[ADA-ramayana  —  part 5 of 12, continuation of part 4]
============================================================

o’er the ample space, By Bharat led who firmly true In duty from his bosom threw All pride, and near his brother drew   To win the hero’s grace.




Canto XCIX. Bharat’s Approach.


Soon as the warriors took their rest Obeying Bharat’s high behest, Thus Bharat to Śatrughna spake: “A band of soldiers with thee take, And with these hunters o’er and o’er The thickets of the wood explore. With bow, sword, arrows in their hands Let Guha with his kindred bands Within this grove remaining trace The children of Kakutstha’s race. And I meanwhile on foot will through This neighbouring wood my way pursue, With elders and the twice-born men, And every lord and citizen. There is, I feel, no rest for me Till Ráma’s face again I see, Lakshmaṇ, in arms and glory great, And Sítá born to happy fate: No rest, until his cheek as bright As the fair moon rejoice my sight, No rest until I see the eye With which the lotus petals vie; Till on my head those dear feet rest With signs of royal rank impressed; None, till my kingly brother gain His old hereditary reign, Till o’er his limbs and noble head The consecrating drops be shed. How blest is Janak’s daughter, true To every wifely duty, who Cleaves faithful to her husband’s side Whose realm is girt by Ocean’s tide! This mountain too above the rest E’en as the King of Hills is blest,— Whose shades Kakutstha’s scion hold As Nandan charms the Lord of Gold. Yea, happy is this tangled grove Where savage beasts unnumbered rove, Where, glory of the Warrior race, King Ráma finds a dwelling-place.”

  Thus Bharat, strong-armed hero spake, And walked within the pathless brake. O’er plains where gay trees bloomed he went, Through boughs in tangled net-work bent, And then from Ráma’s cot appeared The banner which the flame upreared. And Bharat joyed with every friend To mark those smoky wreaths ascend: “Here Ráma dwells,” he thought; “at last The ocean of our toil is passed.”   Then sure that Ráma’s hermit cot     Was on the mountain’s side   He stayed his army on the spot,     And on with Guha hied.




Canto C. The Meeting.


Then Bharat to Śatrughna showed The spot, and eager onward strode, First bidding Saint Vaśishṭha bring The widowed consorts of the king. As by fraternal love impelled His onward course the hero held, Sumantra followed close behind Śatrughna with an anxious mind: Not Bharat’s self more fain could be To look on Ráma’s face than he. As, speeding on, the spot he neared, Amid the hermits’ homes appeared His brother’s cot with leaves o’erspread, And by its side a lowly shed. Before the shed great heaps were left Of gathered flowers and billets cleft, And on the trees hung grass and bark Ráma and Lakshmaṇ’s path to mark: And heaps of fuel to provide Against the cold stood ready dried. The long-armed chief, as on he went In glory’s light preëminent, With joyous words like these addressed The brave Śatrughna and the rest: “This is the place, I little doubt, Which Bharadvája pointed out, Not far from where we stand must be The woodland stream, Mandákiní. Here on the mountain’s woody side Roam elephants in tusked pride, And ever with a roar and cry Each other, as they meet, defy. And see those smoke-wreaths thick and dark: The presence of the flame they mark, Which hermits in the forest strive By every art to keep alive. O happy me! my task is done, And I shall look on Raghu’s son, Like some great saint, who loves to treat His elders with all reverence meet.”

  Thus Bharat reached that forest rill, Thus roamed on Chitrakúṭa’s hill; Then pity in his breast awoke, And to his friends the hero spoke: “Woe, woe upon my life and birth! The prince of men, the lord of earth Has sought the lonely wood to dwell Sequestered in a hermit’s cell. Through me, through me these sorrows fall On him the splendid lord of all: Through me resigning earthly bliss He hides him in a home like this. Now will I, by the world abhorred, Fall at the dear feet of my lord, And at fair Sítá’s too, to win His pardon for my heinous sin.”

  As thus he sadly mourned and sighed, The son of Daśaratha spied A bower of leafy branches made, Sacred and lovely in the shade, Of fair proportions large and tall, Well roofed with boughs of palm, and Sál, Arranged in order due o’erhead Like grass upon an altar spread. Two glorious bows were gleaming there, Like Indra’s(377) in the rainy air, Terror of foemen, backed with gold, Meet for the mightiest hand to hold: And quivered arrows cast a blaze Bright gleaming like the Day-God’s rays: Thus serpents with their eyes aglow Adorn their capital below.(378) Great swords adorned the cottage, laid Each in a case of gold brocade; There hung the trusty shields, whereon With purest gold the bosses shone. The brace to bind the bowman’s arm, The glove to shield his hand from harm, A lustre to the cottage lent From many a golden ornament: Safe was the cot from fear of men As from wild beasts the lion’s den. The fire upon the altar burned, That to the north and east was turned. Bharat his eager glances bent And gazed within the cot intent; In deerskin dress, with matted hair, Ráma his chief was sitting there: With lion-shoulders broad and strong, With lotus eyes, arms thick and long. The righteous sovereign, who should be Lord paramount from sea to sea, High-minded, born to lofty fate, Like Brahmá’s self supremely great; With Lakshmaṇ by his side, and her, Fair Sítá, for his minister. And Bharat gazing, overcome By sorrow for a while was dumb, Then, yielding to his woe, he ran To Ráma and with sobs began: “He who a royal seat should fill With subjects round to do his will, My elder brother,—see him here, With silvan creatures waiting near. The high-souled hero, wont to wear The costliest robes exceeding fair, Now banished, in a deerskin dress, Here keeps the path of righteousness. How brooks the son of Raghu now The matted locks which load his brow, Around whose princely head were twined Sweet blossoms of the rarest kind? The prince whose merits grew, acquired By rites performed as he desired, Would now a store of merit gain Bought by his body’s toil and pain. Those limbs to which pure sandal lent The freshness of its fragrant scent, Exposed to sun, and dust, and rain, Are now defiled with many a stain. And I the wretched cause why this Falls on the prince whose right is bliss! Ah me, that ever I was born To be the people’s hate and scorn!”

  Thus Bharat cried: of anguish sprung, Great drops upon his forehead hung. He fell o’erpowered—his grief was such— Ere he his brother’s feet could touch. As on the glorious prince he gazed In vain his broken voice he raised: “Dear lord”—through tears and sobbing came, The only words his lips could frame. And brave Śatrughna wept aloud, As low at Ráma’s feet he bowed. Then Ráma, while his tears ran fast, His arms around his brothers cast. Guha, Sumantra came to meet The princes in their wild retreat.   Vrihaspati and Śukra bright     Their greeting thus rejoice to pay   To the dear Lord who brings the night,     And the great God who rules the day.   Then wept the dwellers of the shade,     Whose eyes the princes, meet to ride   On mighty elephants, surveyed;     And cast all thought of joy aside.




Canto CI. Bharata Questioned.


Then Ráma gazed, and scarcely knew Bharat so worn and changed in hue. He raised him, kissed him on the head, Embraced him, and thus kindly said: “Where was thy father, brother dear, That thou art come to seek me here? Unmeet, if he be living yet, Thy feet within the wood to set. I pray thee now the cause declare Why thou hast left the kingdom there, With matted locks and deerskin dress To roam the distant wilderness.”

  Thus questioned by the prince, at length Kaikeyí’s son regained his strength, And hand to hand in reverence laid, To Ráma thus his answer made: “The great-armed monarch, O my lord, Has dared to do a thing abhorred, Left us, and grieving for his son, A home among the Gods has won. My mother Queen Kaikeyí gave The order to the king her slave, And at the bidding of the dame He wrought the sin which mars his fame. Athirst for sway, her hopes are crossed, She mourns her son, her husband lost, And through her impious crime will go For punishment to hell below. Now O my lord, forgive me all; Be gracious to thy lowly thrall: Anointed king, accept to-day Like Indra’s self, the royal sway. Be gracious, Prince, to lord and peer, And widowed queens who seek thee here Accept the kingdom thine by right, And so thy faithful friends delight. Let the broad land no longer be All widowed and forlorn of thee: Let the full moon of autumn reign Triumphant o’er the night again. These lords and I before thee bend: O Ráma, to our prayer attend. O do not thou this grace deny: Thy brother, pupil, slave am I. Look on this venerable ring, Advisers of our sire the king, From age to age so honoured: thou Shouldst grant their supplication now.”

  As weeping thus the hero prayed, His head at Ráma’s feet he laid. Like a mad elephant he sighed: And Ráma gazed and thus replied: “How, brother, can a man of worth, True to his vows, of noble birth— A man like me, commit a sin The lordship of the land to win? No slightest shade of fault I see, O tamer of thy foes, in thee. But ne’er shouldst thou in childish thought The queen thy mother blame in aught. O brother wise and sinless, know The sacred laws would have it so, That from good wife and son require Obedience to their lord and sire. And we are all the king’s, for thus The virtuous ever reckon us: Yea brother, be it known to thee, His wives, and sons, and pupils we. His is the right, if he deem fit, To bid me, throned as monarch, sit, Or in a coat of bark expel, And deerskin, in the wood to dwell. And O remember, best of all Who act as claims of duty call, As to a virtuous sire is due, Such honour claims a mother too. So they whose lives have ever been By duty led, the king and queen, Said, “Ráma, seek the forest shade:” And I (what could I else?) obeyed. Thou must the royal power retain, And o’er the famed Ayodhyá reign: I dressed in bark my days will spend Where Daṇḍak’s forest wilds extend. So Daśaratha spoke, our king, His share to each apportioning Before his honoured servants’ eyes: Then, heir of bliss, he sought the skies. The righteous monarch’s honoured will, Whom all revered, must guide thee still, And thou must still enjoy the share Assigned thee by our father’s care. So I till twice seven years are spent Will roam this wood in banishment, Contented with the lot which he, My high-souled sire, has given me. The charge the monarch gave, endeared To all mankind, by all revered,   Peer of the Lord Supreme, Far better, richer far in gain Of every blessing than to reign   O’er all the worlds I deem.”




Canto CII. Bharat’s Tidings.


He spoke: and Bharat thus replied: “If, false to every claim beside, I ne’er in kingly duties fail, What will my royal life avail? Still should the custom be observed, From which our line has never swerved, Which to the younger son ne’er gives The kingdom while the elder lives. Now to Ayodhyá rich and fair With me, O Raghu’s son, repair, And to protect and gladden all Our house, thyself as king install. A king the world’s opinion deems A man: to me a God he seems, Whose life in virtuous thoughts and deeds The lives of other men exceeds. When I in distant Kekaya stayed, And thou hadst sought the forest shade, Our father died, the saints’ delight, So constant in each holy rite. Scarce with thy wife and Lakshmaṇ thou Hadst journeyed forth to keep the vow, When mourning for his son, forspent, To heavenly rest the monarch went. Then up, O lord of men, away! His funeral rites of water pay: I and Śatrughna, ere we came, Neglected not the sacred claim. But in the spirit-world, they say, That gift alone is fresh for aye Which best beloved hands have poured; And thou his dearest art, my lord. For thee he longed, for thee he grieved,   His every thought on thee was bent, And crushed by woe, of thee bereaved,   He thought of thee as hence he went.”




Canto CIII. The Funeral Libation.


When Ráma heard from Bharat each Dark sorrow of his mournful speech, And tidings of his father dead, His spirits fell, his senses fled. For the sad words his brother spoke Struck on him like a thunder stroke, Fierce as the bolt which Indra throws, The victor of his Daitya foes. Raising his arms in anguish, he, As when the woodman hews a tree With its fair flowery branches crowned, Fainted and fell upon the ground. Lord of the earth to earth he sank, Helpless, as when a towering bank With sudden ruin buries deep An elephant who lay asleep. Then swift his wife and brothers flew, And water, weeping, o’er him threw. As slowly sense and strength he gained, Fast from his eyes the tears he rained, And then in accents sad and weak Kakutstha’s son began to speak, And mourning for the monarch dead, With righteous words to Bharat said: “What calls me home, when he, alas, Has gone the way which all must pass? Of him, the best of kings bereft What guardian has Ayodhyá left? How may I please his spirit? how Delight the high-souled monarch now, Who wept for me and went above By me ungraced with mourning love? Ah, happy brothers! you have paid Due offerings to his parting shade. E’en when my banishment is o’er, Back to my home I go no more, To look upon the widowed state Reft of her king, disconsolate. E’en then, O tamer of the foe, If to Ayodhyá’s town I go, Who will direct me as of old, Now other worlds our father hold? From whom, my brother, shall I hear Those words which ever charmed mine ear And filled my bosom with delight Whene’er he saw me act aright?”

  Thus Ráma spoke: then nearer came And looking on his moonbright dame, “Sítá, the king is gone,” he said: “And Lakshmaṇ, know thy sire is dead, And with the Gods on high enrolled: This mournful news has Bharat told.” He spoke: the noble youths with sighs Rained down the torrents from their eyes. And then the brothers of the chief With words of comfort soothed his grief: “Now to the king our sire who swayed The earth be due libations paid.” Soon as the monarch’s fate she knew, Sharp pangs of grief smote Sítá through: Nor could she look upon her lord With eyes from which the torrents poured. And Ráma strove with tender care To soothe the weeping dame’s despair, And then, with piercing woe distressed, The mournful Lakshmaṇ thus addressed: “Brother, I pray thee bring for me The pressed fruit of the Ingudí, And a bark mantle fresh and new, That I may pay this offering due. First of the three shall Sítá go, Next thou, and I the last: for so Moves the funereal pomp of woe.”(379)

  Sumantra of the noble mind, Gentle and modest, meek and kind, Who, follower of each princely youth, To Ráma clung with constant truth, Now with the royal brothers’ aid The grief of Ráma soothed and stayed, And lent his arm his lord to guide Down to the river’s holy side. That lovely stream the heroes found, With woods that ever blossomed crowned, And there in bitter sorrow bent Their footsteps down the fair descent. Then where the stream that swiftly flowed A pure pellucid shallow showed, The funeral drops they duly shed, And “Father, this be thine,” they said. But he, the lord who ruled the land, Filled from the stream his hollowed hand, And turning to the southern side Stretched out his arm and weeping cried: “This sacred water clear and pure, An offering which shall aye endure To thee, O lord of kings, I give: Accept it where the spirits live!”

  Then, when the solemn rite was o’er, Came Ráma to the river shore, And offered, with his brothers’ aid, Fresh tribute to his father’s shade. With jujube fruit he mixed the seed Of Ingudís from moisture freed, And placed it on a spot o’erspread With sacred grass, and weeping said: “Enjoy, great King, the cake which we Thy children eat and offer thee! For ne’er do blessed Gods refuse To share the food which mortals use.”

  Then Ráma turned him to retrace The path that brought him to the place, And up the mountain’s pleasant side Where lovely lawns lay fair, he hied. Soon as his cottage door he gained His brothers to his breast he strained. From them and Sítá in their woes So loud the cry of weeping rose, That like the roar of lions round The mountain rolled the echoing sound. And Bharat’s army shook with fear The weeping of the chiefs to hear. “Bharat,” the soldiers cried, “’tis plain, His brother Ráma meets again, And with these cries that round us ring They sorrow for their sire the king.” Then leaving car and wain behind, One eager thought in every mind, Swift toward the weeping, every man, As each could find a passage, ran. Some thither bent their eager course With car, and elephant, and horse, And youthful captains on their feet With longing sped their lord to meet, As though the new-come prince had been An exile for long years unseen. Earth beaten in their frantic zeal By clattering hoof and rumbling wheel, Sent forth a deafening noise as loud As heaven when black with many a cloud. Then, with their consorts gathered near, Wild elephants in sudden fear Rushed to a distant wood, and shed An odour round them as they fled. And every silvan thing that dwelt Within those shades the terror felt, Deer, lion, tiger, boar and roe, Bison, wild-cow, and buffalo. And when the tumult wild they heard, With trembling pinions flew each bird, From tree, from thicket, and from lake, Swan, koïl, curlew, crane, and drake. With men the ground was overspread, With startled birds the sky o’erhead. Then on his sacrificial ground The sinless, glorious chief was found. Loading with curses deep and loud The hump-back and the queen, the crowd Whose cheeks were wet, whose eyes were dim, In fond affection ran to him. While the big tears their eyes bedewed, He looked upon the multitude, And then as sire and mother do, His arms about his loved ones threw.   Some to his feet with reverence pressed,     Some in his arms he strained:   Each friend, with kindly words addressed,     Due share of honour gained.   Then, by their mighty woe o’ercome,     The weeping heroes’ cry   Filled, like the roar of many a drum,     Hill, cavern, earth, and sky.




Canto CIV. The Meeting With The Queens.


Vaśishṭha with his soul athirst To look again on Ráma, first In line the royal widows placed, And then the way behind them traced. The ladies moving, faint and slow, Saw the fair stream before them flow, And by the bank their steps were led Which the two brothers visited. Kauśalyá with her faded cheek And weeping eyes began to speak, And thus in mournful tones addressed The queen Sumitrá and the rest: “See in the wood the bank’s descent, Which the two orphan youths frequent, Whose noble spirits never fall, Though woes surround them, reft of all. Thy son with love that never tires Draws water hence which mine requires. This day, for lowly toil unfit, His pious task thy son should quit.”

  As on the long-eyed lady strayed, On holy grass, whose points were laid Directed to the southern sky, The funeral offering met her eye. When Ráma’s humble gift she spied Thus to the queens Kauśalyá cried: “The gift of Ráma’s hand behold, His tribute to the king high-souled, Offered to him, as texts require, Lord of Ikshváku’s line, his sire! Not such I deem the funeral food Of kings with godlike might endued. Can he who knew all pleasures, he Who ruled the earth from sea to sea, The mighty lord of monarchs, feed On Ingudí’s extracted seed? In all the world there cannot be A woe, I ween, more sad to see, Than that my glorious son should make His funeral gift of such a cake. The ancient text I oft have heard This day is true in every word: “Ne’er do the blessed Gods refuse To eat the food their children use.’ ”

  The ladies soothed the weeping dame: To Ráma’s hermitage they came, And there the hero met their eyes Like a God fallen from the skies. Him joyless, reft of all, they viewed, And tears their mournful eyes bedewed. The truthful hero left his seat, And clasped the ladies’ lotus feet, And they with soft hands brushed away The dust that on his shoulders lay. Then Lakshmaṇ, when he saw each queen With weeping eyes and troubled mien, Near to the royal ladies drew And paid them gentle reverence too. He, Daśaratha’s offspring, signed The heir of bliss by Fortune kind, Received from every dame no less Each mark of love and tenderness. And Sítá came and bent before The widows, while her eyes ran o’er, And pressed their feet with many a tear. They when they saw the lady dear Pale, worn with dwelling in the wild, Embraced her as a darling child: “Daughter of royal Janak, bride Of Daśaratha’s son,” they cried, “How couldst thou, offspring of a king, Endure this woe and suffering In the wild forest? When I trace Each sign of trouble on thy face— That lotus which the sun has dried, That lily by the tempest tried, That gold whereon the dust is spread, That moon whence all the light is fled— Sorrow assails my heart, alas! As fire consumes the wood and grass.”

  Then Ráma, as she spoke distressed, The feet of Saint Vaśishṭha pressed,   Touched them with reverential love,     Then near him took his seat:   Thus Indra clasps in realms above     The Heavenly Teacher’s(380) feet.   Then with each counsellor and peer,     Bharat of duteous mind,   With citizens and captains near,     Sat humbly down behind.   When with his hands to him upraised,     In devotee’s attire,   Bharat upon his brother gazed     Whose glory shone like fire,   As when the pure Mahendra bends     To the great Lord of Life,   Among his noble crowd of friends     This anxious thought was rife:   “What words to Raghu’s son to-day     Will royal Bharat speak,   Whose heart has been so prompt to pay     Obeisance fond and meek?”   Then steadfast Ráma, Lakshmaṇ wise,     Bharat for truth renowned, Shone like three fires that heavenward rise   With holy priests around.




Canto CV. Ráma’s Speech.


A while they sat, each lip compressed, Then Bharat thus his chief addressed: “My mother here was made content; To me was given the government. This now, my lord, I yield to thee: Enjoy it, from all trouble free. Like a great bridge the floods have rent, Impetuous in their wild descent, All other hands but thine in vain Would strive the burthen to maintain. In vain the ass with steeds would vie, With Tárkshya,(381) birds that wing the sky; So, lord of men, my power is slight To rival thine imperial might. Great joys his happy days attend On whom the hopes of men depend, But wretched is the life he leads Who still the aid of others needs. And if the seed a man has sown, With care and kindly nurture grown, Rear its huge trunk and spring in time Too bulky for a dwarf to climb, Yet, with perpetual blossom gay, No fruit upon its boughs display, Ne’er can that tree, thus nursed in vain, Approval of the virtuous gain. The simile is meant to be Applied, O mighty-armed, to thee, Because, our lord and leader, thou Protectest not thy people now. O, be the longing wish fulfilled Of every chief of house and guild, To see again their sun-bright lord Victorious to his realm restored! As thou returnest through the crowd Let roars of elephants be loud. And each fair woman lift her voice And in her new-found king rejoice.”

  The people all with longing moved, The words that Bharat spoke approved, And crowding near to Ráma pressed The hero with the same request. The steadfast Ráma, when he viewed His glorious brother’s mournful mood, With each ambitious thought controlled, Thus the lamenting prince consoled: “I cannot do the things I will, For Ráma is but mortal still. Fate with supreme, resistless law This way and that its slave will draw, All gathered heaps must waste away, All lofty lore and powers decay. Death is the end of life, and all, Now firmly joined, apart must fall. One fear the ripened fruit must know, To fall upon the earth below; So every man who draws his breath Must fear inevitable death. The pillared mansion, high, compact, Must fall by Time’s strong hand attacked; So mortal men, the gradual prey Of old and ruthless death, decay. The night that flies no more returns: Yamuná for the Ocean yearns: Swift her impetuous waters flee, But roll not backward from the sea. The days and nights pass swiftly by And steal our moments as they fly, E’en as the sun’s unpitying rays Drink up the floods in summer blaze. Then for thyself lament and leave For death of other men to grieve, For if thou go or if thou stay, Thy life is shorter day by day. Death travels with us; death attends Our steps until our journey ends, Death, when the traveller wins the goal, Returns with the returning soul. The flowing hair grows white and thin, And wrinkles mark the altered skin. The ills of age man’s strength assail: Ah, what can mortal power avail? Men joy to see the sun arise, They watch him set with joyful eyes: But ne’er reflect, too blind to see, How fast their own brief moments flee. With lovely change for ever new The seasons’ sweet return they view, Nor think with heedless hearts the while That lives decay as seasons smile. As haply on the boundless main Meet drifting logs and part again, So wives and children, friends and gold, Ours for a little time we hold: Soon by resistless laws of fate To meet no more we separate. In all this changing world not one The common lot of all can shun: Then why with useless tears deplore The dead whom tears can bring no more? As one might stand upon the way And to a troop of travellers say: “If ye allow it, sirs, I too Will travel on the road with you:” So why should mortal man lament When on that path his feet are bent Which all men living needs must tread, Where sire and ancestors have led? Life flies as torrents downward fall Speeding away without recall, So virtue should our thoughts engage, For bliss(382) is mortals’ heritage. By ceaseless care and earnest zeal For servants and for people’s weal, By gifts, by duty nobly done, Our glorious sire the skies has won. Our lord the king, o’er earth who reigned, A blissful home in heaven has gained By wealth in ample largess spent, And many a rite magnificent: With constant joy from first to last A long and noble life he passed, Praised by the good, no tears should dim Our eyes, O brother dear, for him. His human body, worn and tried By length of days, he cast aside, And gained the godlike bliss to stray In Brahmá’s heavenly home for aye. For such the wise as we are, deep In Veda lore, should never weep. Those who are firm and ever wise Spurn vain lament and idle sighs. Be self-possessed: thy grief restrain: Go, in that city dwell again. Return, O best of men, and be Obedient to our sire’s decree, While I with every care fulfil Our holy father’s righteous will, Observing in the lonely wood His charge approved by all the good.”   Thus Ráma of the lofty mind     To Bharat spoke his righteous speech,   By every argument designed     Obedience to his sire to teach.




Canto CVI. Bharat’s Speech.


Good Bharat, by the river side, To virtuous Ráma’s speech replied, And thus with varied lore addressed The prince, while nobles round him pressed: “In all this world whom e’er can we Find equal, scourge of foes, to thee? No ill upon thy bosom weighs, No thoughts of joy thy spirit raise. Approved art thou of sages old, To whom thy doubts are ever told. Alike in death and life, to thee The same to be and not to be. The man who such a soul can gain Can ne’er be crushed by woe or pain. Pure as the Gods, high-minded, wise, Concealed from thee no secret lies. Such glorious gifts are all thine own, And birth and death to thee are known, That ill can ne’er thy soul depress With all-subduing bitterness. O let my prayer, dear brother, win Thy pardon for my mother’s sin. Wrought for my sake who willed it not When absent in a distant spot. Duty alone with binding chains The vengeance due to crime restrains, Or on the sinner I should lift My hand in retribution swift. Can I who know the right, and spring From Daśaratha, purest king— Can I commit a heinous crime, Abhorred by all through endless time? The aged king I dare not blame, Who died so rich in holy fame, My honoured sire, my parted lord, E’en as a present God adored. Yet who in lore of duty skilled So foul a crime has ever willed, And dared defy both gain and right To gratify a woman’s spite? When death draws near, so people say, The sense of creatures dies away; And he has proved the ancient saw By acting thus in spite of law. But O my honoured lord, be kind, Dismiss the trespass from thy mind, The sin the king committed, led By haste, his consort’s wrath, and dread. For he who veils his sire’s offence With tender care and reverence— His sons approved by all shall live: Not so their fate who ne’er forgive. Be thou, my lord, the noble son, And the vile deed my sire has done, Abhorred by all the virtuous, ne’er Resent, lest thou the guilt too share. Preserve us, for on thee we call, Our sire, Kaikeyí, me and all Thy citizens, thy kith and kin; Preserve us and reverse the sin. To live in woods a devotee Can scarce with royal tasks agree, Nor can the hermit’s matted hair Suit fitly with a ruler’s care. Do not, my brother, do not still Pursue this life that suits thee ill. Mid duties of a king we count His consecration paramount, That he with ready heart and hand May keep his people and his land. What Warrior born to royal sway From certain good would turn away, A doubtful duty to pursue, That mocks him with the distant view? Thou wouldst to duty cleave, and gain The meed that follows toil and pain. In thy great task no labour spare: Rule the four castes with justest care. Mid all the four, the wise prefer The order of the householder:(383) Canst thou, whose thoughts to duty cleave, The best of all the orders leave? My better thou in lore divine, My birth, my sense must yield to thine: While thou, my lord, art here to reign, How shall my hands the rule maintain? O faithful lover of the right, Take with thy friends the royal might, Let thy sires’ realm, from trouble free, Obey her rightful king in thee. Here let the priests and lords of state Our monarch duly consecrate, With prayer and holy verses blessed By saint Vaśishṭha and the rest. Anointed king by us, again Seek fair Ayodhyá, there to reign, And like imperial Indra girt By Gods of Storm, thy might assert. From the three debts(384) acquittance earn, And with thy wrath the wicked burn, O’er all of us thy rule extend, And cheer with boons each faithful friend. Let thine enthronement, lord, this day Make all thy lovers glad and gay, And let all those who hate thee flee To the ten winds for fear of thee. Dear lord, my mother’s words of hate With thy sweet virtues expiate, And from the stain of folly clear The father whom we both revere. Brother, to me compassion show, I pray thee with my head bent low, And to these friends who on thee call,— As the Great Father pities all. But if my tears and prayers be vain, And thou in woods wilt still remain, I will with thee my path pursue And make my home in forests too.”

  Thus Bharat strove to bend his will   With suppliant head, but he, Earth’s lord, inexorable still   Would keep his sire’s decree. The firmness of the noble chief   The wondering people moved, And rapture mingling with their grief,   All wept and all approved. “How firm his steadfast will,” they cried,   “Who Keeps his promise thus! Ah, to Ayodhyá’s town,” they sighed,   “He comes not back with us.” The holy priest, the swains who tilled   The earth, the sons of trade, And e’en the mournful queens were filled   With joy as Bharat prayed, And bent their heads, then weeping stilled   A while, his prayer to aid.




Canto CVII. Ráma’s Speech.


Thus, by his friends encompassed round, He spoke, and Ráma, far renowned, To his dear brother thus replied, Whom holy rites had purified: “O thou whom Queen Kaikeyí bare The best of kings, thy words are fair, Our royal father, when of yore He wed her, to her father swore The best of kingdoms to confer, A noble dowry meet for her; Then, grateful, on the deadly day Of heavenly Gods’ and demons’ fray, A future boon on her bestowed To whose sweet care his life he owed. She to his mind that promise brought, And then the best of kings besought To bid me to the forest flee, And give the rule, O Prince, to thee. Thus bound by oath, the king our lord Gave her those boons of free accord, And bade me, O thou chief of men, Live in the woods four years and ten. I to this lonely wood have hied With faithful Lakshmaṇ by my side, And Sítá by no tears deterred, Resolved to keep my father’s word. And thou, my noble brother, too Shouldst keep our father’s promise true: Anointed ruler of the state Maintain his word inviolate. From his great debt, dear brother, free Our lord the king for love of me, Thy mother’s breast with joy inspire, And from all woe preserve thy sire. ’Tis said, near Gayá’s holy town(385) Gayá, great saint of high renown, This text recited when he paid Due rites to each ancestral shade:   “A son is born his sire to free     From Put’s infernal pains:   Hence, saviour of his father, he     The name of Puttra gains.”(386) Thus numerous sons are sought by prayer, In Scripture trained with graces fair, That of the number one some day May funeral rites at Gayá pay. The mighty saints who lived of old This holy doctrine ever hold. Then, best of men, our sire release From pains of hell, and give him peace. Now Bharat, to Ayodhyá speed, The brave Śatrughna with thee lead, Take with thee all the twice-born men, And please each lord and citizen. I now, O King, without delay To Daṇḍak wood will bend my way, And Lakshmaṇ and the Maithil dame Will follow still, our path the same.   Now, Bharat, lord of men be thou,     And o’er Ayodhyá reign:   The silvan world to me shall bow,     King of the wild domain.   Yea, let thy joyful steps be bent     To that fair town to-day,   And I as happy and content,     To Daṇḍak wood will stray.   The white umbrella o’er thy brow     Its cooling shade shall throw:   I to the shadow of the bough     And leafy trees will go.   Śatrughna, for wise plans renowned,     Shall still on thee attend;   And Lakshmaṇ, ever faithful found,     Be my familiar friend.   Let us his sons, O brother dear,     The path of right pursue,   And keep the king we all revere     Still to his promise true.”




Canto CVIII. Jáváli’s Speech.


Thus Ráma soothed his brother’s grief: Then virtuous Jáváli, chief Of twice-born sages, thus replied In words that virtue’s law defied: “Hail, Raghu’s princely son, dismiss A thought so weak and vain as this. Canst thou, with lofty heart endowed, Think with the dull ignoble crowd? For what are ties of kindred? can One profit by a brother man? Alone the babe first opes his eyes, And all alone at last he dies. The man, I ween, has little sense Who looks with foolish reverence On father’s or on mother’s name: In others, none a right may claim. E’en as a man may leave his home And to a distant village roam, Then from his lodging turn away And journey on the following day, Such brief possession mortals hold In sire and mother, house and gold, And never will the good and wise The brief uncertain lodging prize. Nor, best of men, shouldst thou disown Thy sire’s hereditary throne, And tread the rough and stony ground Where hardship, danger, woes abound. Come, let Ayodhyá rich and bright See thee enthroned with every rite: Her tresses bound in single braid(387) She waits thy coming long delayed. O come, thou royal Prince, and share The kingly joys that wait thee there, And live in bliss transcending price As Indra lives in Paradise. The parted king is naught to thee, Nor right in living man has he: The king is one, thou, Prince of men, Another art: be counselled then. Thy royal sire, O chief, has sped On the long path we all must tread. The common lot of all is this, And thou in vain art robbed of bliss. For those—and only those—I weep Who to the path of duty keep; For here they suffer ceaseless woe, And dying to destruction go. With pious care, each solemn day, Will men their funeral offerings pay: See, how the useful food they waste: He who is dead no more can taste. If one is fed, his strength renewed Whene’er his brother takes his food, Then offerings to the parted pay: Scarce will they serve him on his way. By crafty knaves these rules were framed, And to enforce men’s gifts proclaimed: “Give, worship, lead a life austere, Keep lustral rites, quit pleasures here.” There is no future life: be wise, And do, O Prince, as I advise. Enjoy, my lord, the present bliss, And things unseen from thought dismiss. Let this advice thy bosom move, The counsel sage which all approve; To Bharat’s earnest prayer incline, And take the rule so justly thine.”




Canto CIX. The Praises Of Truth.


By sage Jáváli thus addressed, Ráma of truthful hearts the best, With perfect skill and wisdom high Thus to his speech made fit reply: “Thy words that tempt to bliss are fair, But virtue’s garb they falsely wear. For he from duty’s path who strays To wander in forbidden ways, Allured by doctrine false and vain, Praise from the good can never gain. Their lives the true and boaster show, Pure and impure, and high and low, Else were no mark to judge between Stainless and stained and high and mean; They to whose lot fair signs may fall Were but as they who lack them all, And those to virtuous thoughts inclined Were but as men of evil mind. If in the sacred name of right I do this wrong in duty’s spite; The path of virtue meanly quit, And this polluting sin commit, What man who marks the bounds between Virtue and vice with insight keen, Would rank me high in after time Stained with this soul destroying crime? Whither could I, the sinner, turn, How hope a seat in heaven to earn, If I my plighted promise break, And thus the righteous path forsake? This world of ours is ever led To walk the ways which others tread, And as their princes they behold, The subjects too their lives will mould. That truth and mercy still must be Beloved of kings, is Heaven’s decree. Upheld by truth the monarch reigns, And truth the very world sustains. Truth evermore has been the love Of holy saints and Gods above, And he whose lips are truthful here Wins after death the highest sphere. As from a serpent’s deadly tooth, We shrink from him who scorns the truth. For holy truth is root and spring Of justice and each holy thing, A might that every power transcends, Linked to high bliss that never ends. Truth is all virtue’s surest base, Supreme in worth and first in place. Oblations, gifts men offer here, Vows, sacrifice, and rites austere, And Holy Writ, on truth depend: So men must still that truth defend. Truth, only truth protects the land, By truth unharmed our houses stand; Neglect of truth makes men distressed, And truth in highest heaven is blessed. Then how can I, rebellious, break Commandments which my father spake— I ever true and faithful found, And by my word of honour bound? My father’s bridge of truth shall stand Unharmed by my destructive hand: Not folly, ignorance, or greed My darkened soul shall thus mislead. Have we not heard that God and shade Turn from the hated offerings paid By him whose false and fickle mind No pledge can hold, no promise bind? Truth is all duty: as the soul, It quickens and supports the whole. The good respect this duty: hence Its sacred claims I reverence. The Warrior’s duty I despise That seeks the wrong in virtue’s guise: Those claims I shrink from, which the base, Cruel, and covetous embrace. The heart conceives the guilty thought, Then by the hand the sin is wrought, And with the pair is leagued a third, The tongue that speaks the lying word. Fortune and land and name and fame To man’s best care have right and claim; The good will aye to truth adhere, And its high laws must men revere. Base were the deed thy lips would teach, Approved as best by subtle speech. Shall I my plighted promise break, That I these woods my home would make? Shall I, as Bharat’s words advise, My father’s solemn charge despise? Firm stands the oath which then before My father’s face I soothly swore, Which Queen Kaikeyí’s anxious ear Rejoiced with highest joy to hear. Still in the wood will I remain, With food prescribed my life sustain, And please with fruit and roots and flowers Ancestral shades and heavenly powers. Here every sense contented, still Heeding the bounds of good and ill, My settled course will I pursue, Firm in my faith and ever true. Here in this wild and far retreat Will I my noble task complete; And Fire and Wind and Moon shall be Partakers of its fruit with me. A hundred offerings duly wrought His rank o’er Gods for Indra bought, And mighty saints their heaven secured By torturing years on earth endured.” That scoffing plea the hero spurned,   And thus he spake once more, Chiding, the while his bosom burned,   Jáváli’s impious lore: “Justice, and courage ne’er dismayed,   Pity for all distressed, Truth, loving honour duly paid   To Bráhman, God, and guest— In these, the true and virtuous say,   Should lives of men be passed: They form the right and happy way   That leads to heaven at last. My father’s thoughtless act I chide   That gave thee honoured place, Whose soul, from virtue turned aside,   Is faithless, dark, and base. We rank the Buddhist with the thief,(388)   And all the impious crew Who share his sinful disbelief,   And hate the right and true. Hence never should wise kings who seek   To rule their people well, Admit, before their face to speak,   The cursed infidel. But twice-born men in days gone by,   Of other sort than thou, Have wrought good deeds, whose glories high   Are fresh among us now: This world they conquered, nor in vain   They strove to win the skies: The twice-born hence pure lives maintain,   And fires of worship rise. Those who in virtue’s path delight,   And with the virtuous live,— Whose flames of holy zeal are bright,   Whose hands are swift to give, Who injure none, and good and mild   In every grace excel, Whose lives by sin are undefiled,   We love and honour well.” Thus Ráma spoke in righteous rage   Jáváli’s speech to chide, When thus again the virtuous sage   In truthful words replied: “The atheist’s lore I use no more,   Not mine his impious creed: His words and doctrine I abhor,   Assumed at time of need. E’en as I rose to speak with thee,   The fit occasion came That bade me use the atheist’s plea   To turn thee from thine aim. The atheist creed I disavow,   Unsay the words of sin, And use the faithful’s language now   Thy favour, Prince, to win.”




Canto CX. The Sons Of Ikshváku.(389)


Then spake Vaśishṭha who perceived That Ráma’s soul was wroth and grieved: “Well knows the sage Jáváli all The changes that the world befall; And but to lead thee to revoke Thy purpose were the words he spoke. Lord of the world, now hear from me How first this world began to be. First water was, and naught beside; There earth was formed that stretches wide. Then with the Gods from out the same The Self-existent Brahmá came. Then Brahmá(390) in a boar’s disguise Bade from the deep this earth arise; Then, with his sons of tranquil soul, He made the world and framed the whole. From subtlest ether Brahmá rose: No end, no loss, no change he knows. A son had he, Maríchi styled, And Kaśyap was Maríchi’s child. From him Vivasvat sprang: from him Manu, whose fame shall ne’er be dim. Manu, who life to mortals gave, Begot Ikshváku good and brave: First of Ayodhyá’s kings was he, Pride of her famous dynasty. From him the glorious Kukshi sprang, Whose fame through all the regions rang. Rival of Kukshi’s ancient fame, His heir the great Vikukshi came. His son was Váṇa, lord of might, His Anaraṇya, strong in fight. No famine marred his blissful reign, No drought destroyed the kindly grain; Amid the sons of virtue chief, His happy realm ne’er held a thief, His son was Prithu, glorious name, From him the wise Triśanku came: Embodied to the skies he went For love of truth preëminent. He left a son renowned afar, Known by the name of Dhundhumár. His son succeeding bore the name Of Yuvanáśva dear to fame. He passed away. Him followed then His son Mándhátá, king of men. His son was blest in high emprise, Susandhi, fortunate and wise. Two noble sons had he, to wit Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. Bharat was Dhruvasandhi’s son: His glorious arm the conquest won, Against his son King Asit, rose In fierce array his royal foes, Haihayas, Tálajanghas styled, And Śaśivindhus fierce and wild. Long time he strove, but forced to yield Fled from his kingdom and the field. The wives he left had both conceived— So is the ancient tale believed:— One, of her rival’s hopes afraid, Fell poison in the viands laid. It chanced that Chyavan, Bhrigu’s child, Had wandered to the pathless wild Where proud Himálaya’s lovely height Detained him with a strange delight. Then came the other widowed queen With lotus eyes and beauteous mien, Longing a noble son to bear, And wooed the saint with earnest prayer. When thus Kálindí, fairest dame With reverent supplication came, To her the holy sage replied: “O royal lady, from thy side A glorious son shall spring ere long, Righteous and true and brave and strong; He, scourge of foes and lofty-souled, His ancient race shall still uphold.”

  Then round the sage the lady went, And bade farewell, most reverent. Back to her home she turned once more, And there her promised son she bore. Because her rival mixed the bane To render her conception vain, And her unripened fruit destroy, Sagar she called her rescued boy.(391) He, when he paid that solemn rite,(392) Filled living creatures with affright: Obedient to his high decree His countless sons dug out the sea. Prince Asamanj was Sagar’s child: But him with cruel sin defiled And loaded with the people’s hate His father banished from the state. To Asamanj his consort bare Bright Anśumán his valiant heir. Anśumán’s son, Dilípa famed, Begot a son Bhagírath named. From him renowned Kakutstha came: Thou bearest still the lineal name. Kakutstha’s son was Raghu: thou Art styled the son of Raghu now. From him came Purushádak bold, Fierce hero of gigantic mould: Kalmáshapáda’s name he bore, Because his feet were spotted o’er. Śankhan his son, to manhood grown, Died sadly with his host o’erthrown, But ere he perished sprang from him Sudarśan fair in face and limb. From beautiful Sudarśan came Prince Agnivarṇa, bright as flame. His son was Śíghraga, for speed Unmatched; and Maru was his seed. Prasusruka was Maru’s child: His son was Ambarísha styled. Nahush was Ambarísha’s heir With hand to strike and heart to dare. His son was good Nábhág, from youth Renowned for piety and truth. From great Nábhág sprang children two Aja and Suvrat pure and true. From Aja Daśaratha came, Whose virtuous life was free from blame. His eldest son art thou: his throne, O famous Ráma, is thine own. Accept the sway so justly thine, And view the world with eyes benign. For ever in Ikshváku’s race The eldest takes his father’s place, And while he lives no son beside As lord and king is sanctified.   The rule by Raghu’s children kept     Thou must not spurn to-day.   This realm of peerless wealth accept,     And like thy father sway.”




Canto CXI. Counsel To Bharat.


Thus said Vaśishṭha, and again To Ráma spake in duteous strain: “All men the light of life who see With high respect should look on three: High honour ne’er must be denied To father, mother, holy guide. First to their sires their birth they owe, Nursed with maternal love they grow: Their holy guides fair knowledge teach: So men should love and honour each. Thy sire and thou have learned of me, The sacred guide of him and thee, And if my word thou wilt obey Thou still wilt keep the virtuous way. See, with the chiefs of every guild And all thy friends, this place is filled: All these, as duty bids, protect; So still the righteous path respect. O, for thine aged mother feel, Nor spurn the virtuous dame’s appeal: Obey, O Prince, thy mother dear, And still to virtue’s path adhere. Yield thou to Bharat’s fond request, With earnest supplication pressed, So wilt thou to thyself be true, And faith and duty still pursue.”

  Thus by his saintly guide addressed With pleas in sweetest tones expressed, The lord of men in turn replied To wise Vaśishṭha by his side: “The fondest son’s observance ne’er Repays the sire and mother’s care: The constant love that food provides, And dress, and every need besides: Their pleasant words still soft and mild, Their nurture of the helpless child: The words which Daśaratha spake, My king and sire, I ne’er will break.”

  Then Bharat of the ample chest The wise Sumantra thus addressed; “Bring sacred grass, O charioteer, And strew it on the level here. For I will sit and watch his face Until I win my brother’s grace. Like a robbed Bráhman will I lie,(393) Nor taste of food nor turn my eye, In front of Ráma’s leafy cot, And till he yield will leave him not.”

  When Bharat saw Sumantra’s eye Looked up to Ráma for reply, The Prince himself in eager haste The sacred grass in order placed. Him great and mighty Ráma, best Of royal saints, in turn addressed: “What, Bharat, have I done, that thou Besiegest me,(394) a suppliant now? Thus streched, to force redress for wrongs To men of Bráhman birth belongs, Not those upon whose kingly head The consecrating drops are shed. Up, lord of men! arise, and quit This fearful vow for thee unfit. Go, brother, seek Ayodhyá’s town, Fair city of supreme renown.”

  But Bharat, as his seat he took, Cast all around an eager look: “O people, join your prayers with mine, And so his stubborn heart incline.”

  And all the people answered thus: “Full well is Ráma known to us. Right is the word he speaks and he Is faithful to his sire’s decree: Nor can we rashly venture now To turn him from his purposed vow.”

  Then Ráma spoke: “O Bharat, heed Thy virtuous friends, and mark their rede. Mark well what I and these advise, And duty view with clearer eyes. Thy hand on mine, O hero, place, Touch water, and thy sin efface.”

  Then Bharat rose: his hand he dipped, And purifying water sipped: “Each citizen,” he cried, “give ear, Attend, each counsellor and peer. My mother planned, by me untaught, To win the sway I never sought: Ne’er Raghu’s son could I despise, In duty’s lore supremely wise. Now if obedience to our sire This dwelling in the woods require, I, till the destined years be spent, Will dwell alone in banishment.”

  The virtuous Ráma, wonder-stirred, The faithful speech of Bharat heard, And thus the hero’s feelings found Due utterance, as he gazed around:

  “Still to my father’s word I hold, Whate’er he bought, or pledged, or sold: Ne’er shall his living promise be Annulled by Bharat or by me. Not thus my task will I evade, My exile on another laid: Most wise was Queen Kaikeyí’s rede, And just and good my father’s deed. Dear Bharat’s patient soul I know, How reverence due he loves to show; In him, high-souled and faithful found, Must each auspicious grace abound. When from the woods I turn again I with his aid shall nobly reign, With one so good, of peerless worth, A glorious lord of happy earth. Her boon Kaikeyí sought and won. I, as my father swore, have done: And O, do thou, my brother dear, The monarch’s name from falsehood clear.




Canto CXII. The Sandals.


High wonder mingled with delight Took the great sages at the sight, Thrilling their breasts who came to view The meeting of the peerless two. The saints and sages’ holy train Departed to their home again. And high each holy voice was raised, And thus the glorious brothers praised.

  “High fate is his, the sire of two Most virtuous souls, so brave and true: With wonder and with joy intense Our ears have heard their conference.” Then the great sages, longing all To see the ten-necked tyrant(395) fall, To Bharat, bravest of the brave, Their salutary counsel gave:

  “O thou of lofty lineage born, Whom wisdom, conduct, fame adorn, Thou for thy honoured father’s sake Shouldst Ráma’s righteous counsel take. All debts to Queen Kaikeyí paid, Thy sire his home in heaven has made, So virtuous Ráma we would see From filial obligation free.” Thus gave each royal sage advice, High saint, and bard of Paradise; Then quickly vanishing from view Each to his proper home withdrew. Then Ráma’s face his rapture showed, And his full heart with joy o’erflowed, While, as the sages parted thence, He paid his humble reverence.

  Then Bharat shook in every limb As suppliant thus he spake to him: “The duty of a king respect, Held by our race in high respect: And O, thy gracious ear incline To heed my mother’s prayer and mine. The mighty realm to rule and guard For me alone is task too hard. No power have I the love to gain Of noble, citizen, and swain. All those who know thee, warrior, friend, On thee their eager glances bend, As labouring hinds who till the plain Look fondly for the Lord of Rain. O wisest Prince, thy realm secure, And make its firm foundations sure. Kakutstha’s son, thy mighty arm Can keep the nation free from harm.” He spoke, and fell in sorrow drowned At Ráma’s feet upon the ground, And there the hero sued and sighed, And “Hear me, Raghu’s son,” he cried.

  Then Ráma raised him up, and pressed His brother to his loving breast, And sweetly as a wild swan cried To Bharat dark and lotus-eyed: “So just and true thy generous soul, Thy hand may well this earth control: But many a sage his aid will lend, With counsellor, and peer, and friend: With these advise: their counsel ask, And so perform thy arduous task. The moon his beauty may forgo, The cold forsake the Hills of Snow, And Ocean o’er his banks may sweep, But I my father’s word will keep. Now whether love of thee or greed Thy mother led to plan the deed, Forth from thy breast the memory throw, And filial love and reverence show.”

  Thus spake Kauśalyá’s son: again Bharat replied in humble strain To him who matched the sun in might And lovely as the young moon’s light: “Put, noble brother, I entreat, These sandals on thy blessed feet: These, lord of men, with gold bedecked, The realm and people will protect.”

  Then Ráma, as his brother prayed Beneath his feet the sandals laid, And these with fond affection gave To Bharat’s hand, the good and brave. Then Bharat bowed his reverent head And thus again to Ráma said: “Through fourteen seasons will I wear The hermit’s dress and matted hair: With fruit and roots my life sustain, And still beyond the realm remain, Longing for thee to come again. The rule and all affairs of state I to these shoes will delegate. And if, O tamer of thy foes, When fourteen years have reached their close, I see thee not that day return, The kindled fire my frame shall burn.”

  Then Ráma to his bosom drew Dear Bharat and Śatrughna too: “Be never wroth,” he cried, “with her, Kaikeyí’s guardian minister: This, glory of Ikshváku’s line, Is Sítá’s earnest prayer and mine.” He spoke, and as the big tears fell, To his dear brother bade farewell.   Round Ráma, Bharat strong and bold     In humble reverence paced,   When the bright sandals wrought with gold     Above his brows were placed.   The royal elephant who led     The glorious pomp he found,   And on the monster’s mighty head     Those sandals duly bound.   Then noble Ráma, born to swell     The glories of his race,   To all in order bade farewell     With love and tender grace—   To brothers, counsellers, and peers,—     Still firm, in duty proved,   Firm, as the Lord of Snow uprears     His mountains unremoved.   No queen, for choking sobs and sighs,     Could say her last adieu:   Then Ráma bowed, with flooded eyes,     And to his cot withdrew.




Canto CXIII. Bharat’s Return.


Bearing the sandals on his head Away triumphant Bharat sped, And clomb, Śatrughna by his side, The car wherein he wont to ride. Before the mighty army went The lords for counsel eminent, Vaśishṭha, Vámadeva next, Jáváli, pure with prayer and text. Then from that lovely river they Turned eastward on their homeward way: With reverent steps from left to right They circled Chitrakúṭa’s height, And viewed his peaks on every side With stains of thousand metals dyed. Then Bharat saw, not far away, Where Bharadvája’s dwelling lay, And when the chieftain bold and sage Had reached that holy hermitage, Down from the car he sprang to greet The saint, and bowed before his feet. High rapture filled the hermit’s breast, Who thus the royal prince addressed: “Say, Bharat, is thy duty done? Hast thou with Ráma met, my son?”

  The chief whose soul to virtue clave This answer to the hermit gave: “I prayed him with our holy guide: But Raghu’s son our prayer denied, And long besought by both of us He answered Saint Vaśishṭha thus: “True to my vow, I still will be Observant of my sire’s decree: Till fourteen years complete their course That promise shall remain in force.” The saint in highest wisdom taught, These solemn words with wisdom fraught, To him in lore of language learned Most eloquent himself returned: “Obey my rede: let Bharat hold This pair of sandals decked with gold: They in Ayodhyá shall ensure Our welfare, and our bliss secure.” When Ráma heard the royal priest He rose, and looking to the east Consigned the sandals to my hand That they for him might guard the land. Then from the high-souled chief’s abode I turned upon my homeward road, Dismissed by him, and now this pair Of sandals to Ayodhyá bear.”

  To him the hermit thus replied, By Bharat’s tidings gratified: “No marvel thoughts so just and true, Thou best of all who right pursue, Should dwell in thee, O Prince of men, As waters gather in the glen. He is not dead, we mourn in vain: Thy blessed father lives again, Whose noble son we thus behold Like Virtue’s self in human mould.”

  He ceased: before him Bharat fell To clasp his feet, and said farewell: His reverent steps around him bent, And onward to Ayodhyá went. His host of followers stretching far With many an elephant and car, Waggon and steed, and mighty train, Traversed their homeward way again. O’er holy Yamuná they sped, Fair stream, with waves engarlanded, And then once more the rivers’ queen, The blessed Gangá’s self was seen. Then making o’er that flood his way, Where crocodiles and monsters lay, The king to Śringavera drew His host and royal retinue. His onward way he thence pursued, And soon renowned Ayodhyá viewed. Then burnt by woe and sad of cheer Bharat addressed the charioteer: “Ah, see, Ayodhyá dark and sad, Her glory gone, once bright and glad: Of joy and beauty reft, forlorn, In silent grief she seems to mourn.”




Canto CXIV. Bharat’s Departure.


Deep, pleasant was the chariot’s sound As royal Bharat, far renowned, Whirled by his mettled coursers fast Within Ayodhyá’s city passed. There dark and drear was every home Where cats and owls had space to roam, As when the shades of midnight fall With blackest gloom, and cover all: As Rohiṇí, dear spouse of him Whom Ráhu hates,(396) grows faint and dim, When, as she shines on high alone The demon’s shade is o’er her thrown: As burnt by summer’s heat a rill Scarce trickling from her parent hill, With dying fish in pools half dried, And fainting birds upon her side: As sacrificial flames arise When holy oil their food supplies, But when no more the fire is fed Sink lustreless and cold and dead: Like some brave host that filled the plain, With harness rent and captains slain, When warrior, elephant, and steed Mingled in wild confusion bleed: As when, all spent her store of worth, Rocks from her base the loosened earth: Like a sad fallen star no more Wearing the lovely light it wore: So mournful in her lost estate Was that sad town disconsolate. Then car-borne Bharat, good and brave, Thus spake to him the steeds who drave: “Why are Ayodhyá’s streets so mute? Where is the voice of lyre and lute? Why sounds not, as of old, to-day The music of the minstrel’s lay? Where are the wreaths they used to twine? Where are the blossoms and the wine? Where is the cool refreshing scent Of sandal dust with aloe blent? The elephant’s impatient roar, The din of cars, I hear no more: No more the horse’s pleasant neigh Rings out to meet me on my way. Ayodhyá’s youths, since Ráma’s flight, Have lost their relish for delight: Her men roam forth no more, nor care Bright garlands round their necks to wear. All grieve for banished Ráma: feast, And revelry and song have ceased: Like a black night when floods pour down, So dark and gloomy is the town. When will he come to make them gay Like some auspicious holiday? When will my brother, like a cloud At summer’s close, make glad the crowd?”

  Then through the streets the hero rode, And passed within his sire’s abode, Like some deserted lion’s den, Forsaken by the lord of men. Then to the inner bowers he came, Once happy home of many a dame,   Now gloomy, sad, and drear, Dark as of old that sunless day When wept the Gods in wild dismay;(397)   There poured he many a tear.




Canto CXV. Nandigrám.(398)


Then when the pious chief had seen Lodged in her home each widowed queen, Still with his burning grief oppressed His holy guides he thus addressed: “I go to Nandigrám: adieu, This day, my lords to all of you: I go, my load of grief to bear, Reft of the son of Raghu, there. The king my sire, alas, is dead, And Ráma to the forest fled; There will I wait till he, restored, Shall rule the realm, its rightful lord.”

  They heard the high-souled prince’s speech, And thus with ready answer each Of those great lords their chief addressed, With saint Vaśishṭha and the rest: “Good are the words which thou hast said, By brotherly affection led, Like thine own self, a faithful friend, True to thy brother to the end: A heart like thine must all approve, Which naught from virtue’s path can move.”

  Soon as the words he loved to hear Fell upon Bharat’s joyful ear, Thus to the charioteer he spoke: “My car with speed, Sumantra, yoke.” Then Bharat with delighted mien Obeisance paid to every queen, And with Śatrughna by his side Mounting the car away he hied. With lords, and priests in long array The brothers hastened on their way. And the great pomp the Bráhmans led With Saint Vaśishṭha at their head. Then every face was eastward bent As on to Nandigrám they went. Behind the army followed, all Unsummoned by their leader’s call, And steeds and elephants and men Streamed forth with every citizen. As Bharat in his chariot rode His heart with love fraternal glowed, And with the sandals on his head To Nandigrám he quickly sped. Within the town he swiftly pressed, Alighted, and his guides addressed: “To me in trust my brother’s hand Consigned the lordship of the land, When he these gold-wrought sandals gave As emblems to protect and save.” Then Bharat bowed, and from his head The sacred pledge deposited, And thus to all the people cried Who ringed him round on every side: “Haste, for these sandals quickly bring The canopy that shades the king. Pay ye to them all reverence meet As to my elder brother’s feet, For they will right and law maintain Until King Ráma come again. My brother with a loving mind These sandals to my charge consigned: I till he come will guard with care The sacred trust for Raghu’s heir. My watchful task will soon be done, The pledge restored to Raghu’s son; Then shall I see, his wanderings o’er, These sandals on his feet once more. My brother I shall meet at last, The burthen from my shoulders cast, To Ráma’s hand the realm restore And serve my elder as before. When Ráma takes again this pair Of sandals kept with pious care, And here his glorious reign begins, I shall be cleansed from all my sins, When the glad people’s voices ring With welcome to the new-made king, Joy will be mine four-fold as great As if supreme I ruled the state.”

  Thus humbly spoke in sad lament The chief in fame preëminent: Thus, by his reverent lords obeyed, At Nandigrám the kingdom swayed. With hermit’s dress and matted hair He dwelt with all his army there. The sandals of his brother’s feet Installed upon the royal seat, He, all his powers to them referred, Affairs of state administered.   In every care, in every task,     When golden store was brought,   He first, as though their rede to ask,     Those royal sandals sought.




Canto CXVI. The Hermit’s Speech.


When Bharat took his homeward road Still Ráma in the wood abode: But soon he marked the fear and care That darkened all the hermits there. For all who dwelt before the hill Were sad with dread of coming ill: Each holy brow was lined by thought, And Ráma’s side they often sought. With gathering frowns the prince they eyed, And then withdrew and talked aside.

  Then Raghu’s son with anxious breast The leader of the saints addressed: “Can aught that I have done displease, O reverend Sage, the devotees? Why are their loving looks, O say, Thus sadly changed or turned away? Has Lakshmaṇ through his want of heed Offended with unseemly deed? Or is the gentle Sítá, she Who loved to honour you and me— Is she the cause of this offence, Failing in lowly reverence?”

  One sage, o’er whom, exceeding old, Had many a year of penance rolled, Trembling in every aged limb Thus for the rest replied to him: “How could we, O beloved, blame Thy lofty-souled Videhan dame, Who in the good of all delights, And more than all of anchorites? But yet through thee a numbing dread Of fiends among our band has spread; Obstructed by the demons’ art The trembling hermits talk apart. For Rávaṇ’s brother, overbold, Named Khara, of gigantic mould, Vexes with fury fierce and fell All those in Janasthán(399) who dwell. Resistless in his cruel deeds, On flesh of men the monster feeds: Sinful and arrogant is he, And looks with special hate on thee. Since thou, beloved son, hast made Thy home within this holy shade, The fiends have vexed with wilder rage The dwellers of the hermitage. In many a wild and dreadful form Around the trembling saints they swarm, With hideous shape and foul disguise They terrify our holy eyes. They make our loathing souls endure Insult and scorn and sights impure, And flocking round the altars stay The holy rites we love to pay. In every spot throughout the grove With evil thoughts the monsters rove, Assailing with their secret might Each unsuspecting anchorite. Ladle and dish away they fling, Our fires with floods extinguishing, And when the sacred flame should burn They trample on each water-urn. Now when they see their sacred wood Plagued by this impious brotherhood, The troubled saints away would roam And seek in other shades a home: Hence will we fly, O Ráma, ere The cruel fiends our bodies tear. Not far away a forest lies Rich in the roots and fruit we prize, To this will I and all repair And join the holy hermits there; Be wise, and with us thither flee Before this Khara injure thee. Mighty art thou, O Ráma, yet Each day with peril is beset. If with thy consort by thy side Thou in this wood wilt still abide.”

  He ceased: the words the hero spake The hermit’s purpose failed to break: To Raghu’s son farewell he said, And blessed the chief and comforted; Then with the rest the holy sage Departed from the hermitage.

  So from the wood the saints withdrew, And Ráma bidding all adieu   In lowly reverence bent: Instructed by their friendly speech, Blest with the gracious love of each,   To his pure home he went. Nor would the son of Raghu stray A moment from that grove away   From which the saints had fled. And many a hermit thither came Attracted by his saintly fame   And the pure life he led.




Canto CXVII. Anasúyá.


But dwelling in that lonely spot Left by the hermits pleased him not. “I met the faithful Bharat here, The townsmen, and my mother dear: The painful memory lingers yet, And stings me with a vain regret. And here the host of Bharat camped, And many a courser here has stamped, And elephants with ponderous feet Have trampled through the calm retreat.” So forth to seek a home he hied, His spouse and Lakshmaṇ by his side. He came to Atri’s pure retreat, Paid reverence to his holy feet, And from the saint such welcome won As a fond father gives his son. The noble prince with joy unfeigned As a dear guest he entertained, And cheered the glorious Lakshmaṇ too And Sítá with observance due. Then Anasúyá at the call Of him who sought the good of all, His blameless venerable spouse, Delighting in her holy vows, Came from her chamber to his side: To her the virtuous hermit cried: “Receive, I pray, with friendly grace This dame of Maithil monarchs’ race:” To Ráma next made known his wife, The devotee of saintliest life: “Ten thousand years this votaress bent On sternest rites of penance spent; She when the clouds withheld their rain, And drought ten years consumed the plain, Caused grateful roots and fruit to grow And ordered Gangá here to flow: So from their cares the saints she freed, Nor let these checks their rites impede, She wrought in Heaven’s behalf, and made Ten nights of one, the Gods to aid:(400) Let holy Anasúyá be An honoured mother, Prince, to thee. Let thy Videhan spouse draw near To her whom all that live revere, Stricken in years, whose loving mind Is slow to wrath and ever kind.”

  He ceased: and Ráma gave assent, And said, with eyes on Sítá bent: “O Princess, thou hast heard with me This counsel of the devotee: Now that her touch thy soul may bless, Approach the saintly votaress: Come to the venerable dame, Far known by Anasúyá’s name: The mighty things that she has done High glory in the world have won.”

  Thus spoke the son of Raghu: she Approached the saintly devotee, Who with her white locks, old and frail, Shook like a plantain in the gale. To that true spouse she bowed her head, And “Lady, I am Sítá,” said: Raised suppliant hands and prayed her tell That all was prosperous and well.

  The aged matron, when she saw Fair Sítá true to duty’s law, Addressed her thus: “High fate is thine Whose thoughts to virtue still incline. Thou, lady of the noble mind, Hast kin and state and wealth resigned To follow Ráma forced to tread Where solitary woods are spread. Those women gain high spheres above Who still unchanged their husbands love, Whether they dwell in town or wood, Whether their hearts be ill or good. Though wicked, poor, or led away In love’s forbidden paths to stray, The noble matron still will deem Her lord a deity supreme. Regarding kin and friendship, I Can see no better, holier tie, And every penance-rite is dim Beside the joy of serving him. But dark is this to her whose mind Promptings of idle fancy blind, Who led by evil thoughts away Makes him who should command obey. Such women, O dear Maithil dame, Their virtue lose and honest fame, Enslaved by sin and folly, led In these unholy paths to tread. But they who good and true like thee The present and the future see, Like men by holy deeds will rise To mansions in the blissful skies.   So keep thee pure from taint of sin,     Still to thy lord be true,   And fame and merit shalt thou win,     To thy devotion due.”




Canto CXVIII. Anasúyá’s Gifts.


Thus by the holy dame addressed Who banished envy from her breast, Her lowly reverence Sítá paid, And softly thus her answer made: “No marvel, best of dames, thy speech The duties of a wife should teach; Yet I, O lady, also know Due reverence to my lord to show. Were he the meanest of the base, Unhonoured with a single grace, My husband still I ne’er would leave, But firm through all to him would cleave: Still rather to a lord like mine Whose virtues high-exalted shine, Compassionate, of lofty soul, With every sense in due control, True in his love, of righteous mind, Like a dear sire and mother kind. E’en as he ever loves to treat Kauśalyá with observance meet, Has his behaviour ever been To every other honoured queen. Nay, more, a sonlike reverence shows The noble Ráma e’en to those On whom the king his father set His eyes one moment, to forget. Deep in my heart the words are stored, Said by the mother of my lord, When from my home I turned away In the lone fearful woods to stray. The counsel of my mother deep Impressed upon my soul I keep, When by the fire I took my stand, And Ráma clasped in his my hand. And in my bosom cherished yet, My friends’ advice I ne’er forget: Woman her holiest offering pays When she her husband’s will obeys. Good Sávitrí her lord obeyed, And a high saint in heaven was made, And for the self-same virtue thou Hast heaven in thy possession now. And she with whom no dame could vie, Now a bright Goddess in the sky, Sweet Rohiṇí the Moon’s dear Queen, Without her lord is never seen: And many a faithful wife beside For her pure love is glorified.”

  Thus Sítá spake: soft rapture stole Through Anasúyá’s saintly soul: Kisses on Sítá’s head she pressed, And thus the Maithil dame addressed: “I by long rites and toils endured Rich store of merit have secured: From this my wealth will I bestow A blessing ere I let thee go. So right and wise and true each word That from thy lips mine ears have heard, I love thee: be my pleasing task To grant the boon that thou shalt ask.”

  Then Sítá marvelled much, and while Played o’er her lips a gentle smile, “All has been done, O Saint,” she cried, “And naught remains to wish beside.”

  She spake; the lady’s meek reply Swelled Anasúyá’s rapture high. “Sítá,” she said, “my gift to-day Thy sweet contentment shall repay. Accept this precious robe to wear, Of heavenly fabric, rich and rare, These gems thy limbs to ornament, This precious balsam sweet of scent. O Maithil dame, this gift of mine Shall make thy limbs with beauty shine, And breathing o’er thy frame dispense Its pure and lasting influence. This balsam on thy fair limbs spread New radiance on thy lord shall shed, As Lakshmí’s beauty lends a grace To Vishṇu’s own celestial face.”

  Then Sítá took the gift the dame Bestowed on her in friendship’s name, The balsam, gems, and robe divine, And garlands wreathed of bloomy twine; Then sat her down, with reverence meet, At saintly Anasúyá’s feet. The matron rich in rites and vows Turned her to Ráma’s Maithil spouse, And questioned thus in turn to hear A pleasant tale to charm her ear: “Sítá, ’tis said that Raghu’s son Thy hand, mid gathered suitors, won. I fain would hear thee, lady, tell The story as it all befell: Do thou repeat each thing that passed, Reviewing all from first to last.”

  Thus spake the dame to Sítá: she Replying to the devotee, “Then, lady, thy attention lend,” Rehearsed the story to the end:

  “King Janak, just and brave and strong, Who loves the right and hates the wrong, Well skilled in what the law ordains For Warriors, o’er Videha reigns. Guiding one morn the plough, his hand Marked out, for rites the sacred land, When, as the ploughshare cleft the earth, Child of the king I leapt to birth. Then as the ground he smoothed and cleared, He saw me all with dust besmeared, And on the new-found babe, amazed The ruler of Videha gazed. In childless love the monarch pressed The welcome infant to his breast: “My daughter,” thus he cried, “is she:” And as his child he cared for me. Forth from the sky was heard o’erhead As ’twere a human voice that said: “Yea, even so: great King, this child Henceforth thine own be justly styled.” Videha’s monarch, virtuous souled, Rejoiced o’er me with joy untold, Delighting in his new-won prize, The darling of his heart and eyes. To his chief queen of saintly mind The precious treasure he consigned, And by her side she saw me grow, Nursed with the love which mothers know. Then as he saw the seasons fly, And knew my marriage-time was nigh, My sire was vexed with care, as sad As one who mourns the wealth he had: “Scorn on the maiden’s sire must wait From men of high and low estate: The virgin’s father all despise, Though Indra’s peer, who rules the skies.” More near he saw, and still more near, The scorn that filled his soul with fear, On trouble’s billowy ocean tossed, Like one whose shattered bark is lost. My father knowing how I came, No daughter of a mortal dame, In all the regions failed to see A bridegroom meet to match with me. Each way with anxious thought he scanned, And thus at length the monarch planned: “The Bride’s Election will I hold, With every rite prescribed of old.” It pleased King Varuṇ to bestow Quiver and shafts and heavenly bow Upon my father’s sire who reigned, When Daksha his great rite ordained. Where was the man might bend or lift With utmost toil that wondrous gift? Not e’en in dreams could mortal king Strain the great bow or draw the string. Of this tremendous bow possessed, My truthful father thus addressed The lords of many a region, all Assembled at the monarch’s call: “Whoe’er this bow can manage, he The husband of my child shall be.” The suitors viewed with hopeless eyes That wondrous bow of mountain size, Then to my sire they bade adieu, And all with humbled hearts withdrew. At length with Viśvámitra came This son of Raghu, dear to fame, The royal sacrifice to view. Near to my father’s home he drew, His brother Lakshmaṇ by his side, Ráma, in deeds heroic tried. My sire with honour entertained The saint in lore of duty trained, Who thus in turn addressed the king: “Ráma and Lakshmaṇ here who spring From royal Daśaratha, long To see thy bow so passing strong.”

  Before the prince’s eyes was laid That marvel, as the Bráhman prayed. One moment on the bow he gazed, Quick to the notch the string he raised, Then, in the wandering people’s view, The cord with mighty force he drew. Then with an awful crash as loud As thunderbolts that cleave the cloud, The bow beneath the matchless strain Of arms heroic snapped in twain. Thus, giving purest water, he, My sire, to Ráma offered me. The prince the offered gift declined Till he should learn his father’s mind; So horsemen swift Ayodhyá sought And back her aged monarch brought. Me then my sire to Ráma gave, Self-ruled, the bravest of the brave. And Urmilá, the next to me, Graced with all gifts, most fair to see, My sire with Raghu’s house allied, And gave her to be Lakshmaṇ’s bride. Thus from the princes of the land Lord Ráma won my maiden hand, And him exalted high above Heroic chiefs I truly love.”




Canto CXIX. The Forest.


When Anasúyá, virtuous-souled, Had heard the tale by Sítá told, She kissed the lady’s brow and laced Her loving arms around her waist. “With sweet-toned words distinct and clear Thy pleasant tale has charmed mine ear, How the great king thy father held That Maiden’s Choice unparalleled. But now the sun has sunk from sight, And left the world to holy Night. Hark! how the leafy thickets sound With gathering birds that twitter round: They sought their food by day, and all Flock homeward when the shadows fall. See, hither comes the hermit band, Each with his pitcher in his hand: Fresh from the bath, their locks are wet, Their coats of bark are dripping yet. Here saints their fires of worship tend, And curling wreaths of smoke ascend: Borne on the flames they mount above, Dark as the brown wings of the dove. The distant trees, though well-nigh bare, Gloom thickened by the evening air, And in the faint uncertain light Shut the horizon from our sight. The beasts that prowl in darkness rove On every side about the grove, And the tame deer, at ease reclined Their shelter near the altars find. The night o’er all the sky is spread, With lunar stars engarlanded, And risen in his robes of light The moon is beautifully bright. Now to thy lord I bid thee go: Thy pleasant tale has charmed me so: One thing alone I needs must pray, Before me first thyself array: Here in thy heavenly raiment shine, And glad, dear love, these eyes of mine.” Then like a heavenly Goddess shone Fair Sítá with that raiment on. She bowed her to the matron’s feet, Then turned away her lord to meet. The hero prince with joy surveyed His Sítá in her robes arrayed, As glorious to his arms she came With love-gifts of the saintly dame. She told him how the saint to show Her fond affection would bestow That garland of celestial twine, Those ornaments and robes divine. Then Ráma’s heart, nor Lakshmaṇ’s less, Was filled with pride and happiness, For honours high had Sítá gained, Which mortal dames have scarce obtained. There honoured by each pious sage Who dwelt within the hermitage, Beside his darling well content That sacred night the hero spent.

  The princes, when the night had fled, Farewell to all the hermits said, Who gazed upon the distant shade, Their lustral rites and offerings paid. The saints who made their dwelling there In words like these addressed the pair: “O Princes, monsters fierce and fell Around that distant forest dwell: On blood from human veins they feed, And various forms assume at need, With savage beasts of fearful power That human flesh and blood devour. Our holy saints they rend and tear When met alone or unaware, And eat them in their cruel joy: These chase, O Ráma, or destroy. By this one path our hermits go To fetch the fruits that yonder grow: By this, O Prince, thy feet should stray Through pathless forests far away.”

  Thus by the reverent saints addressed, And by their prayers auspicious blessed,   He left the holy crowd: His wife and brother by his side, Within the mighty wood he hied. So sinks the Day-God in his pride   Beneath a bank of cloud.





BOOK III.




Canto I. The Hermitage.


When Ráma, valiant hero, stood In the vast shade of Daṇḍak wood, His eyes on every side he bent And saw a hermit settlement, Where coats of bark were hung around, And holy grass bestrewed the ground. Bright with Bráhmanic lustre glowed That circle where the saints abode: Like the hot sun in heaven it shone, Too dazzling to be looked upon. Wild creatures found a refuge where The court, well-swept, was bright and fair, And countless birds and roedeer made Their dwelling in the friendly shade. Beneath the boughs of well-loved trees Oft danced the gay Apsarases.(401) Around was many an ample shed Wherein the holy fire was fed; With sacred grass and skins of deer, Ladles and sacrificial gear, And roots and fruit, and wood to burn, And many a brimming water-urn. Tall trees their hallowed branches spread, Laden with pleasant fruit, o’erhead; And gifts which holy laws require,(402) And solemn offerings burnt with fire,(403) And Veda chants on every side That home of hermits sanctified. There many a flower its odour shed, And lotus blooms the lake o’erspred. There, clad in coats of bark and hide,— Their food by roots and fruit supplied,— Dwelt many an old and reverend sire Bright as the sun or Lord of Fire, All with each worldly sense subdued, A pure and saintly multitude. The Veda chants, the saints who trod The sacred ground and mused on God, Made that delightful grove appear Like Brahmá’s own most glorious sphere. As Raghu’s splendid son surveyed That hermit home and tranquil shade, He loosed his mighty bow-string, then Drew nearer to the holy men. With keen celestial sight endued Those mighty saints the chieftain viewed, With joy to meet the prince they came, And gentle Sítá dear to fame. They looked on virtuous Ráma, fair As Soma(404) in the evening air, And Lakshmaṇ by his brother’s side, And Sítá long in duty tried, And with glad blessings every sage Received them in the hermitage. Then Ráma’s form and stature tall Entranced the wondering eyes of all,— His youthful grace, his strength of limb, And garb that nobly sat on him. To Lakshmaṇ too their looks they raised, And upon Sítá’s beauty gazed With eyes that closed not lest their sight Should miss the vision of delight. Then the pure hermits of the wood, Rejoicing in all creatures’ good, Their guest, the glorious Ráma, led Within a cot with leaves o’erhead. With highest honour all the best Of radiant saints received their guest, With kind observance, as is meet, And gave him water for his feet. To highest pitch of rapture wrought Their stores of roots and fruit they brought. They poured their blessings on his head, And “All we have is thine,” they said. Then, reverent hand to hand applied,(405) Each duty-loving hermit cried: “The king is our protector, bright In fame, maintainer of the right. He bears the awful sword, and hence Deserves an elder’s reverence. One fourth of Indra’s essence, he Preserves his realm from danger free, Hence honoured by the world of right The king enjoys each choice delight. Thou shouldst to us protection give, For in thy realm, dear lord, we live: Whether in town or wood thou be, Thou art our king, thy people we. Our wordly aims are laid aside, Our hearts are tamed and purified. To thee our guardian, we who earn Our only wealth by penance turn.”

  Then the pure dwellers in the shade To Raghu’s son due honour paid, And Lakshmaṇ, bringing store of roots, And many a flower, and woodland fruits. And others strove the prince to please With all attentive courtesies.




Canto II. Virádha.


Thus entertained he passed the night, Then, with the morning’s early light, To all the hermits bade adieu And sought his onward way anew. He pierced the mighty forest where Roamed many a deer and pard and bear: Its ruined pools he scarce could see. For creeper rent and prostrate tree, Where shrill cicada’s cries were heard, And plaintive notes of many a bird. Deep in the thickets of the wood With Lakshmaṇ and his spouse he stood, There in the horrid shade he saw A giant passing nature’s law: Vast as some mountain-peak in size, With mighty voice and sunken eyes, Huge, hideous, tall, with monstrous face, Most ghastly of his giant race. A tiger’s hide the Rákshas wore Still reeking with the fat and gore: Huge-faced, like Him who rules the dead, All living things he struck with dread. Three lions, tigers four, ten deer He carried on his iron spear, Two wolves, an elephant’s head beside With mighty tusks which blood-drops dyed. When on the three his fierce eye fell, He charged them with a roar and yell As furious as the grisly King When stricken worlds are perishing. Then with a mighty roar that shook The earth beneath their feet, he took The trembling Sítá to his side. Withdrew a little space, and cried: “Ha, short lived wretches, ye who dare, In hermit dress with matted hair, Armed each with arrows, sword, and bow, Through Daṇḍak’s pathless wood to go: How with one dame, I bid you tell, Can you among ascetics dwell? Who are ye, sinners, who despise The right, in holy men’s disguise? The great Virádha, day by day Through this deep-tangled wood I stray, And ever, armed with trusty steel, I seize a saint to make my meal. This woman young and fair of frame Shall be the conquering giant’s dame: Your blood, ye things of evil life, My lips shall quaff in battle strife.”

  He spoke: and Janak’s hapless child, Scared by his speech so fierce and wild, Trembled for terror, as a frail Young plantain shivers in the gale. When Ráma saw Virádha clasp Fair Sítá in his mighty grasp, Thus with pale lips that terror dried The hero to his brother cried: “O see Virádha’s arm enfold My darling in its cursed hold,— The child of Janak best of kings, My spouse whose soul to virtue clings, Sweet princess, with pure glory bright, Nursed in the lap of soft delight. Now falls the blow Kaikeyí meant, Successful in her dark intent: This day her cruel soul will be Triumphant over thee and me. Though Bharat on the throne is set, Her greedy eyes look farther yet: Me from my home she dared expel, Me whom all creatures loved so well. This fatal day at length, I ween, Brings triumph to the younger queen. I see with bitterest grief and shame Another touch the Maithil dame. Not loss of sire and royal power So grieves me as this mournful hour.”

  Thus in his anguish cried the chief: Then drowned in tears, o’erwhelmed by grief, Thus Lakshmaṇ in his anger spake, Quick panting like a spell-bound snake:

  “Canst thou, my brother, Indra’s peer, When I thy minister am near, Thus grieve like some forsaken thing, Thou, every creature’s lord and king? My vengeful shaft the fiend shall slay, And earth shall drink his blood to-day. The fury which my soul at first Upon usurping Bharat nursed, On this Virádha will I wreak As Indra splits the mountain peak. Winged by this arm’s impetuous might   My shaft with deadly force The monster in the chest shall smite,   And fell his shattered corse.”




Canto III. Virádha Attacked.


Virádha with a fearful shout That echoed through the wood, cried out:

  “What men are ye, I bid you say, And whither would ye bend your way?”

  To him whose mouth shot fiery flame The hero told his race and name: “Two Warriors, nobly bred, are we, And through this wood we wander free. But who art thou, how born and styled, Who roamest here in Daṇḍak’s wild?”

  To Ráma, bravest of the brave, His answer thus Virádha gave: “Hear, Raghu’s son, and mark me well, And I my name and race will tell. Of Śatahradá born, I spring From Java as my sire, O King: Me, of this lofty lineage, all Giants on earth Virádha call. The rites austere I long maintained From Brahmá’s grace the boon have gained To bear a charmed frame which ne’er Weapon or shaft may pierce or tear. Go as ye came, untouched by fear, And leave with me this woman here: Go, swiftly from my presence fly, Or by this hand ye both shall die.”

  Then Ráma with his fierce eyes red With fury to the giant said: “Woe to thee, sinner, fond and weak, Who madly thus thy death wilt seek! Stand, for it waits thee in the fray: With life thou ne’er shalt flee away.”

  He spoke, and raised the cord whereon A pointed arrow flashed and shone, Then, wild with anger, from his bow, He launched the weapon on the foe. Seven times the fatal cord he drew, And forth seven rapid arrows flew, Shafts winged with gold that left the wind And e’en Suparṇa’s(406) self behind. Full on the giant’s breast they smote, And purpled like the peacock’s throat, Passed through his mighty bulk and came To earth again like flakes of flame. The fiend the Maithil dame unclasped; In his fierce hand his spear he grasped, And wild with rage, pierced through and through, At Ráma and his brother flew. So loud the roar which chilled with fear, So massy was the monster’s spear, He seemed, like Indra’s flagstaff, dread As the dark God who rules the dead. On huge Virádha fierce as He(407) Who smites, and worlds have ceased to be, The princely brothers poured amain Their fiery flood of arrowy rain. Unmoved he stood, and opening wide His dire mouth laughed unterrified, And ever as the monster gaped Those arrows from his jaws escaped. Preserving still his life unharmed, By Brahmá’s saving promise charmed, His mighty spear aloft in air He raised, and rushed upon the pair. From Ráma’s bow two arrows flew And cleft that massive spear in two, Dire as the flaming levin sent From out the cloudy firmament. Cut by the shafts he guided well To earth the giant’s weapon fell: As when from Meru’s summit, riven By fiery bolts, a rock is driven. Then swift his sword each warrior drew, Like a dread serpent black of hue, And gathering fury for the blow Rushed fiercely on the giant foe. Around each prince an arm he cast, And held the dauntless heroes fast: Then, though his gashes gaped and bled, Bearing the twain he turned and fled.

  Then Ráma saw the giant’s plan, And to his brother thus began: “O Lakshmaṇ, let Virádha still Hurry us onward as he will, For look, Sumitrá’s son, he goes Along the path we freely chose.”

  He spoke: the rover of the night Upraised them with terrific might, Till, to his lofty shoulders swung, Like children to his neck they clung. Then sending far his fearful roar, The princes through the wood he bore,— A wood like some vast cloud to view, Where birds of every plumage flew, And mighty trees o’erarching threw   Dark shadows on the ground; Where snakes and silvan creatures made Their dwelling, and the jackal strayed   Through tangled brakes around.




Canto IV. Virádha’s Death.


But Sítá viewed with wild affright The heroes hurried from her sight. She tossed her shapely arms on high, And shrieked aloud her bitter cry: “Ah, the dread giant bears away The princely Ráma as his prey, Truthful and pure, and good and great, And Lakshmaṇ shares his brother’s fate. The brindled tiger and the bear My mangled limbs for food will tear. Take me, O best of giants, me, And leave the sons of Raghu free.”

  Then, by avenging fury spurred, Her mournful cry the heroes heard, And hastened, for the lady’s sake, The wicked monster’s life to take. Then Lakshmaṇ with resistless stroke The foe’s left arm that held him broke, And Ráma too, as swift to smite, Smashed with his heavy hand the right. With broken arms and tortured frame To earth the fainting giant came, Like a huge cloud, or mighty rock Rent, sundered by the levin’s shock. Then rushed they on, and crushed and beat Their foe with arms and fists and feet, And nerved each mighty limb to pound And bray him on the level ground. Keen arrows and each biting blade Wide rents in breast and side had made; But crushed and torn and mangled, still The monster lived they could not kill. When Ráma saw no arms might slay The fiend who like a mountain lay, The glorious hero, swift to save In danger, thus his counsel gave: “O Prince of men, his charmed life No arms may take in battle strife: Now dig we in this grove a pit His elephantine bulk to fit, And let the hollowed earth enfold The monster of gigantic mould.”

  This said, the son of Raghu pressed His foot upon the giant’s breast. With joy the prostrate monster heard Victorious Ráma’s welcome word, And straight Kakutstha’s son, the best Of men, in words like these addressed: “I yield, O chieftain, overthrown By might that vies with Indra’s own. Till now my folly-blinded eyes Thee, hero, failed to recognize. Happy Kauśalyá! blest to be The mother of a son like thee! I know thee well, O chieftain, now: Ráma, the prince of men, art thou. There stands the high-born Maithil dame, There Lakshmaṇ, lord of mighty fame. My name was Tumburu,(408) for song Renowned among the minstrel throng: Cursed by Kuvera’s stern decree I wear the hideous shape you see. But when I sued, his grace to crave, The glorious God this answer gave: “When Ráma, Daśaratha’s son, Destroys thee and the fight is won, Thy proper shape once more assume, And heaven again shall give thee room.” When thus the angry God replied, No prayers could turn his wrath aside, And thus on me his fury fell For loving Rambhá’s(409) charms too well. Now through thy favour am I freed From the stern fate the God decreed, And saved, O tamer of the foe, By thee, to heaven again shall go. A league, O Prince, beyond this spot Stands holy Śarabhanga’s cot: The very sun is not more bright Than that most glorious anchorite: To him, O Ráma, quickly turn, And blessings from the hermit earn. First under earth my body throw, Then on thy way rejoicing go. Such is the law ordained of old For giants when their days are told: Their bodies laid in earth, they rise To homes eternal in the skies.”

  Thus, by the rankling dart oppressed, Kakutstha’s offspring he addressed: In earth his mighty body lay, His spirit fled to heaven away.

  Thus spake Virádha ere he died; And Ráma to his brother cried: “Now dig we in this grove a pit His elephantine bulk to fit. And let the hollowed earth enfold This mighty giant fierce and bold.”

  This said, the valiant hero put Upon the giant’s neck his foot. His spade obedient Lakshmaṇ plied, And dug a pit both deep and wide By lofty souled Virádha’s side. Then Raghu’s son his foot withdrew, And down the mighty form they threw; One awful shout of joy he gave And sank into the open grave. The heroes, to their purpose true, In fight the cruel demon slew,   And radiant with delight Deep in the hollowed earth they cast The monster roaring to the last,   In their resistless might. Thus when they saw the warrior’s steel No life-destroying blow might deal,   The pair, for lore renowned, Deep in the pit their hands had made The unresisting giant laid,   And killed him neath the ground. Upon himself the monster brought From Ráma’s hand the death he sought   With strong desire to gain: And thus the rover of the night Told Ráma, as they strove in fight, That swords might rend and arrows smite   Upon his breast in vain. Thus Ráma, when his speech he heard, The giant’s mighty form interred,   Which mortal arms defied. With thundering crash the giant fell, And rock and cave and forest dell   With echoing roar replied. The princes, when their task was done And freedom from the peril won,   Rejoiced to see him die. Then in the boundless wood they strayed, Like the great sun and moon displayed   Triumphant in the sky.(410)




Canto V. Sarabhanga.


Then Ráma, having slain in fight Virádha of terrific might, With gentle words his spouse consoled, And clasped her in his loving hold. Then to his brother nobly brave The valiant prince his counsel gave: “Wild are these woods around us spread; And hard and rough the ground to tread: We, O my brother, ne’er have viewed So dark and drear a solitude: To Śarabhanga let us haste, Whom wealth of holy works has graced.”

  Thus Ráma spoke, and took the road To Śarabhanga’s pure abode. But near that saint whose lustre vied With Gods, by penance purified, With startled eyes the prince beheld A wondrous sight unparalleled. In splendour like the fire and sun He saw a great and glorious one. Upon a noble car he rode, And many a God behind him glowed: And earth beneath his feet unpressed(411) The monarch of the skies confessed. Ablaze with gems, no dust might dim The bright attire that covered him. Arrayed like him, on every side High saints their master glorified. Near, borne in air, appeared in view His car which tawny coursers drew, Like silver cloud, the moon, or sun Ere yet the day is well begun. Wreathed with gay garlands, o’er his head A pure white canopy was spread, And lovely nymphs stood nigh to hold Fair chouris with their sticks of gold, Which, waving in each gentle hand, The forehead of their monarch fanned. God, saint, and bard, a radiant ring, Sang glory to their heavenly King: Forth into joyful lauds they burst As Indra with the sage conversed. Then Ráma, when his wondering eyes Beheld the monarch of the skies, To Lakshmaṇ quickly called, and showed The car wherein Lord Indra rode: “See, brother, see that air-borne car, Whose wondrous glory shines afar: Wherefrom so bright a lustre streams That like a falling sun it seems: These are the steeds whose fame we know, Of heavenly race through heaven they go: These are the steeds who bear the yoke Of Śakra,(412) Him whom all invoke. Behold these youths, a glorious band, Toward every wind a hundred stand: A sword in each right hand is borne, And rings of gold their arms adorn. What might in every broad deep chest And club-like arm is manifest! Clothed in attire of crimson hue They show like tigers fierce to view. Great chains of gold each warder deck, Gleaming like fire beneath his neck. The age of each fair youth appears Some score and five of human years: The ever-blooming prime which they Who live in heaven retain for aye: Such mien these lordly beings wear, Heroic youths, most bright and fair. Now, brother, in this spot, I pray, With the Videhan lady stay, Till I have certain knowledge who This being is, so bright to view.”

  He spoke, and turning from the spot Sought Śarabhanga’s hermit cot. But when the lord of Śachí(413) saw The son of Raghu near him draw, He hastened of the sage to take His leave, and to his followers spake:

  “See, Ráma bends his steps this way, But ere he yet a word can say, Come, fly to our celestial sphere; It is not meet he see me here. Soon victor and triumphant he In fitter time shall look on me. Before him still a great emprise, A task too hard for others, lies.”

  Then with all marks of honour high The Thunderer bade the saint good-bye, And in his car which coursers drew Away to heaven the conqueror flew. Then Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, and the dame, To Śarabhanga nearer came, Who sat beside the holy flame. Before the ancient sage they bent, And clasped his feet most reverent; Then at his invitation found A seat beside him on the ground. Then Ráma prayed the sage would deign Lord Indra’s visit to explain; And thus at length the holy man In answer to his prayer began:

  “This Lord of boons has sought me here To waft me hence to Brahmá’s sphere, Won by my penance long and stern,— A home the lawless ne’er can earn. But when I knew that thou wast nigh, To Brahmá’s world I could not fly Until these longing eyes were blest With seeing thee, mine honoured guest. Since thou, O Prince, hast cheered my sight, Great-hearted lover of the right, To heavenly spheres will I repair And bliss supreme that waits me there. For I have won, dear Prince, my way To those fair worlds which ne’er decay, Celestial seat of Brahmá’s reign: Be thine, with me, those worlds to gain.”

  Then master of all sacred lore, Spake Ráma to the saint once more:

  “I, even I, illustrious sage, Will make those worlds mine heritage: But now, I pray, some home assign Within this holy grove of thine.”

  Thus Ráma, Indra’s peer in might, Addressed the aged anchorite: And he, with wisdom well endued, To Raghu’s son his speech renewed:

  “Sutíkshṇa’s woodland home is near, A glorious saint of life austere, True to the path of duty; he With highest bliss will prosper thee. Against the stream thy course must be Of this fair brook Mandákiní, Whereon light rafts like blossoms glide; Then to his cottage turn aside. There lies thy path: but ere thou go, Look on me, dear one, till I throw Aside this mould that girds me in, As casts the snake his withered skin.”

  He spoke, the fire in order laid With holy oil due offerings made, And Śarabhanga, glorious sire, Laid down his body in the fire. Then rose the flame above his head, On skin, blood, flesh, and bones it fed, Till forth, transformed, with radiant hue Of tender youth, he rose anew, Far-shining in his bright attire Came Śarabhanga from the pyre: Above the home of saints, and those Who feed the quenchless flame,(414) he rose: Beyond the seat of Gods he passed, And Brahmá’s sphere was gained at last. The noblest of the twice-born race, For holy works supreme in place, The Mighty Father there beheld Girt round by hosts unparalleled; And Brahmá joying at the sight Welcomed the glorious anchorite.




Canto VI. Ráma’s Promise.


When he his heavenly home had found, The holy men who dwelt around To Ráma flocked, whose martial fame Shone glorious as the kindled flame: Vaikhánasas(415) who love the wild, Pure hermits Bálakhilyas(416) styled, Good Samprakshálas,(417) saints who live On rays which moon and daystar give: Those who with leaves their lives sustain And those who pound with stones their grain: And they who lie in pools, and those Whose corn, save teeth, no winnow knows: Those who for beds the cold earth use, And those who every couch refuse: And those condemned to ceaseless pains, Whose single foot their weight sustains: And those who sleep neath open skies, Whose food the wave or air supplies, And hermits pure who spend their nights On ground prepared for sacred rites; Those who on hills their vigil hold, Or dripping clothes around them fold: The devotees who live for prayer, Or the five fires(418) unflinching bear. On contemplation all intent, With light that heavenly knowledge lent, They came to Ráma, saint and sage, In Śarabhanga’s hermitage. The hermit crowd around him pressed, And thus the virtuous chief addressed: “The lordship of the earth is thine, O Prince of old Ikshváku’s line. Lord of the Gods is Indra, so Thou art our lord and guide below. Thy name, the glory of thy might, Throughout the triple world are bright: Thy filial love so nobly shown, Thy truth and virtue well are known. To thee, O lord, for help we fly, And on thy love of right rely: With kindly patience hear us speak, And grant the boon we humbly seek. That lord of earth were most unjust, Foul traitor to his solemn trust, Who should a sixth of all(419) require, Nor guard his people like a sire. But he who ever watchful strives To guard his subjects’ wealth and lives, Dear as himself or, dearer still, His sons, with earnest heart and will,— That king, O Raghu’s son, secures High fame that endless years endures, And he to Brahmá’s world shall rise, Made glorious in the eternal skies. Whate’er, by duty won, the meed Of saints whom roots and berries feed, One fourth thereof, for tender care Of subjects, is the monarch’s share. These, mostly of the Bráhman race, Who make the wood their dwelling-place, Although a friend in thee they view, Fall friendless neath the giant crew. Come, Ráma, come, and see hard by The holy hermits’ corpses lie, Where many a tangled pathway shows The murderous work of cruel foes. These wicked fiends the hermits kill— Who live on Chitrakúṭa’s hill, And blood of slaughtered saints has dyed Mandákiní and Pampá’s side. No longer can we bear to see The death of saint and devotee Whom through the forest day by day These Rákshasas unpitying slay. To thee, O Prince, we flee, and crave Thy guardian help our lives to save. From these fierce rovers of the night Defend each stricken anchorite. Throughout the world ’twere vain to seek An arm like thine to aid the weak. O Prince, we pray thee hear our call, And from these fiends preserve us all.”

  The son of Raghu heard the plaint Of penance-loving sage and saint, And the good prince his speech renewed To all the hermit multitude:

  “To me, O saints, ye need not sue: I wait the hests of all of you. I by mine own occasion led This mighty forest needs must tread, And while I keep my sire’s decree Your lives from threatening foes will free. I hither came of free accord To lend the aid by you implored, And richest meed my toil shall pay, While here in forest shades I stay. I long in battle strife to close. And slay these fiends, the hermits’ foes, That saint and sage may learn aright My prowess and my brother’s might.”

  Thus to the saints his promise gave That prince who still to virtue clave   With never-wandering thought: And then with Lakshmaṇ by his side, With penance-wealthy men to guide,   Sutíkshṇa’s home he sought.




Canto VII. Sutíkshna.


So Raghu’s son, his foemen’s dread, With Sítá and his brother sped, Girt round by many a twice-born sage, To good Sutíkshṇa’s hermitage.(420) Through woods for many a league he passed, O’er rushing rivers full and fast, Until a mountain fair and bright As lofty Meru rose in sight. Within its belt of varied wood Ikshváku’s sons and Sítá stood, Where trees of every foliage bore Blossom and fruit in endless store. There coats of bark, like garlands strung, Before a lonely cottage hung, And there a hermit, dust-besmeared, A lotus on his breast, appeared. Then Ráma with obeisance due Addressed the sage, as near he drew: “My name is Ráma, lord; I seek Thy presence, saint, with thee to speak. O sage, whose merits ne’er decay, Some word unto thy servant say.”

  The sage his eyes on Ráma bent, Of virtue’s friends preëminent; Then words like these he spoke, and pressed The son of Raghu to his breast: “Welcome to thee, illustrious youth, Best champion of the rights of truth! By thine approach this holy ground A worthy lord this day has found. I could not quit this mortal frame Till thou shouldst come, O dear to fame: To heavenly spheres I would not rise, Expecting thee with eager eyes. I knew that thou, unkinged, hadst made Thy home in Chitrakúṭa’s shade. E’en now, O Ráma, Indra, lord Supreme by all the Gods adored, King of the Hundred Offerings,(421) said, When he my dwelling visited, That the good works that I have done My choice of all the worlds have won. Accept this meed of holy vows, And with thy brother and thy spouse, Roam, through my favour, in the sky Which saints celestial glorify.”

  To that bright sage, of penance stern, The high-souled Ráma spake in turn, As Vásava(422) who rules the skies To Brahmá’s gracious speech replies: “I of myself those worlds will win, O mighty hermit pure from sin: But now, O saint, I pray thee tell Where I within this wood may dwell: For I by Śarabhanga old, The son of Gautama, was told That thou in every lore art wise, And seest all with loving eyes.”

  Thus to the saint, whose glories high Filled all the world, he made reply: And thus again the holy man His pleasant speech with joy began: “This calm retreat, O Prince, is blest With many a charm: here take thy rest. Here roots and kindly fruits abound, And hermits love the holy ground. Fair silvan beasts and gentle deer In herds unnumbered wander here: And as they roam, secure from harm, Our eyes with grace and beauty charm: Except the beasts in thickets bred, This grove of ours has naught to dread.”

  The hermit’s speech when Ráma heard,— The hero ne’er by terror stirred,— On his great bow his hand he laid, And thus in turn his answer made: “O saint, my darts of keenest steel, Armed with their murderous barbs, would deal Destruction mid the silvan race That flocks around thy dwelling-place. Most wretched then my fate would be For such dishonour shown to thee: And only for the briefest stay Would I within this grove delay.”

  He spoke and ceased. With pious care He turned him to his evening prayer, Performed each customary rite, And sought his lodging for the night, With Sítá and his brother laid Beneath the grove’s delightful shade, First good Sutíkshṇa, as elsewhere, when he saw The shades of night around them draw,   With hospitable care The princely chieftains entertained With store of choicest food ordained   For holy hermit’s fare.




Canto VIII. The Hermitage.


So Ráma and Sumitrá’s son, When every honour due was done, Slept through the night. When morning broke, The heroes from their rest awoke. Betimes the son of Raghu rose, With gentle Sítá, from repose, And sipped the cool delicious wave Sweet with the scent the lotus gave, Then to the Gods and sacred flame The heroes and the lady came, And bent their heads in honour meet Within the hermit’s pure retreat. When every stain was purged away, They saw the rising Lord of Day: Then to Sutíkshṇa’s side they went, And softly spoke, most reverent:

  “Well have we slept, O holy lord, Honoured of thee by all adored: Now leave to journey forth we pray: These hermits urge us on our way. We haste to visit, wandering by, The ascetics’ homes that round you lie, And roaming Daṇḍak’s mighty wood To view each saintly brotherhood, For thy permission now we sue, With these high saints to duty true, By penance taught each sense to tame,— In lustre like the smokeless flame. Ere on our brows the sun can beat With fierce intolerable heat. Like some unworthy lord who wins His power by tyranny and sins, O saint, we fain would part.” The three Bent humbly to the devotee. He raised the princes as they pressed His feet, and strained them to his breast; And then the chief of devotees Bespake them both in words like these: “Go with thy brother, Ráma, go, Pursue thy path untouched by woe: Go with thy faithful Sítá, she Still like a shadow follows thee. Roam Daṇḍak wood observing well The pleasant homes where hermits dwell,— Pure saints whose ordered souls adhere To penance rites and vows austere. There plenteous roots and berries grow, And noble trees their blossoms show, And gentle deer and birds of air In peaceful troops are gathered there. There see the full-blown lotus stud The bosom of the lucid flood, And watch the joyous mallard shake The reeds that fringe the pool and lake. See with delighted eye the rill Leap sparkling from her parent hill, And hear the woods that round thee lie Reëcho to the peacock’s cry. And as I bid thy brother, so, Sumitrá’s child, I bid thee go. Go forth, these varied beauties see, And then once more return to me.”

  Thus spake the sage Sutíkshṇa: both The chiefs assented, nothing loth, Round him with circling steps they paced, Then for the road prepared with haste. There Sítá stood, the dame long-eyed, Fair quivers round their waists she tied, And gave each prince his trusty bow, And sword which ne’er a spot might know. Each took his quiver from her hand. And clanging bow and gleaming brand: Then from the hermits’ home the two Went forth each woodland scene to view. Each beauteous in the bloom of age, Dismissed by that illustrious sage, With bow and sword accoutred, hied Away, and Sítá by their side.




Canto IX. Sítá’s Speech.


Blest by the sage, when Raghu’s son His onward journey had begun, Thus in her soft tone Sítá, meek With modest fear, began to speak: “One little slip the great may lead To shame that follows lawless deed: Such shame, my lord, as still must cling To faults from low desire that spring. Three several sins defile the soul, Born of desire that spurns control: First, utterance of a lying word, Then, viler both, the next, and third: The lawless love of other’s wife, The thirst of blood uncaused by strife. The first, O Raghu’s son, in thee None yet has found, none e’er shall see. Love of another’s dame destroys All merit, lost for guilty joys: Ráma, such crime in thee, I ween, Has ne’er been found, shall ne’er be seen: The very thought, my princely lord, Is in thy secret soul abhorred. For thou hast ever been the same Fond lover of thine own dear dame, Content with faithful heart to do Thy father’s will, most just and true: Justice, and faith, and many a grace In thee have found a resting-place. Such virtues, Prince, the good may gain Who empire o’er each sense retain; And well canst thou, with loving view Regarding all, each sense subdue. But for the third, the lust that strives, Insatiate still, for others’ lives,— Fond thirst of blood where hate is none,— This, O my lord, thou wilt not shun. Thou hast but now a promise made, The saints of Daṇḍak wood to aid: And to protect their lives from ill The giants’ blood in tight wilt spill: And from thy promise lasting fame Will glorify the forest’s name. Armed with thy bow and arrows thou Forth with thy brother journeyest now, While as I think how true thou art Fears for thy bliss assail my heart, And all my spirit at the sight Is troubled with a strange affright. I like it not—it seems not good— Thy going thus to Daṇḍak wood: And I, if thou wilt mark me well, The reason of my fear will tell. Thou with thy brother, bow in hand, Beneath those ancient trees wilt stand, And thy keen arrows will not spare Wood-rovers who will meet thee there. For as the fuel food supplies That bids the dormant flame arise, Thus when the warrior grasps his bow He feels his breast with ardour glow. Deep in a holy grove, of yore, Where bird and beast from strife forbore, Śuchi beneath the sheltering boughs, A truthful hermit kept his vows. Then Indra, Śachí’s heavenly lord, Armed like a warrior with a sword, Came to his tranquil home to spoil The hermit of his holy toil, And left the glorious weapon there Entrusted to the hermit’s care, A pledge for him to keep, whose mind To fervent zeal was all resigned. He took the brand: with utmost heed He kept it for the warrior’s need: To keep his trust he fondly strove When roaming in the neighbouring grove: Whene’er for roots and fruit he strayed Still by his side he bore the blade: Still on his sacred charge intent, He took his treasure when he went. As day by day that brand he wore, The hermit, rich in merit’s store From penance rites each thought withdrew, And fierce and wild his spirit grew. With heedless soul he spurned the right, And found in cruel deeds delight. So, living with the sword, he fell, A ruined hermit, down to hell. This tale applies to those who deal Too closely with the warrior’s steel: The steel to warriors is the same As fuel to the smouldering flame. Sincere affection prompts my speech: I honour where I fain would teach. Mayst thou, thus armed with shaft and bow, So dire a longing never know As, when no hatred prompts the fray, These giants of the wood to slay: For he who kills without offence Shall win but little glory thence. The bow the warrior joys to bend Is lent him for a nobler end, That he may save and succour those Who watch in woods when pressed by foes. What, matched with woods, is bow or steel? What, warrior’s arm with hermit’s zeal? We with such might have naught to do: The forest rule should guide us too. But when Ayodhyá hails thee lord, Be then thy warrior life restored: So shall thy sire(423) and mother joy In bliss that naught may e’er destroy. And if, resigning empire, thou Submit thee to the hermit’s vow, The noblest gain from virtue springs, And virtue joy unending brings. All earthly blessings virtue sends: On virtue all the world depends. Those who with vow and fasting tame To due restraint the mind and frame, Win by their labour, nobly wise, The highest virtue for their prize. Pure in the hermit’s grove remain, True to thy duty, free from stain. But the three worlds are open thrown To thee, by whom all things are known. Who gave me power that I should dare His duty to my lord declare? ’Tis woman’s fancy, light as air,   That moves my foolish breast. Now with thy brother counsel take, Reflect, thy choice with judgment make,   And do what seems the best.”




Canto X. Ráma’s Reply.


The words that Sítá uttered, spurred By truest love, the hero heard: Then he who ne’er from virtue strayed To Janak’s child his answer made: “In thy wise speech, sweet love, I find True impress of thy gentle mind, Well skilled the warrior’s path to trace, Thou pride of Janak’s ancient race. What fitting answer shall I frame To thy good words, my honoured dame? Thou sayst the warrior bears the bow That misery’s tears may cease to flow; And those pure saints who love the shade Of Daṇḍak wood are sore dismayed. They sought me of their own accord, With suppliant prayers my aid implored: They, fed on roots and fruit, who spend Their lives where bosky wilds extend, My timid love, enjoy no rest By these malignant fiends distressed. These make the flesh of man their meat: The helpless saints they kill and eat. The hermits sought my side, the chief Of Bráhman race declared their grief. I heard, and from my lips there fell The words which thou rememberest well: I listened as the hermits cried, And to their prayers I thus replied:

  “Your favour, gracious lords, I claim, O’erwhelmed with this enormous shame That Bráhmans, great and pure as you, Who should be sought, to me should sue.” And then before the saintly crowd, “What can I do?” I cried aloud. Then from the trembling hermits broke One long sad cry, and thus they spoke: “Fiends of the wood, who wear at will Each varied shape, afflict us still. To thee in our distress we fly: O help us, Ráma, or we die. When sacred rites of fire are due, When changing moons are full or new, These fiends who bleeding flesh devour Assail us with resistless power. They with their cruel might torment The hermits on their vows intent: We look around for help and see Our surest refuge, Prince, in thee. We, armed with powers of penance, might Destroy the rovers of the night: But loth were we to bring to naught The merit years of toil have bought. Our penance rites are grown too hard, By many a check and trouble barred, But though our saints for food are slain The withering curse we yet restrain. Thus many a weary day distressed By giants who this wood infest, We see at length deliverance, thou With Lakshmaṇ art our guardian now.”

  As thus the troubled hermits prayed, I promised, dame, my ready aid, And now—for truth I hold most dear— Still to my word must I adhere. My love, I might endure to be Deprived of Lakshmaṇ, life, and thee, But ne’er deny my promise, ne’er To Bráhmans break the oath I sware. I must, enforced by high constraint, Protect them all. Each suffering saint In me, unasked, his help had found; Still more in one by promise bound. I know thy words, mine own dear dame, From thy sweet heart’s affection came: I thank thee for thy gentle speech, For those we love are those we teach. ’Tis like thyself, O fair of face, ’Tis worthy of thy noble race: Dearer than life, thy feet are set In righteous paths they ne’er forget.”

  Thus to the Maithil monarch’s child, His own dear wife, in accents mild     The high-souled hero said: Then to the holy groves which lay Beyond them fair to see, their way     The bow-armed chieftain led.




Canto XI. Agastya.


Ráma went foremost of the three, Next Sítá, followed, fair to see, And Lakshmaṇ with his bow in hand Walked hindmost of the little band. As onward through the wood they went, With great delight their eyes were bent On rocky heights beside the way And lofty trees with blossoms gay; And streamlets running fair and fast The royal youths with Sítá passed. They watched the sáras and the drake On islets of the stream and lake, And gazed delighted on the floods Bright with gay birds and lotus buds. They saw in startled herds the roes, The passion-frenzied buffaloes, Wild elephants who fiercely tore The tender trees, and many a boar. A length of woodland way they passed, And when the sun was low at last A lovely stream-fed lake they spied, Two leagues across from side to side. Tall elephants fresh beauty gave To grassy bank and lilied wave, By many a swan and sáras stirred, Mallard, and gay-winged water-bird. From those sweet waters, loud and long, Though none was seen to wake the song, Swelled high the singer’s music blent With each melodious instrument. Ráma and car-borne Lakshmaṇ heard The charming strain, with wonder stirred, Turned on the margent of the lake To Dharmabhrit(424) the sage, and spake:

  “Our longing souls, O hermit, burn This music of the lake to learn: We pray thee, noblest sage, explain The cause of the mysterious strain.” He, as the son of Raghu prayed, With swift accord his answer made, And thus the hermit, virtuous-souled, The story of the fair lake told:

  “Through every age ’tis known to fame, Panchápsaras(425) its glorious name, By holy Máṇḍakarṇi wrought With power his rites austere had bought. For he, great votarist, intent On strictest rule his stern life spent. Ten thousand years the stream his bed, Ten thousand years on air he fed. Then on the blessed Gods who dwell In heavenly homes great terror fell: They gathered all, by Agni led, And counselled thus disquieted: “The hermit by ascetic pain The seat of one of us would gain.” Thus with their hearts by fear oppressed In full assembly spoke the Blest, And bade five loveliest nymphs, as fair As lightning in the evening air, Armed with their winning wiles, seduce From his stern vows the great recluse. Though lore of earth and heaven he knew, The hermit from his task they drew, And made the great ascetic slave To conquering love, the Gods to save. Each of the heavenly five became, Bound to the sage, his wedded dame; And he, for his beloved’s sake, Formed a fair palace neath the lake. Under the flood the ladies live, To joy and ease their days they give, And lap in bliss the hermit wooed From penance rites to youth renewed. So when the sportive nymphs within Those secret bowers their play begin, You hear the singers’ dulcet tones Blend sweetly with their tinkling zones.”

  “How wondrous are these words of thine!” Cried the famed chiefs of Raghu’s line, As thus they heard the sage unfold The marvels of the tale he told.

  As Ráma spake, his eyes were bent Upon a hermit settlement With light of heavenly lore endued, With sacred grass and vesture strewed. His wife and brother by his side, Within the holy bounds he hied, And there, with honour entertained By all the saints, a while remained. In time, by due succession led, Each votary’s cot he visited, And then the lord of martial lore, Returned where he had lodged before. Here for the months, content, he stayed, There for a year his visit paid: Here for four months his home would fix, There, as it chanced, for five or six. Here for eight months and there for three The son of Raghu’s stay would be: Here weeks, there fortnights, more or less, He spent in tranquil happiness. As there the hero dwelt at ease Among those holy devotees, In days untroubled o’er his head Ten circling years of pleasure fled. So Raghu’s son in duty trained A while in every cot remained, Then with his dame retraced the road To good Sutíkshṇa’s calm abode. Hailed by the saints with honours due Near to the hermit’s home he drew, And there the tamer of his foes Dwelt for a time in sweet repose. One day within that holy wood By saint Sutíkshṇa Ráma stood, And thus the prince with reverence meek To that high sage began to speak:

  “In the wide woodlands that extend Around us, lord most reverend, As frequent voice of rumour tells, Agastya, saintliest hermit, dwells. So vast the wood, I cannot trace The path to reach his dwelling place, Nor, searching unassisted, find That hermit of the thoughtful mind. I with my wife and brother fain Would go, his favour to obtain, Would seek him in his lone retreat And the great saint with reverence greet. This one desire, O Master, long Cherished within my heart, is strong, That I may pay of free accord My duty to that hermit lord.”

  As thus the prince whose heart was bent On virtue told his firm intent, The good Sutíkshṇa’s joy rose high, And thus in turn he made reply: “The very thing, O Prince, which thou Hast sought, I wished to urge but now, Bid thee with wife and brother see Agastya, glorious devotee. I count this thing an omen fair That thou shouldst thus thy wish declare, And I, my Prince, will gladly teach The way Agastya’s home to reach. Southward, dear son, direct thy feet Eight leagues beyond this still retreat: Agastya’s hermit brother there Dwells in a home most bright and fair. ’Tis on a knoll of woody ground, With many a branching Pippal(426) crowned: There sweet birds’ voices ne’er are mute, And trees are gay with flower and fruit. There many a lake gleams bright and cool, And lilies deck each pleasant pool, While swan, and crane, and mallard’s wings Are lovely in the water-springs. There for one night, O Ráma, stay, And with the dawn pursue thy way. Still farther, bending southward, by The thicket’s edge the course must lie, And thou wilt see, two leagues from thence Agastya’s lovely residence, Set in the woodland’s fairest spot, All varied foliage decks the cot: There Sítá, Lakshmaṇ thou, at ease May spend sweet hours neath shady trees, For all of noblest growth are found Luxuriant on that bosky ground. If it be still thy firm intent To see that saint preëminent, O mighty counsellor, this day Depart upon thine onward way.”

  The hermit spake, and Ráma bent His head, with Lakshmaṇ, reverent, And then with him and Janak’s child Set out to trace the forest wild. He saw dark woods that fringed the road, And distant hills like clouds that showed, And, as the way he followed, met With many a lake and rivulet. So passing on with ease where led The path Sutíkshṇa bade him tread, The hero with exulting breast His brother in these words addressed:

  “Here, surely, is the home, in sight, Of that illustrious anchorite: Here great Agastya’s brother leads A life intent on holy deeds. Warned of each guiding mark and sign, I see them all herein combine: I see the branches bending low Beneath the flowers and fruit they show. A soft air from the forest springs, Fresh from the odorous grass, and brings A spicy fragrance as it flees O’er the ripe fruit of Pippal trees. See, here and there around us high Piled up in heaps cleft billets lie, And holy grass is gathered, bright As strips of shining lazulite. Full in the centre of the shade The hermits’ holy fire is laid: I see its smoke the pure heaven streak Dense as a big cloud’s dusky peak. The twice-born men their steps retrace From each sequestered bathing-place, And each his sacred gift has brought Of blossoms which his hands have sought. Of all these signs, dear brother, each Agrees with good Sutíkshṇa’s speech, And doubtless in this holy bound Agastya’s brother will be found. Agastya once, the worlds who viewed With love, a Deathlike fiend subdued, And armed with mighty power, obtained By holy works, this grove ordained To be a refuge and defence From all oppressors’ violence. In days of yore within this place Two brothers fierce of demon race, Vátápi dire and Ilval, dwelt, And slaughter mid the Bráhmans dealt. A Bráhman’s form, the fiend to cloak, Fierce Ilval wore, and Sanskrit spoke, And twice-born sages would invite To solemnize some funeral rite. His brother’s flesh, concealed within A ram’s false shape and borrowed skin,— As men are wont at funeral feasts,— He dressed and fed those gathered priests. The holy men, unweeting ill, Took of the food and ate their fill. Then Ilval with a mighty shout Exclaimed “Vátápi, issue out.” Soon as his brother’s voice he heard, The fiend with ram-like bleating stirred: Rending in pieces every frame, Forth from the dying priests he came. So they who changed their forms at will Thousands of Bráhmans dared to kill,— Fierce fiends who loved each cruel deed, And joyed on bleeding flesh to feed. Agastya, mighty hermit, pressed To funeral banquet like the rest, Obedient to the Gods’ appeal Ate up the monster at a meal. “’Tis done, ’tis done,” fierce Ilval cried, And water for his hands supplied: Then lifting up his voice he spake: “Forth, brother, from thy prison break.” Then him who called the fiend, who long Had wrought the suffering Bráhmans wrong, Thus thoughtful-souled Agastya, best Of hermits, with a smile addressed: “How, Rákshas, is the fiend empowered To issue forth whom I devoured? Thy brother in a ram’s disguise Is gone where Yáma’s kingdom lies.” When from the words Agastya said He knew his brother fiend was dead, His soul on fire with vengeful rage, Rushed the night-rover at the sage. One lightning glance of fury, hot As fire, the glorious hermit shot, As the fiend neared him in his stride, And straight, consumed to dust, he died. In pity for the Bráhmans’ plight Agastya wrought this deed of might: This grove which lakes and fair trees grace In his great brother’s dwelling place.”

  As Ráma thus the tale rehearsed, And with Sumitrá’s son conversed, The setting sun his last rays shed, And evening o’er the land was spread. A while the princely brothers stayed And even rites in order paid, Then to the holy grove they drew And hailed the saint with honour due. With courtesy was Ráma met By that illustrious anchoret, And for one night he rested there Regaled with fruit and hermit fare. But when the night had reached its close, And the sun’s glorious circle rose, The son of Raghu left his bed And to the hermit’s brother said: “Well rested in thy hermit cell, I stand, O saint, to bid farewell; For with thy leave I journey hence Thy brother saint to reverence.” “Go, Ráma go,” the sage replied: Then from the cot the chieftain hied. And while the pleasant grove he viewed, The path the hermit showed, pursued. Of every leaf, of changing hue. Plants, trees by hundreds round him grew, With joyous eyes he looked on all, Then Jak,(427) the wild rice, and Sál;(428) He saw the red Hibiscus glow, He saw the flower-tipped creeper throw The glory of her clusters o’er Tall trees that loads of blossom bore. Some, elephants had prostrate laid, In some the monkeys leapt and played, And through the whole wide forest rang The charm of gay birds as they sang. Then Ráma of the lotus eye To Lakshmaṇ turned who followed nigh, And thus the hero youth impressed With Fortune’s favouring signs, addressed:

  “How soft the leaves of every tree, How tame each bird and beast we see! Soon the fair home shall we behold Of that great hermit tranquil-souled. The deed the good Agastya wrought High fame throughout the world has bought: I see, I see his calm retreat That balms the pain of weary feet. Where white clouds rise from flames beneath, Where bark-coats lie with many a wreath, Where silvan things, made gentle, throng, And every bird is loud in song. With ruth for suffering creatures filled, A deathlike fiend with might he killed, And gave this southern realm to be A refuge, from oppression free. There stands his home, whose dreaded might Has put the giant crew to flight, Who view with envious eyes afar The peaceful shades they cannot mar. Since that most holy saint has made His dwelling in this lovely shade, Checked by his might the giant brood Have dwelt in peace with souls subdued. And all this southern realm, within Whose bounds no fiend may entrance win, Now bears a name which naught may dim, Made glorious through the worlds by him. When Vindhya, best of hills, would stay The journey of the Lord of Day, Obedient to the saint’s behest He bowed for aye his humbled crest. That hoary hermit, world-renowned For holy deeds, within this ground Has set his pure and blessed home, Where gentle silvan creatures roam. Agastya, whom the worlds revere, Pure saint to whom the good are dear, To us his guests all grace will show, Enriched with blessings ere we go. I to this aim each thought will turn, The favour of the saint to earn, That here in comfort may be spent The last years of our banishment. Here sanctities and high saints stand, Gods, minstrels of the heavenly band; Upon Agastya’s will they wait, And serve him, pure and temperate. The liar’s tongue, the tyrant’s mind Within these bounds no home may find: No cheat, no sinner here can be: So holy and so good is he. Here birds and lords of serpent race, Spirits and Gods who haunt the place, Content with scanty fare remain, As merit’s meed they strive to gain. Made perfect here, the saints supreme, On cars that mock the Day-God’s gleam,— Their mortal bodies cast aside,— Sought heaven transformed and glorified, Here Gods to living things, who win Their favour, pure from cruel sin, Give royal rule and many a good, Immortal life and spirithood. Now, Lakshmaṇ, we are near the place: Do thou precede a little space, And tell the mighty saint that I With Sítá at my side am nigh.”




Canto XII. The Heavenly Bow.


He spoke: the younger prince obeyed: Within the bounds his way he made, And thus addressed, whom first he met, A pupil of the anchoret:

  “Brave Ráma, eldest born, who springs, From Daśaratha, hither brings His wife the lady Sítá: he Would fain the holy hermit see. Lakshmaṇ am I—if happy fame E’er to thine ears has brought the name— His younger brother, prompt to do His will, devoted, fond, and true. We, through our royal sire’s decree, To the dread woods were forced to flee. Tell the great Master, I entreat, Our earnest wish our lord to greet.”

  He spoke: the hermit rich in store Of fervid zeal and sacred lore, Sought the pure shrine which held the fire, To bear his message to the sire. Soon as he reached the saint most bright In sanctity’s surpassing might, He cried, uplifting reverent hands: “Lord Ráma near thy cottage stands.” Then spoke Agastya’s pupil dear The message for his lord to hear: “Ráma and Lakshmaṇ, chiefs who spring From Daśaratha, glorious king, Thy hermitage e’en now have sought, And lady Sítá with them brought. The tamers of the foe are here To see thee, Master, and revere. ’Tis thine thy further will to say: Deign to command, and we obey.”

  When from his pupil’s lips he knew The presence of the princely two, And Sítá born to fortune high. The glorious hermit made reply: “Great joy at last is mine this day That Ráma hither finds his way, For long my soul has yearned to see The prince who comes to visit me. Go forth, go forth, and hither bring The royal three with welcoming: Lead Ráma in and place him near: Why stands he not already here?”

  Thus ordered by the hermit, who, Lord of his thought, all duty knew, His reverent hands together laid, The pupil answered and obeyed. Forth from the place with speed he ran, To Lakshmaṇ came and thus began: “Where is he? let not Ráma wait, But speed, the sage to venerate.”

  Then with the pupil Lakshmaṇ went Across the hermit settlement, And showed him Ráma where he stood With Janak’s daughter in the wood. The pupil then his message spake Which the kind hermit bade him take; Then led the honoured Ráma thence And brought him in with reverence. As nigh the royal Ráma came With Lakshmaṇ and the Maithil dame, He viewed the herds of gentle deer Roaming the garden free from fear. As through the sacred grove he trod He viewed the seat of many a God, Brahmá and Agni,(429) Sun and Moon, And His who sends each golden boon;(430) Here Vishṇu’s stood, there Bhaga’s(431) shrine, And there Mahendra’s, Lord divine; Here His who formed this earthly frame,(432) His there from whom all beings came.(433) Váyu’s,(434) and His who loves to hold The great noose, Varuṇ(435) mighty-souled: Here was the Vasus’(436) shrine to see, Here that of sacred Gáyatrí,(437) The king of serpents(438) here had place, And he who rules the feathered race.(439) Here Kártikeya,(440) warrior lord, And there was Justice King adored. Then with disciples girt about The mighty saint himself came out: Through fierce devotion bright as flame Before the rest the Master came: And then to Lakshmaṇ, fortune blest, Ráma these hasty words addressed: “Behold, Agastya’s self draws near, The mighty saint, whom all revere: With spirit raised I meet my lord With richest wealth of penance stored.”

  The strong-armed hero spake, and ran Forward to meet the sunbright man. Before him, as he came, he bent And clasped his feet most reverent, Then rearing up his stately height Stood suppliant by the anchorite, While Lakshmaṇ’s strength and Sítá’s grace Stood by the pride of Raghu’s race. The sage his arms round Ráma threw And welcomed him with honours due, Asked, was all well, with question sweet, And bade the hero to a seat. With holy oil he fed the flame, He brought the gifts which strangers claim, And kindly waiting on the three With honours due to high degree, He gave with hospitable care A simple hermit’s woodland fare. Then sat the reverend father, first Of hermits, deep in duty versed. And thus to suppliant Ráma, bred In all the lore of virtue, said: “Did the false hermit, Prince, neglect To hail his guest with due respect, He must,—the doom the perjured meet,— His proper flesh hereafter eat. A car-borne king, a lord who sways The earth, and virtue’s law obeys, Worthy of highest honour, thou Hast sought, dear guest, my cottage now.” He spoke: with fruit and hermit fare, With every bloom the branches bare, Agastya graced his honoured guest, And thus with gentle words addressed: “Accept this mighty bow, divine, Whereon red gold and diamonds shine; ’Twas by the Heavenly Artist planned For Vishṇu’s own almighty hand; This God-sent shaft of sunbright hue, Whose deadly flight is ever true, By Lord Mahendra given of yore: This quiver with its endless store. Keen arrows hurtling to their aim Like kindled fires that flash and flame: Accept, in golden sheath encased, This sword with hilt of rich gold graced. Armed with this best of bows Lord Vishṇu slew his demon foes, And mid the dwellers in the skies Won brilliant glory for his prize. The bow, the quivers, shaft, and sword Received from me, O glorious lord: These conquest to thine arm shall bring, As thunder to the thunder’s King.”

  The splendid hermit bade him take The noble weapons as he spake, And as the prince accepted each In words like these renewed his speech:




Canto XIII. Agastya’s Counsel.


“O Ráma, great delight I feel, Pleased, Lakshmaṇ, with thy faithful zeal, That you within these shades I see With Sítá come to honour me. But wandering through the rough rude wild Has wearied Janak’s gentle child: With labours of the way oppressed The Maithil lady longs for rest. Young, delicate, and soft, and fair, Such toils as these untrained to bear, Her wifely love the dame has led The forest’s troubled ways to tread. Here, Ráma, see that naught annoy Her easy hours of tranquil joy: A glorious task has she assayed, To follow thee through woodland shade. Since first from Nature’s hand she came, A woman’s mood is still the same, When Fortune smiles, her love to show, And leave her lord in want and woe. No pity then her heart can feel, She arms her soul with warrior’s steel, Swift as the storm or Feathered King, Uncertain as the lightning’s wing. Not so thy spouse: her purer mind Shrinks from the faults of womankind; Like chaste Arundhatí(441) above, A paragon of faithful love. Let these blest shades, dear Ráma, be A home for Lakshmaṇ, her, and thee.”

  With raised hands reverently meek He heard the holy hermit speak, And humbly thus addressed the sire Whose glory shone like kindled fire:

  “How blest am I, what thanks I owe That our great Master deigns to show His favour, that his heart can be Content with Lakshmaṇ, Sítá, me. Show me, I pray, some spot of ground Where thick trees wave and springs abound, That I may raise my hermit cell And there in tranquil pleasure dwell.”

  Then thus replied Agastya, best Of hermits, to the chief’s request: When for a little he had bent His thoughts, upon that prayer intent:

  “Beloved son, four leagues away Is Panchavaṭí bright and gay: Thronged with its deer, most fair it looks With berries, fruit, and water-brooks. There build thee with thy brother’s aid A cottage in the quiet shade, And faithful to thy sire’s behest, Obedient to the sentence, rest. For well, O sinless chieftain, well I know thy tale, how all befell: Stern penance and the love I bore Thy royal sire supply the lore. To me long rites and fervid zeal The wish that stirs thy heart reveal, And hence my guest I bade thee be, That this pure grove might shelter thee. So now, thereafter, thus I speak: The shades of Panchavaṭí seek; That tranquil spot is bright and fair, And Sítá will be happy there. Not far remote from here it lies, A grove to charm thy loving eyes, Godávarí’s pure stream is nigh: There Sítá’s days will sweetly fly. Pure, lovely, rich in many a charm, O hero of the mighty arm, ’Tis gay with every plant and fruit, And throngs of gay buds never mute. Thou, true to virtue’s path, hast might To screen each trusting anchorite, And wilt from thy new home defend The hermits who on thee depend. Now yonder, Prince, direct thine eyes Where dense Madhúka(442) woods arise: Pierce their dark shade, and issuing forth Turn to a fig-tree on the north: Then onward up a sloping mead Flanked by a hill the way will lead: There Panchavaṭí, ever gay With ceaseless bloom, thy steps will stay.”

  The hermit ceased: the princely two With seemly honours bade adieu: With reverential awe each youth Bowed to the saint whose word was truth, And then, dismissed with Sítá, they To Panchavaṭí took their way. Thus when each royal prince had grasped His warrior’s mighty bow, and clasped     His quiver to his side, With watchful eyes along the road The glorious saint Agastya showed, Dauntless in fight the brothers strode,     And Sítá with them hied.




Canto XIV. Jatáyus.


Then as the son of Raghu made His way to Panchavaṭí’s shade, A mighty vulture he beheld Of size and strength unparalleled. The princes, when the bird they saw, Approached with reverence and awe, And as his giant form they eyed, “Tell who thou art,” in wonder cried. The bird, as though their hearts to gain, Addressed them thus in gentlest strain; “In me, dear sons, the friend behold Your royal father loved of old.”

  He spoke: nor long did Ráma wait His sire’s dear friend to venerate: He bade the bird declare his name And the high race of which he came. When Raghu’s son had spoken, he Declared his name and pedigree, His words prolonging to disclose How all the things that be arose:

  “List while I tell, O Raghu’s son, The first-born Fathers, one by one, Great Lords of Life, whence all in earth And all in heaven derive their birth. First Kardam heads the glorious race Where Vikrit holds the second place, With Śesha, Sanśray next in line, And Bahuputra’s might divine. Then Stháṇu and Maríchi came, Atri, and Kratu’s forceful frame. Pulastya followed, next to him Angiras’ name shall ne’er be dim. Prachetas, Pulah next, and then Daksha, Vivasvat praised of men: Aríshṭanemi next, and last Kaśyap in glory unsurpassed. From Daksha,—fame the tale has told—: Three-score bright daughters sprang of old. Of these fair-waisted nymphs the great Lord Kaśyap sought and wedded eight, Aditi, Diti, Kálaká, Támrá, Danú, and Analá, And Krodhavasá swift to ire, And Manu(443) glorious as her sire. Then when the mighty Kaśyap cried Delighted to each tender bride: “Sons shalt thou bear, to rule the three Great worlds, in might resembling me.” Aditi, Diti, and Danú Obeyed his will as consorts true, And Kálaká; but all the rest Refused to hear their lord’s behest. First Aditi conceived, and she, Mother of thirty Gods and three, The Vasus and Ádityas bare, Rudras, and Aśvins, heavenly pair. Of Diti sprang the Daityas: fame Delights to laud their ancient name. In days of yore their empire dread O’er earth and woods and ocean spread. Danú was mother of a child, O hero, Aśvagríva styled, And Narak next and Kálak came Of Kálaká, celestial dame. Of Támrá, too, five daughters bright In deathless glory sprang to light. Ennobling fame still keeps alive The titles of the lovely five: Immortal honour still she claims For Kraunchí, Bhasí, Śyení’s names. And wills not that the world forget Śukí or Dhritaráshtrí yet. Then Kraunchí bare the crane and owl, And Bhásí tribes of water fowl: Vultures and hawks that race through air With storm-fleet pinions Śyení bare. All swans and geese on mere and brook Their birth from Dhritaráshtrí took, And all the river-haunting brood Of ducks, a countless multitude. From Śukí Nalá sprang, who bare Dame Vinatá surpassing fair. From fiery Krodhavaśá, ten Bright daughters sprang, O King of men: Mrigí and Mrigamandá named, Hari and Bhadramadá famed, Śárdúlí, Śvetá fair to see, Mátangí bright, and Surabhí, Surasá marked with each fair sign, And Kadrumá, all maids divine. Mrigí, O Prince without a peer, Was mother of the herds of deer, The bear, the yak, the mountain roe Their birth to Mrigamandá owe; And Bhadramadá joyed to be Mother of fair Irávatí, Who bare Airávat,(444) huge of mould, Mid warders of the earth enrolled, From Harí lordly lions trace, With monkeys of the wild, their race. From the great dame Śárdúlí styled Sprung pards, Lángúrs,(445) and tigers wild. Mátangí, Prince, gave birth to all Mátangas, elephants strong and tall, And Śvetá bore the beasts who stand One at each wind, earth’s warder band.(446) Next Surabhí the Goddess bore Two heavenly maids, O Prince, of yore, Gandharví—dear to fame is she— And her sweet sister Rohiṇí. With kine this daughter filled each mead, And bright Gandharví bore the steed.(447) Surasá bore the serpents:(448) all The snakes Kadrú their mother call. Then Manu, high-souled Kaśyap’s(449) wife, To all the race of men gave life, The Bráhmans first, the Kshatriya caste, Then Vaiśyas, and the Śúdras last. Sprang from her mouth the Bráhman race; Her chest the Kshatriyas’ natal place: The Vaiśyas from her thighs, ’tis said, The Śúdras from her feet were bred. From Analá all trees that hang Their fair fruit-laden branches sprang. The child of beauteous Śukí bore Vinatá, as I taught before: And Surasá and Kadrú were Born of one dame, a noble pair. Kadrú gave birth to countless snakes That roam the earth in woods and brakes. Aruṇ and Garuḍ swift of flight By Vinatá were given to light, And sons of Aruṇ red as morn Sampati first, then I was born, Me then, O tamer of the foe, Jaṭáyus, son of Śyení, know. Thy ready helper will I be, And guard thy house, if thou agree: When thou and Lakshmaṇ urge the chase By Sítá’s side shall be my place.” With courteous thanks for promised aid,   The prince, to rapture stirred, Bent low, and due obeisance paid,   Embraced the royal bird. He often in the days gone by   Had heard his father tell How, linked with him in friendship’s tie,   He loved Jaṭáyus well. He hastened to his trusted friend   His darling to confide, And through the wood his steps to bend   By strong Jaṭáyus’ side. On to the grove, with Lakshmaṇ near,   The prince his way pursued To free those pleasant shades from fear   And slay the giant brood.




Canto XV. Panchavatí.


Arrived at Panchavaṭí’s shade Where silvan life and serpents strayed, Ráma in words like these addressed Lakshmaṇ of vigour unrepressed:

  “Brother, our home is here: behold The grove of which the hermit told: The bowers of Panchavaṭí see Made fair by every blooming tree. Now, brother, bend thine eyes around; With skilful glance survey the ground: Here be some spot selected, best Approved for gentle hermits’ rest, Where thou, the Maithil dame, and I May dwell while seasons sweetly fly. Some pleasant spot be chosen where Pure waters gleam and trees are fair, Some nook where flowers and wood are found And sacred grass and springs abound.”

  Then Lakshmaṇ, Sítá standing by, Raised reverent hands, and made reply:

  “A hundred years shall flee, and still Will I obey my brother’s will: Select thyself a pleasant spot; Be mine the care to rear the cot.” The glorious chieftain, pleased to hear That loving speech that soothed his ear, Selected with observant care A spot with every charm most fair. He stood within that calm retreat, A shade for hermits’ home most meet, And thus Sumitrá’s son addressed, While his dear hand in his he pressed:

  “See, see this smooth and lovely glade Which flowery trees encircling shade: Do thou, beloved Lakshmaṇ rear A pleasant cot to lodge us here. I see beyond that feathery brake The gleaming of a lilied lake, Where flowers in sunlike glory throw Fresh odours from the wave below. Agastya’s words now find we true, He told the charms which here we view: Here are the trees that blossom o’er Godávarí’s most lovely shore. Whose pleasant flood from side to side With swans and geese is beautified, And fair banks crowded with the deer That steal from every covert near. The peacock’s cry is loud and shrill From many a tall and lovely hill, Green-belted by the trees that wave Full blossoms o’er the rock and cave. Like elephants whose huge fronts glow With painted streaks, the mountains show Long lines of gold and silver sheen With copper’s darker hues between. With every tree each hill is graced, Where creepers blossom interlaced. Look where the Sál’s long branches sway, And palms their fanlike leaves display; The date-tree and the Jak are near, And their long stems Tamálas rear. See the tall Mango lift his head, Aśokas all their glory spread, The Ketak her sweet buds unfold, And Champacs hang their cups of gold.(450) The spot is pure and pleasant: here Are multitudes of birds and deer. O Lakshmaṇ, with our father’s friend What happy hours we here shall spend!”

  He spoke: the conquering Lakshmaṇ heard, Obedient to his brother’s word. Raised by his toil a cottage stood To shelter Ráma in the wood, Of ample size, with leaves o’erlaid, Of hardened earth the walls were made. The strong bamboos his hands had felled For pillars fair the roof upheld, And rafter, beam, and lath supplied Well interwrought from side to side. Then Śamí(451) boughs he deftly spread Enlaced with knotted cord o’erhead, Well thatched above from ridge to eaves With holy grass, and reed, and leaves. The mighty chief with careful toil Had cleared the ground and smoothed the soil Where now, his loving labour done, Rose a fair home for Raghu’s son. Then when his work was duly wrought, Godávarís sweet stream he sought, Bathed, plucked the lilies, and a store Of fruit and berries homeward bore. Then sacrifice he duly paid, And wooed the Gods their hopes to aid, And then to Ráma proudly showed The cot prepared for his abode. Then Raghu’s son with Sítá gazed Upon the home his hands had raised, And transport thrilled his bosom through His leafy hermitage to view. The glorious son of Raghu round His brother’s neck his arms enwound, And thus began his sweet address Of deep-felt joy and gentleness: “Well pleased am I, dear lord, to see This noble work performed by thee. For this,—sole grace I can bestow,— About thy neck mine arms I throw. So wise art thou, thy breast is filled With grateful thoughts, in duty skilled, Our mighty father, free from stain, In thee, his offspring, lives again.”

  Thus spoke the prince, who lent a grace To fortune, pride of Raghu’s race; Then in that spot whose pleasant shade Gave store of fruit, content he stayed. With Lakshmaṇ and his Maithil spouse He spent his day’s neath sheltering boughs, As happy as a God on high Lives in his mansion in the sky.




Canto XVI. Winter.


While there the high-souled hero spent His tranquil hours in sweet content, The glowing autumn passed, and then Came winter so beloved of men.

  One morn, to bathe, at break of day To the fair stream he took his way. Behind him, with the Maithil dame Bearing a pitcher Lakshmaṇ came, And as he went the mighty man Thus to his brother chief began:

  “The time is come, to thee more dear Than all the months that mark the year: The gracious seasons’ joy and pride, By which the rest are glorified. A robe of hoary rime is spread O’er earth, with corn engarlanded. The streams we loved no longer please, But near the fire we take our ease. Now pious men to God and shade Offer young corn’s fresh sprouted blade, And purge away their sins with rice Bestowed in humble sacrifice. Rich stores of milk delight the swain, And hearts are cheered that longed for gain, Proud kings whose breasts for conquests glow Lead bannered troops to smite the foe. Dark is the north: the Lord of Day To Yáma’s south(452) has turned away: And she—sad widow—shines no more, Reft of the bridal mark(453) she wore. Himálaya’s hill, ordained of old The treasure-house of frost and cold, Scarce conscious of the feebler glow, Is truly now the Lord of Snow. Warmed by the noontide’s genial rays Delightful are the glorious days: But how we shudder at the chill Of evening shadows and the rill! How weak the sun, how cold the breeze! How white the rime on grass and trees! The leaves are sere, the woods have lost Their blossoms killed by nipping frost. Neath open skies we sleep no more: December’s nights with rime are hoar: Their triple watch(454) in length extends With hours the shortened daylight lends. No more the moon’s sun-borrowed rays Are bright, involved in misty haze, As when upon the mirror’s sheen The breath’s obscuring cloud is seen. E’en at the full the faint beams fail To struggle through the darksome veil: Changed like her hue, they want the grace That parts not yet from Sítá’s face. Cold is the western wind, but how Its piercing chill is heightened now, Blowing at early morning twice As furious with its breath of ice! See how the dewy tears they weep The barley, wheat, and woodland steep, Where, as the sun goes up the sky, The curlew and the sáras cry. See where the rice plants scarce uphold Their full ears tinged with paly gold, Bending their ripe heads slowly down Fair as the date tree’s flowery crown. Though now the sun has mounted high Seeking the forehead of the sky, Such mist obscures his struggling beams, No bigger than the moon he seems. Though weak at first, his rays at length Grow pleasant in their noonday strength, And where a while they chance to fall Fling a faint splendour over all. See, o’er the woods where grass is wet With hoary drops that cling there yet, With soft light clothing earth and bough There steals a tender glory now. Yon elephant who longs to drink, Still standing on the river’s brink, Plucks back his trunk in shivering haste From the cold wave he fain would taste. The very fowl that haunt the mere Stand doubtful on the bank, and fear To dip them in the wintry wave As cowards dread to meet the brave. The frost of night, the rime of dawn Bind flowerless trees and glades of lawn: Benumbed in apathetic chill Of icy chains they slumber still. You hear the hidden sáras cry From floods that wrapped in vapour lie, And frosty-shining sands reveal Where the unnoticed rivers steal. The hoary rime of dewy night, And suns that glow with tempered light Lend fresh cool flavours to the rill That sparkles from the topmost hill. The cold has killed the lily’s pride: Leaf, filament, and flower have died: With chilling breath rude winds have blown, The withered stalk is left alone. At this gay time, O noblest chief, The faithful Bharat, worn by grief, Lives in the royal town where he Spends weary hours for love of thee. From titles, honour, kingly sway, From every joy he turns away: Couched on cold earth, his days are passed With scanty fare and hermit’s fast. This moment from his humble bed He lifts, perhaps, his weary head, And girt by many a follower goes To bathe where silver Sarjú flows. How, when the frosty morn is dim, Shall Sarjú be a bath for him Nursed with all love and tender care, So delicate and young and fair. How bright his hue! his brilliant eye With the broad lotus leaf may vie. By fortune stamped for happy fate, His graceful form is tall and straight. In duty skilled, his words are truth: He proudly rules each lust of youth. Though his strong arm smites down the foe, In gentle speech his accents flow. Yet every joy has he resigned And cleaves to thee with heart and mind. Thus by the deeds that he has done A name in heaven has Bharat won, For in his life he follows yet Thy steps, O banished anchoret. Thus faithful Bharat, nobly wise, The proverb of the world belies: “No men, by mothers’ guidance led, The footsteps of their fathers tread.” How could Kaikeyí, blest to be Spouse of the king our sire, and see A son like virtuous Bharat, blot Her glory with so foul a plot!”

  Thus in fraternal love he spoke, And from his lips reproaches broke: But Ráma grieved to hear him chide The absent mother, and replied:

  “Cease, O beloved, cease to blame Our royal father’s second dame. Still speak of Bharat first in place Of old Ikshváku’s princely race. My heart, so firmly bent but now To dwell in woods and keep my vow, Half melting as I hear thee speak Of Bharat’s love, grows soft and weak, With tender joy I bring to mind His speeches ever sweet and kind. That dear as Amrit took the sense With most enchanting influence. Ah, when shall I, no more to part, Meet Bharat of the mighty heart? When, O my brother, when shall we The good and brave Śatrughna see?” Thus as he poured his fond lament The son of Raghu onward went: They reached the river, and the three Bathed them in fair Godávarí. Libations of the stream they paid To every deity and shade, With hymns of praise, the Sun on high And sinless Gods to glorify. Fresh from the purifying tide   Resplendent Ráma came, With Lakshmaṇ ever by his side,   And the sweet Maithil dame. So Rudra shines by worlds adored,   In glory undefiled, When Nandi(455) stands beside his lord,   And King Himálaya’s child.(456)




Canto XVII. Súrpanakhá.


The bathing and the prayer were o’er; He turned him from the grassy shore, And with his brother and his spouse Sought his fair home beneath the boughs. Sítá and Lakshmaṇ by his side, On to his cot the hero hied, And after rites at morning due Within the leafy shade withdrew. Then, honoured by the devotees, As royal Ráma sat at ease, With Sítá near him, o’er his head A canopy of green boughs spread, He shone as shines the Lord of Night By Chitrá’s(457) side, his dear delight. With Lakshmaṇ there he sat and told Sweet stories of the days of old, And as the pleasant time he spent With heart upon each tale intent, A giantess, by fancy led, Came wandering to his leafy shed. Fierce Śúrpaṇakhá,—her of yore The Ten-necked tyrant’s mother bore,— Saw Ráma with his noble mien Bright as the Gods in heaven are seen; Him from whose brow a glory gleamed, Like lotus leaves his full eyes beamed: Long-armed, of elephantine gait, With hair close coiled in hermit plait: In youthful vigour, nobly framed, By glorious marks a king proclaimed: Like some bright lotus lustrous-hued, With young Kandarpa’s(458) grace endued: As there like Indra’s self he shone, She loved the youth she gazed upon. She grim of eye and foul of face Loved his sweet glance and forehead’s grace: She of unlovely figure, him Of stately form and shapely limb: She whose dim locks disordered hung, Him whose bright hair on high brows clung: She whose fierce accents counselled fear, Him whose soft tones were sweet to hear: She whose dire form with age was dried, Him radiant in his youthful pride: She whose false lips maintained the wrong, Him in the words of virtue strong: She cruel-hearted, stained with sin, Him just in deed and pure within. She, hideous fiend, a thing to hate, Him formed each eye to captivate: Fierce passion in her bosom woke, And thus to Raghu’s son she spoke:

  “With matted hair above thy brows, With bow and shaft and this thy spouse, How hast thou sought in hermit dress The giant-haunted wilderness? What dost thou here? The cause explain: Why art thou come, and what to gain?” As Śúrpaṇakhá questioned so, Ráma, the terror of the foe, In answer to the monster’s call, With fearless candour told her all. “King Daśaratha reigned of old, Like Gods celestial brave and bold. I am his eldest son and heir, And Ráma is the name I bear. This brother, Lakshmaṇ, younger born, Most faithful love to me has sworn. My wife, this princess, dear to fame, Is Sitá the Videhan dame. Obedient to my sire’s behest And by the queen my mother pressed, To keep the law and merit win, I sought this wood to harbour in. But speak, for I of thee in turn Thy name, and race, and sire would learn. Thou art of giant race, I ween. Changing at will thy form and mien. Speak truly, and the cause declare That bids thee to these shades repair.”

  Thus Ráma spoke: the demon heard, And thus replied by passion spurred: “Of giant race, what form soe’er My fancy wills, ’tis mine to wear. Named Śúrpaṇakhá here I stray, And where I walk spread wild dismay. King Rávaṇ is my brother: fame Has taught perchance his dreaded name, Strong Kumbhakarṇa slumbering deep In chains of never-ending sleep: Vibhíshaṇ of the duteous mind, In needs unlike his giant kind: Dúshaṇ and Khara, brave and bold Whose fame by every tongue is told: Their might by mine is far surpassed; But when, O best of men, I cast These fond eyes on thy form, I see My chosen love and lord in thee. Endowed with wondrous might am I: Where’er my fancy leads I fly. The poor misshapen Sítá leave, And me, thy worthier bride receive. Look on my beauty, and prefer A spouse more meet than one like her: I’ll eat that ill-formed woman there: Thy brother too her fate shall share. But come, beloved, thou shalt roam With me through all our woodland home; Each varied grove with me shalt seek, And gaze upon each mountain peak.”

  As thus she spoke, the monster gazed With sparkling eyes where passion blazed: Then he, in lore of language learned, This answer eloquent returned:




Canto XVIII. The Mutilation.


On her ensnared in Káma’s net His eyes the royal Ráma set, And thus, her passion to beguile, Addressed her with a gentle smile:

  “I have a wife: behold her here, My Sítá ever true and dear: And one like thee will never brook Upon a rival spouse to look. But there my brother Lakshmaṇ stands: Unchained is he by nuptial bands: A youth heroic, loved of all, Gracious and gallant, fair and tall. With winning looks, most nobly bred, Unmatched till now, he longs to wed. Meet to enjoy thy youthful charms, O take him to thy loving arms. Enamoured on his bosom lie, Fair damsel of the radiant eye, As the warm sunlight loves to rest Upon her darling Meru’s breast.”

  The hero spoke, the monster heard, While passion still her bosom stirred. Away from Ráma’s side she broke, And thus in turn to Lakshmaṇ spoke: “Come, for thy bride take me who shine In fairest grace that suits with thine. Thou by my side from grove to grove Of Daṇḍak’s wild in bliss shalt rove.”

  Then Lakshmaṇ, skilled in soft address, Wooed by the amorous giantess, With art to turn her love aside, To Śúrpaṇakhá thus replied:

  “And can so high a dame agree The slave-wife of a slave to be? I, lotus-hued! in good and ill Am bondsman to my brother’s will. Be thou, fair creature radiant-eyed, My honoured brother’s younger bride: With faultless tint and dainty limb, A happy wife, bring joy to him. He from his spouse grown old and grey, Deformed, untrue, will turn away, Her withered charms will gladly leave, And to his fair young darling cleave. For who could be so fond and blind, O loveliest of all female kind, To love another dame and slight Thy beauties rich in all delight?”

  Thus Lakshmaṇ praised in scornful jest The long-toothed fiend with loathly breast, Who fondly heard his speech, nor knew His mocking words were aught but true. Again inflamed with love she fled To Ráma, in his leafy shed Where Sítá rested by his side, And to the mighty victor cried:

  “What, Ráma, canst thou blindly cling To this old false misshapen thing? Wilt thou refuse the charms of youth For withered breast and grinning tooth! Canst thou this wretched creature prize And look on me with scornful eyes? This aged crone this very hour Before thy face will I devour: Then joyous, from all rivals free. Through Daṇḍak will I stray with thee.”

  She spoke, and with a glance of flame Rushed on the fawn-eyed Maithil dame: So would a horrid meteor mar Fair Rohiṇí’s soft beaming star. But as the furious fiend drew near, Like Death’s dire noose which chills with fear, The mighty chief her purpose stayed, And spoke, his brother to upbraid: “Ne’er should we jest with creatures rude, Of savage race and wrathful mood. Think, Lakshmaṇ, think how nearly slain My dear Videhan breathes again. Let not the hideous wretch escape Without a mark to mar her shape. Strike, lord of men, the monstrous fiend, Deformed, and foul, and evil-miened.”

  He spoke: then Lakshmaṇ’s wrath rose high, And there before his brother’s eye, He drew that sword which none could stay, And cleft her nose and ears away. Noseless and earless, torn and maimed, With fearful shrieks the fiend exclaimed, And frantic in her wild distress Resought the distant wilderness. Deformed, terrific, huge, and dread, As on she moved, her gashes bled, And groan succeeded groan as loud As roars, ere rain, the thunder cloud. Still on the fearful monster passed, While streams of blood kept falling fast, And with a roar, and arms outspread Within the boundless wood she fled. To Janasthán the monster flew;   Fierce Khara there she found, With chieftains of the giant crew   In thousands ranged around. Before his awful feet she bent   And fell with piercing cries, As when a bolt in swift descent   Comes flashing from the skies. There for a while with senses dazed   Silent she lay and scared: At length her drooping head she raised,   And all the tale declared, How Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, and the dame   Had reached that lonely place: Then told her injuries and shame,   And showed her bleeding face.




Canto XIX. The Rousing Of Khara.


When Khara saw his sister lie With blood-stained limbs and troubled eye, Wild fury in his bosom woke, And thus the monstrous giant spoke;

  “Arise, my sister; cast away This numbing terror and dismay, And straight the impious hand declare That marred those features once so fair. For who his finger tip will lay On the black snake in childish play, And unattacked, with idle stroke His poison-laden fang provoke? Ill-fated fool, he little knows Death’s noose around his neck he throws, Who rashly met thee, and a draught Of life-destroying poison quaffed. Strong, fierce as death, ’twas thine to choose Thy way at will, each shape to use; In power and might like one of us: What hand has maimed and marred thee thus? What God or fiend this deed has wrought, What bard or sage of lofty thought Was armed with power supremely great Thy form to mar and mutilate? In all the worlds not one I see Would dare a deed to anger me: Not Indra’s self, the Thousand-eyed, Beneath whose hand fierce Páka(459) died. My life-destroying darts this day His guilty breath shall rend away, E’en as the thirsty wild swan drains Each milk-drop that the wave retains. Whose blood in foaming streams shall burst O’er the dry ground which lies athirst, When by my shafts transfixed and slain He falls upon the battle plain? From whose dead corpse shall birds of air The mangled flesh and sinews tear, And in their gory feast delight, When I have slain him in the fight? Not God or bard or wandering ghost, No giant of our mighty host Shall step between us, or avail To save the wretch when I assail. Collect each scattered sense, recall Thy troubled thoughts, and tell me all. What wretch attacked thee in the way, And quelled thee in victorious fray?”

  His breast with burning fury fired, Thus Khara of the fiend inquired: And then with many a tear and sigh Thus Śúrpaṇakhá made reply: “’Tis Daśaratha’s sons, a pair Strong, resolute, and young, and fair: In coats of dark and blackdeer’s hide, And like the radiant lotus eyed: On berries roots and fruit they feed, And lives of saintly virtue lead: With ordered senses undefiled, Ráma and Lakshmaṇ are they styled. Fair as the Minstrels’ King(460) are they, And stamped with signs of regal sway. I know not if the heroes trace Their line from Gods or Dánav(461) race. There by these wondering eyes between The noble youths a dame was seen, Fair, blooming, young, with dainty waist, And all her bright apparel graced. For her with ready heart and mind The royal pair their strength combined, And brought me to this last distress, Like some lost woman, comfortless. Perfidious wretch! my soul is fain Her foaming blood and theirs to drain. O let me head the vengeful fight, And with this hand my murderers smite. Come, brother, hasten to fulfil This longing of my eager will. On to the battle! Let me drink Their lifeblood as to earth they sink.”

  Then Khara, by his sister pressed, Inflamed with fury, gave his hest To twice seven giants of his crew, Fierce as the God of death to view:

  ’Two men equipped with arms, who wear Deerskin and bark and matted hair, Leading a beauteous dame, have strayed To the wild gloom of Daṇḍak’s shade. These men, this cursed woman slay, And hasten back without delay, That this my sister’s lips may be Red with the lifeblood of the three. Giants, my wounded sister longs To take this vengeance for her wrongs. With speed her dearest wish fulfil, And with your might these creatures kill. Soon as your matchless strength shall lay These brothers dead in battle fray, She in triumphant joy will laugh, And their hearts’ blood delighted quaff.”

  The giants heard the words he said, And forth with Śúrpaṇakhá sped, As mighty clouds in autumn fly Urged by the wind along the sky.




Canto XX. The Giants’ Death.


Fierce Śúrpaṇakhá with her train To Ráma’s dwelling came again, And to the eager giants showed Where Sítá and the youths abode. Within the leafy cot they spied The hero by his consort’s side, And faithful Lakshmaṇ ready still To wait upon his brother’s will. Then noble Ráma raised his eye And saw the giants standing nigh, And then, as nearer still they pressed. His glorious brother thus addressed, “Be thine a while, my brother dear, To watch o’er Sítá’s safety here, And I will slay these creatures who The footsteps of my spouse pursue.”

  He spoke, and reverent Lakshmaṇ heard Submissive to his brother’s word. The son of Raghu, virtuous-souled, Strung his great bow adorned with gold, And, with the weapon in his hand, Addressed him to the giant band: “Ráma and Lakshmaṇ we, who spring From Daśaratha, mighty king; We dwell a while with Sítá here In Daṇḍak forest wild and drear. On woodland roots and fruit we feed, And lives of strictest rule we lead. Say why would ye our lives oppress Who sojourn in the wilderness. Sent hither by the hermits’ prayer With bow and darts unused to spare, For vengeance am I come to slay Your sinful band in battle fray. Rest as ye are: remain content, Nor try the battle’s dire event. Unless your offered lives ye spurn, O rovers of the night, return.”

  They listened while the hero spoke, And fury in each breast awoke. The Bráhman-slayers raised on high Their mighty spears and made reply: They spoke with eyes aglow with ire, While Ráma’s burnt with vengeful tire, And answered thus, in fury wild, That peerless chief whose tones were mild:

  “Nay thou hast angered, overbold, Khara our lord, the mighty-souled, And for thy sin, in battle strife Shalt yield to us thy forfeit life. No power hast thou alone to stand Against the numbers of our band. ’Twere vain to match thy single might Against us in the front of fight. When we equipped for fight advance With brandished pike and mace and lance, Thou, vanquished in the desperate field, Thy bow, thy strength, thy life shalt yield.”

  With bitter words and threatening mien Thus furious spoke the fierce fourteen, And raising scimitar and spear On Ráma rushed in wild career. Their levelled spears the giant crew Against the matchless hero threw. His bow the son of Raghu bent, And twice seven shafts to meet them sent, And every javelin sundered fell By the bright darts he aimed so well.

  The hero saw: his anger grew To fury: from his side he drew Fresh sunbright arrows pointed keen, In number, like his foes, fourteen. His bow he grasped, the string he drew, And gazing on the giant crew, As Indra casts the levin, so Shot forth his arrows at the foe. The hurtling arrows, stained with gore, Through the fiends’ breasts a passage tore, And in the earth lay buried deep As serpents through an ant-hill creep Like trees uptorn by stormy blast The shattered fiends to earth were cast, And there with mangled bodies they, Bathed in their blood and breathless, lay.

  With fainting heart and furious eye The demon saw her champions die. With drying wounds that scarcely bled Back to her brother’s home she fled. Oppressed with pain, with loud lament At Khara’s feet the monster bent. There like a plant whence slowly come The trickling drops of oozy gum, With her grim features pale with pain She poured her tears in ceaseless rain, There routed Śúrpaṇakhá lay,   And told her brother all, The issue of the bloody fray,   Her giant champions’ fall.




Canto XXI. The Rousing Of Khara.


Low in the dust he saw her lie, And Khara’s wrath grew fierce and high. Aloud he cried to her who came Disgracefully with baffled aim: “I sent with thee at thy request The bravest of my giants, best Of all who feed upon the slain: Why art thou weeping here again? Still to their master’s interest true, My faithful, noble, loyal crew, Though slaughtered in the bloody fray, Would yet their monarch’s word obey. Now I, my sister, fain would know The cause of this thy fear and woe, Why like a snake thou writhest there, Calling for aid in wild despair. Nay, lie not thus in lowly guise: Cast off thy weakness and arise!”

  With soothing words the giant chief Assuaged the fury of her grief. Her weeping eyes she slowly dried And to her brother thus replied: “I sought thee in my shame and fear With severed nose and mangled ear: My gashes like a river bled, I sought thee and was comforted. Those twice seven giants, brave and strong, Thou sentest to avenge the wrong, To lay the savage Ráma low, And Lakshmaṇ who misused me so. But ah, the shafts of Ráma through The bodies of my champions flew: Though madly fierce their spears they plied, Beneath his conquering might they died. I saw them, famed for strength and speed, I saw my heroes fall and bleed: Great trembling seized my every limb At the great deed achieved by him. In trouble, horror, doubt, and dread, Again to thee for help I fled. While terror haunts my troubled sight, I seek thee, rover of the night. And canst thou not thy sister free From this wide waste of troublous sea Whose sharks are doubt and terror, where Each wreathing wave is dark despair? Low lie on earth thy giant train By ruthless Ráma’s arrows slain, And all the mighty demons, fed On blood, who followed me are dead. Now if within thy breast may be Pity for them and love for me, If thou, O rover of the night, Have valour and with him can fight, Subdue the giants’ cruel foe Who dwells where Daṇḍak’s thickets grow. But if thine arm in vain assay This queller of his foes to slay, Now surely here before thine eyes, Wronged and ashamed thy sister dies. Too well, alas, too well I see That, strong in war as thou mayst be, Thou canst not in the battle stand When Ráma meets thee hand to hand. Go forth, thou hero but in name, Assuming might thou canst not claim; Call friend and kin, no longer stay: Away from Janasthán, away! Shame of thy race! the weak alone Beneath thine arm may sink o’erthrown: Fly Ráma and his brother: they Are men too strong for thee to slay. How canst thou hope, O weak and base, To make this grove thy dwelling-place? With Ráma’s might unmeet to vie, O’ermastered thou wilt quickly die. A hero strong in valorous deed Is Ráma, Daśaratha’s seed: And scarce of weaker might than he His brother chief who mangled me.”

  Thus wept and wailed in deep distress The grim misshapen giantess: Before her brother’s feet she lay O’erwhelmed with grief, and swooned away.




Canto XXII. Khara’s Wrath.


Roused by the taunting words she spoke, The mighty Khara’s wrath awoke, And there, while giants girt him round, In these fierce words an utterance found:

  “I cannot, peerless one, contain Mine anger at this high disdain, Galling as salt when sprinkled o’er The rawness of a bleeding sore. Ráma in little count I hold, Weak man whose days are quickly told. The caitiff with his life to-day For all his evil deeds shall pay. Dry, sister, dry each needless tear, Stint thy lament and banish fear, For Ráma and his brother go This day to Yáma’s realm below. My warrior’s axe shall stretch him slain, Ere set of sun, upon the plain, Then shall thy sated lips be red With his warm blood in torrents shed.”

  As Khara’s speech the demon heard, With sudden joy her heart was stirred: She fondly praised him as the boast And glory of the giant host. First moved to ire by taunts and stings, Now soothed by gentle flatterings, To Dúshaṇ, who his armies led, The demon Khara spoke, and said:

  “Friend, from the host of giants call Full fourteen thousand, best of all, Slaves of my will, of fearful might, Who never turn their backs in fight: Fiends who rejoice to slay and mar, Dark as the clouds of autumn are: Make ready quickly, O my friend, My chariot and the bows I bend. My swords, my shafts of brilliant sheen, My divers lances long and keen. On to the battle will I lead These heroes of Pulastya’s seed, And thus, O famed for warlike skill, Ráma my wicked foeman kill.”

  He spoke, and ere his speech was done, His chariot glittering like the sun, Yoked and announced, by Dúshan’s care, With dappled steeds was ready there. High as a peak from Meru rent It burned with golden ornament: The pole of lazulite, of gold Were the bright wheels whereon it rolled. With gold and moonstone blazoned o’er, Fish, flowers, trees, rocks, the panels bore; Auspicious birds embossed thereon, And stars in costly emblem shone. O’er flashing swords his banner hung, And sweet bells, ever tinkling, swung. That mighty host with sword and shield And oar was ready for the field: And Khara saw, and Dúshan cried, “Forth to the fight, ye giants, ride.” Then banners waved, and shield and sword Flashed as the host obeyed its lord. From Janasthán they sallied out With eager speed, and din, and shout, Armed with the mace for close attacks, The bill, the spear, the battle-axe, Steel quoit and club that flashed afar, Huge bow and sword and scimitar, The dart to pierce, the bolt to strike, The murderous bludgeon, lance, and pike. So forth from Janasthán, intent On Khara’s will, the monsters went. He saw their awful march: not far Behind the host he drove his car. Ware of his master’s will, to speed The driver urged each gold-decked steed. Then forth the warrior’s coursers sprang, And with tumultuous murmur rang Each distant quarter of the sky And realms that intermediate lie. High and more high within his breast   His pride triumphant rose, While terrible as Death he pressed   Onward to slay his foes, “More swiftly yet,” as on they fled,   He cried in thundering tones Loud as a cloud that overhead   Hails down a flood of stones.




Canto XXIII. The Omens.


As forth upon its errand went That huge ferocious armament, An awful cloud, in dust and gloom, With threatening thunders from its womb Poured in sad augury a flood Of rushing water mixt with blood. The monarch’s steeds, though strong and fleet, Stumbled and fell: and yet their feet Passed o’er the bed of flowers that lay Fresh gathered on the royal way. No gleam of sunlight struggled through The sombre pall of midnight hue, Edged with a line of bloody red, Like whirling torches overhead. A vulture, fierce, of mighty size. Terrific with his cruel eyes, Perched on the staff enriched with gold, Whence hung the flag in many a fold. Each ravening bird, each beast of prey Where Janasthán’s wild thickets lay, Rose with a long discordant cry And gathered as the host went by. And from the south long, wild, and shrill, Came spirit voices boding ill. Like elephants in frantic mood, Vast clouds terrific, sable-hued, Hid all the sky where’er they bore Their load of water mixt with gore. Above, below, around were spread Thick shades of darkness strange and dread, Nor could the wildered glance descry A point or quarter of the sky. Then came o’er heaven a sanguine hue, Though evening’s flush not yet was due, While each ill-omened bird that flies Assailed the king with harshest cries. There screamed the vulture and the crane, And the loud jackal shrieked again. Each hideous thing that bodes aright Disaster in the coming fight, With gaping mouth that hissed and flamed, The ruin of the host proclaimed. Eclipse untimely reft away The brightness of the Lord of Day, And near his side was seen to glow A mace-like comet boding woe. Then while the sun was lost to view A mighty wind arose and blew, And stars like fireflies shed their light, Nor waited for the distant night. The lilies drooped, the brooks were dried, The fish and birds that swam them died, And every tree that was so fair With flower and fruit was stripped and bare. The wild wind ceased, yet, raised on high, Dark clouds of dust involved the sky. In doleful twitter long sustained The restless Sárikás(462) complained, And from the heavens with flash and flame Terrific meteors roaring came. Earth to her deep foundation shook With rock and tree and plain and brook, As Khara with triumphant shout, Borne in his chariot, sallied out. His left arm throbbed: he knew full well That omen, and his visage fell. Each awful sign the giant viewed, And sudden tears his eye bedewed. Care on his brow sat chill and black, Yet mad with wrath he turned not back. Upon each fearful sight that raised The shuddering hair the chieftain gazed, And laughing in his senseless pride Thus to his giant legions cried: “By sense of mightiest strength upborne, These feeble signs I laugh to scorn. I could bring down the stars that shine In heaven with these keen shafts of mine. Impelled by warlike fury I Could cause e’en Death himself to die. I will not seek my home again Until my pointed shafts have slain This Raghu’s son so fierce in pride, And Lakshmaṇ by his brother’s side. And she, my sister, she for whom These sons of Raghu meet their doom, She with delighted lips shall drain The lifeblood of her foemen slain. Fear not for me: I ne’er have known Defeat, in battle overthrown. Fear not for me, O giants; true Are the proud words I speak to you. The king of Gods who rules on high, If wild Airávat bore him nigh, Should fall before me bolt in hand: And shall these two my wrath withstand!”

  He ended and the giant host Who heard their chief’s triumphant boast, Rejoiced with equal pride elate, Entangled in the noose of Fate.

  Then met on high in bright array, With eyes that longed to see the fray, God and Gandharva, sage and saint, With beings pure from earthly taint. Blest for good works aforetime wrought, Thus each to other spake his thought: “Now joy to Bráhmans, joy to kine, And all whom world count half divine! May Raghu’s offspring slay in fight Pulastya’s sons who roam by night!” In words like these and more, the best Of high-souled saints their hopes expressed, Bending their eager eyes from where Car-borne with Gods they rode in air. Beneath them stretching far, they viewed The giants’ death-doomed multitude. They saw where, urged with fury, far Before the host rolled Khara’s car, And close beside their leader came Twelve giant peers of might and fame. Four other chiefs(463) before the rest Behind their leader Dúshaṇ pressed.   Impetuous, cruel, dark, and dread,     All thirsting for the fray,   The hosts of giant warriors sped     Onward upon their way.   With eager speed they reached the spot     Where dwelt the princely two,—   Like planets in a league to blot     The sun and moon from view.




Canto XXIV. The Host In Sight.


While Khara, urged by valiant rage, Drew near that little hermitage, Those wondrous signs in earth and sky Smote on each prince’s watchful eye. When Ráma saw those signs of woe Fraught with destruction to the foe, With bold impatience scarce repressed His brother chief he thus addressed:

  “These fearful signs, my brother bold, Which threaten all our foes, behold: All laden, as they strike the view, With ruin to the fiendish crew. The angry clouds are gathering fast, Their skirts with dusty gloom o’ercast, And harsh with loud-voiced thunder, rain Thick drops of blood upon the plain. See, burning for the coming fight, My shafts with wreaths of smoke are white, And my great bow embossed with gold Throbs eager for the master’s hold. Each bird that through the forest flies Sends out its melancholy cries. All signs foretell the dangerous strife, The jeopardy of limb and life. Each sight, each sound gives warning clear That foemen meet and death is near. But courage, valiant brother! well The throbbings of mine arm foretell That ruin waits the hostile powers, And triumph in the fight is ours. I hail the welcome omen: thou Art bright of face and clear of brow. For Lakshmaṇ, when the eye can trace A cloud upon the warrior’s face Stealing the cheerful light away, His life is doomed in battle fray. List, brother, to that awful cry: With shout and roar the fiends draw nigh. With thundering beat of many a drum The savage-hearted giants come. The wise who value safety know To meet, prepared, the coming blow: In paths of prudence trained aright They watch the stroke before it smite. Take thou thine arrows and thy bow, And with the Maithil lady go For shelter to the mountain cave Where thickest trees their branches wave. I will not have thee, Lakshmaṇ, say One word in answer, but obey. By all thy honour for these feet Of mine, dear brother, I entreat. Thy warlike arm, I know could, smite To death these rovers of the night; But I this day would fight alone Till all the fiends be overthrown.” He spake: and Lakshmaṇ answered naught: His arrows and his bow he brought, And then with Sítá following hied For shelter to the mountain side. As Lakshmaṇ and the lady through The forest to the cave withdrew, “’Tis well,” cried Ráma. Then he braced His coat of mail around his waist. When, bright as blazing fire, upon His mighty limbs that armour shone, The hero stood like some great light Uprising in the dark of night. His dreadful shafts were by his side; His trusty bow he bent and plied, Prepared he stood: the bowstring rang, Filling the welkin with the clang.

  The high-souled Gods together drew The wonder of the fight to view, The saints made free from spot and stain, And bright Gandharvas’ heavenly train. Each glorious sage the assembly sought, Each saint divine of loftiest thought, And filled with zeal for Ráma’s sake. Thus they whose deeds were holy spake:

  “Now be it well with Bráhmans, now Well with the worlds and every cow! Let Ráma in the deadly fray The fiends who walk in darkness slay, As He who bears the discus(464) slew The chieftains of the Asur crew.”

  Then each with anxious glances viewed His fellow and his speech renewed: “There twice seven thousand giants stand With impious heart and cruel hand: Here Ráma stands, by virtue known: How can the hero fight alone?”

  Thus royal sage and Bráhman saint, Spirit, and Virtue free from taint, And all the Gods of heaven who rode On golden cars, their longing showed. Their hearts with doubt and terror rent, They saw the giants’ armament, And Ráma clothed in warrior might, Forth standing in the front of fight. Lord of the arm no toil might tire, He stood majestic in his ire, Matchless in form as Rudra(465) when His wrath is fierce on Gods or men.

  While Gods and saints in close array Held converse of the coming fray, The army of the fiends drew near With sight and sound that counselled fear. Long, loud and deep their war-cry pealed, As on they rushed with flag and shield, Each, of his proper valour proud, Urging to fight the demon crowd. His ponderous bow each warrior tried, And swelled his bulk with martial pride. ’Mid shout and roar and trampling feet, And thunder of the drums they beat, Loud and more loud the tumult went Throughout the forest’s vast extent, And all the life that moved within The woodland trembled at the din. In eager haste all fled to find Some tranquil spot, nor looked behind.

  With every arm of war supplied, On-rushing wildly like the tide Of some deep sea, the giant host Approached where Ráma kept his post. Then he, in battle skilled and tried, Bent his keen eye on every side, And viewed the host of Khara face To face before his dwelling-place. He drew his arrows forth, and reared And strained that bow which foemen feared, And yielded to the vengeful sway Of fierce desire that host to slay. Terrific as the ruinous fire That ends the worlds, he glowed in ire, And his tremendous form dismayed The Gods who roam the forest shade. For in the furious wrath that glowed Within his soul the hero showed Like Śiva when his angry might Stayed Daksha’s sacrificial rite.(466) Like some great cloud at dawn of day   When first the sun upsprings, And o’er the gloomy mass each ray   A golden radiance flings: Thus showed the children of the night,   Whose mail and chariots threw, With gleam of bows and armlets bright,   Flashes of flamy hue.




Canto XXV. The Battle.


When Khara with the hosts he led Drew near to Ráma’s leafy shed, He saw that queller of the foe Stand ready with his ordered bow. He saw, and burning at the view His clanging bow he raised and drew, And bade his driver urge apace His car to meet him face to face. Obedient to his master’s hest His eager steeds the driver pressed On to the spot where, none to aid, The strong-armed chief his weapon swayed. Soon as the children of the night Saw Khara rushing to the fight, His lords with loud unearthly cry Followed their chief and gathered nigh. As in his car the leader rode With all his lords around, he showed Like the red planet fiery Mars Surrounded by the lesser stars. Then with a horrid yell that rent The air, the giant chieftain sent A thousand darts in rapid shower On Ráma matchless in his power. The rovers of the night, impelled By fiery rage which naught withheld, Upon the unconquered prince, who strained His fearful bow, their arrows rained. With sword and club, with mace and pike, With spear and axe to pierce and strike, Those furious fiends on every side The unconquerable hero plied. The giant legions huge and strong, Like clouds the tempest drives along, Rushed upon Ráma with the speed Of whirling car, and mounted steed, And hill-like elephant, to slay The matchless prince in battle fray. Then upon Ráma thick and fast The rain of mortal steel they cast, As labouring clouds their torrents shed Upon the mountain-monarch’s(467) head. As near and nearer round him drew The warriors of the giant crew, He showed like Śiva girt by all His spirits when night’s shadows fall. As the great deep receives each rill And river rushing from the hill, He bore that flood of darts, and broke With well-aimed shaft each murderous stroke. By stress of arrowy storm assailed, And wounded sore, he never failed, Like some high mountain which defies The red bolts flashing from the skies. With ruddy streams each limb was dyed From gaping wounds in breast and side, Showing the hero like the sun ’Mid crimson clouds ere day is done. Then, at that sight of terror, faint Grew God, Gandharva, sage, and saint, Trembling to see the prince oppose His single might to myriad foes. But waxing wroth, with force unspent, He strained his bow to utmost bent, And forth his arrows keen and true In hundreds, yea in thousands flew,— Shafts none could ward, and none endure: Death’s fatal noose was scarce so sure. As ’twere in playful ease he shot His gilded shafts, and rested not. With swiftest flight and truest aim Upon the giant hosts they came. Each smote, each stayed a foeman’s breath As fatal as the coil of Death. Each arrow through a giant tore A passage, and besmeared with gore, Pursued its onward way and through The air with flamy brilliance flew. Unnumbered were the arrows sent From the great bow which Ráma bent, And every shaft with iron head The lifeblood of a giant shed. Their pennoned bows were cleft, nor mail Nor shield of hide could aught avail. For Ráma’s myriad arrows tore Through arms, and bracelets which they wore, And severed mighty warriors’ thighs Like trunks of elephants in size, And cut resistless passage sheer Through gold-decked horse and charioteer, Slew elephant and rider, slew The horseman and the charger too, And infantry unnumbered sent To dwell ’neath Yáma’s government. Then rose on high a fearful yell Of rovers of the night, who fell Beneath that iron torrent, sore Wounded by shafts that rent and tore. So mangled by the ceaseless storm Of shafts of every kind and form, Such joy they found, as forests feel When scorched by flame, from Ráma’s steel. The mightiest still the fight maintained, And furious upon Ráma rained Dart, arrow, spear, with wild attacks Of mace, and club, and battle-axe. But the great chief, unconquered yet, Their weapons with his arrows met, Which severed many a giant’s head, And all the plain with corpses spread. With sundered bow and shattered shield Headless they sank upon the field, As the tall trees, that felt the blast Of Garuḍ’s wing, to earth were cast. The giants left unslaughtered there Where filled with terror and despair, And to their leader Khara fled Faint, wounded, and discomfited. These fiery Dúshaṇ strove to cheer, And poised his bow to calm their fear; Then fierce as He who rules the dead, When wroth, on angered Ráma sped. By Dúshaṇ cheered, the demons cast Their dread aside and rallied fast With Sáls, rocks, palm-trees in their hands With nooses, maces, pikes, and brands, Again upon the godlike man The mighty fiends infuriate ran, These casting rocks like hail, and these A whelming shower of leafy trees. Wild, wondrous fight, the eye to scare, And raise on end each shuddering hair, As with the fiends who loved to rove By night heroic Ráma strove! The giants in their fury plied Ráma with darts on every side. Then, by the gathering demons pressed From north and south and east and west, By showers of deadly darts assailed From every quarter fiercely hailed, Girt by the foes who swarmed around, He raised a mighty shout whose sound Struck terror. On the giant crew His great Gandharva(468) arrow flew. A thousand mortal shafts were rained From the orbed bow the hero strained, Till east and west and south and north Were filled with arrows volleyed forth. They heard the fearful shout: they saw His mighty hand the bowstring draw, Yet could no wounded giant’s eye See the swift storm of arrows fly. Still firm the warrior stood and cast His deadly missiles thick and fast. Dark grew the air with arrowy hail Which hid the sun as with a veil. Fiends wounded, falling, fallen, slain, All in a moment, spread the plain, And thousands scarce alive were left Mangled, and gashed, and torn, and cleft. Dire was the sight, the plain o’erspread With trophies of the mangled dead. There lay, by Ráma’s missiles rent, Full many a priceless ornament, With severed limb and broken gem, Hauberk and helm and diadem.