[ADA-ramayana  —  part 2 of 12, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

Bhagírath led, There ever glorious Gangá fled, The best of floods, the rivers’ queen, Whose waters wash the wicked clean.

  It chanced that Jahnu, great and good, Engaged with holy offerings stood; The river spread her waves around Flooding his sacrificial ground. The saint in anger marked her pride, And at one draught her stream he dried. Then God, and sage, and bard, afraid, To noble high-souled Jahnu prayed, And begged that he would kindly deem His own dear child that holy stream. Moved by their suit, he soothed their fears And loosed her waters from his ears. Hence Gangá through the world is styled Both Jáhnavi and Jahnu’s child. Then onward still she followed fast, And reached the great sea bank at last. Thence deep below her way she made To end those rites so long delayed. The monarch reached the Ocean’s side, And still behind him Gangá hied. He sought the depths which open lay Where Sagar’s sons had dug their way. So leading through earth’s nether caves The river’s purifying waves, Over his kinsmen’s dust the lord His funeral libation poured. Soon as the flood their dust bedewed, Their spirits gained beatitude, And all in heavenly bodies dressed Rose to the skies’ eternal rest.

  Then thus to King Bhagírath said Brahmá, when, coming at the head Of all his bright celestial train, He saw those spirits freed from stain: “Well done! great Prince of men, well done! Thy kinsmen bliss and heaven have won. The sons of Sagar mighty-souled, Are with the Blest, as Gods, enrolled, Long as the Ocean’s flood shall stand Upon the border of the land, So long shall Sagar’s sons remain, And, godlike, rank in heaven retain. Gangá thine eldest child shall be, Called from thy name Bhágirathí; Named also—for her waters fell From heaven and flow through earth and hell— Tripathagá, stream of the skies, Because three paths she glorifies. And, mighty King, ’tis given thee now To free thee and perform thy vow. No longer, happy Prince, delay Drink-offerings to thy kin to pay. For this the holiest Sagar sighed, But mourned the boon he sought denied. Then Anśumán, dear Prince! although No brighter name the world could show, Strove long the heavenly flood to gain To visit earth, but strove in vain. Nor was she by the sages’ peer, Blest with all virtues, most austere, Thy sire Dilípa, hither brought, Though with fierce prayers the boon he sought. But thou, O King, earned success, And won high fame which God will bless. Through thee, O victor of thy foes, On earth this heavenly Gangá flows, And thou hast gained the meed divine That waits on virtue such as thine. Now in her ever holy wave Thyself, O best of heroes, lave: So shalt thou, pure from every sin, The blessed fruit of merit win. Now for thy kin who died of yore The meet libations duly pour. Above the heavens I now ascend: Depart, and bliss thy steps attend.”

  Thus to the mighty king who broke His foemens’ might, Lord Brahmá spoke, And with his Gods around him rose To his own heaven of blest repose. The royal sage no more delayed, But, the libation duly paid, Home to his regal city hied With water cleansed and purified. There ruled he his ancestral state, Best of all men, most fortunate. And all the people joyed again In good Bhagírath’s gentle reign. Rich, prosperous, and blest were they, And grief and sickness fled away. Thus, Ráma, I at length have told How Gangá came from heaven of old. Now, for the evening passes swift, I wish thee each auspicious gift. This story of the flood’s descent Will give—for ’tis most excellent— Wealth, purity, fame, length of days, And to the skies its hearers raise”




Canto XLV. The Quest Of The Amrit.


High and more high their wonder rose As the strange story reached its close, And thus, with Lakshmaṇ, Ráma, best Of Raghu’s sons, the saint addressed: “Most wondrous is the tale which thou Hast told of heavenly Gangá, how From realms above descending she Flowed through the land and filled the sea. In thinking o’er what thou hast said The night has like a moment fled, Whose hours in musing have been spent Upon thy words most excellent: So much, O holy Sage, thy lore Has charmed us with this tale of yore.”

  Day dawned. The morning rites were done And the victorious Raghu’s son Addressed the sage in words like these, Rich in his long austerities: “The night is past: the morn is clear; Told is the tale so good to hear: Now o’er that river let us go, Three-pathed, the best of all that flow. This boat stands ready on the shore To bear the holy hermits o’er, Who of thy coming warned, in haste, The barge upon the bank have placed.”

  And Kuśik’s son approved his speech, And moving to the sandy beach, Placed in the boat the hermit band, And reached the river’s further strand. On the north bank their feet they set, And greeted all the saints they met. On Gangá’s shore they lighted down, And saw Viśálá’s lovely town. Thither, the princes by his side, The best of holy hermits hied. It was a town exceeding fair That might with heaven itself compare. Then, suppliant palm to palm applied, Famed Ráma asked his holy guide: “O best of hermits, say what race Of monarchs rules this lovely place. Dear master, let my prayer prevail, For much I long to hear the tale.” Moved by his words, the saintly man Viśálá’s ancient tale began: “List, Ráma, list, with closest heed The tale of Indra’s wondrous deed, And mark me as I truly tell What here in ancient days befell. Ere Krita’s famous Age(200) had fled, Strong were the sons of Diti(201) bred; And Aditi’s brave children too Were very mighty, good, and true. The rival brothers fierce and bold Were sons of Kaśyap lofty-souled. Of sister mothers born, they vied, Brood against brood, in jealous pride. Once, as they say, band met with band, And, joined in awful council, planned To live, unharmed by age and time, Immortal in their youthful prime. Then this was, after due debate, The counsel of the wise and great, To churn with might the milky sea(202) The life-bestowing drink to free. This planned, they seized the Serpent King, Vásuki, for their churning-string, And Mandar’s mountain for their pole, And churned with all their heart and soul. As thus, a thousand seasons through, This way and that the snake they drew, Biting the rocks, each tortured head, A very deadly venom shed. Thence, bursting like a mighty flame, A pestilential poison came, Consuming, as it onward ran, The home of God, and fiend, and man. Then all the suppliant Gods in fear To Śankar,(203) mighty lord, drew near. To Rudra, King of Herds, dismayed, “Save us, O save us, Lord!” they prayed. Then Vishṇu, bearing shell, and mace, And discus, showed his radiant face, And thus addressed in smiling glee The Trident wielding deity: “What treasure first the Gods upturn From troubled Ocean, as they churn, Should—for thou art the eldest—be Conferred, O best of Gods, on thee. Then come, and for thy birthright’s sake, This venom as thy first fruits take.” He spoke, and vanished from their sight, When Śiva saw their wild affright, And heard his speech by whom is borne The mighty bow of bending horn,(204) The poisoned flood at once he quaffed As ’twere the Amrit’s heavenly draught. Then from the Gods departing went Śiva, the Lord pre-eminent. The host of Gods and Asurs still Kept churning with one heart and will. But Mandar’s mountain, whirling round, Pierced to the depths below the ground. Then Gods and bards in terror flew To him who mighty Madhu slew. “Help of all beings! more than all, The Gods on thee for aid may call. Ward off, O mighty-armed! our fate, And bear up Mandar’s threatening weight.” Then Vishṇu, as their need was sore, The semblance of a tortoise wore, And in the bed of Ocean lay The mountain on his back to stay. Then he, the soul pervading all, Whose locks in radiant tresses fall, One mighty arm extended still, And grasped the summit of the hill. So ranged among the Immortals, he Joined in the churning of the sea.

  A thousand years had reached their close, When calmly from the ocean rose The gentle sage(205) with staff and can, Lord of the art of healing man. Then as the waters foamed and boiled, As churning still the Immortals toiled, Of winning face and lovely frame, Forth sixty million fair ones came. Born of the foam and water, these Were aptly named Apsarases.(206) Each had her maids. The tongue would fail— So vast the throng—to count the tale. But when no God or Titan wooed A wife from all that multitude, Refused by all, they gave their love In common to the Gods above. Then from the sea still vext and wild Rose Surá,(207) Varuṇ’s maiden child. A fitting match she sought to find: But Diti’s sons her love declined, Their kinsmen of the rival brood To the pure maid in honour sued. Hence those who loved that nymph so fair The hallowed name of Suras bear. And Asurs are the Titan crowd Her gentle claims who disallowed. Then from the foamy sea was freed Uchchaihśravas,(208) the generous steed, And Kaustubha, of gems the gem,(209) And Soma, Moon God, after them.

  At length when many a year had fled, Up floated, on her lotus bed, A maiden fair and tender-eyed, In the young flush of beauty’s pride. She shone with pearl and golden sheen, And seals of glory stamped her queen, On each round arm glowed many a gem, On her smooth brows, a diadem. Rolling in waves beneath her crown The glory of her hair flowed down, Pearls on her neck of price untold, The lady shone like burnisht gold. Queen of the Gods, she leapt to land, A lotus in her perfect hand, And fondly, of the lotus-sprung, To lotus-bearing Vishṇu clung. Her Gods above and men below As Beauty’s Queen and Fortune know.(210) Gods, Titans, and the minstrel train Still churned and wrought the troubled main. At length the prize so madly sought, The Amrit, to their sight was brought. For the rich spoil, ’twixt these and those A fratricidal war arose, And, host ’gainst host in battle, set, Aditi’s sons and Diti’s met. United, with the giants’ aid, Their fierce attack the Titans made, And wildly raged for many a day That universe-astounding fray. When wearied arms were faint to strike, And ruin threatened all alike, Vishṇu, with art’s illusive aid, The Amrit from their sight conveyed. That Best of Beings smote his foes Who dared his deathless arm oppose: Yea, Vishṇu, all-pervading God, Beneath his feet the Titans trod Aditi’s race, the sons of light, slew Diti’s brood in cruel fight. Then town-destroying(211) Indra gained His empire, and in glory reigned O’er the three worlds with bard and sage Rejoicing in his heritage.




Canto XLVI. Diti’s Hope.


But Diti, when her sons were slain, Wild with a childless mother’s pain, To Kaśyap spake, Marícha’s son, Her husband: “O thou glorious one! Dead are the children, mine no more, The mighty sons to thee I bore. Long fervour’s meed, I crave a boy Whose arm may Indra’s life destroy. The toil and pain my care shall be: To bless my hope depends on thee. Give me a mighty son to slay Fierce Indra, gracious lord! I pray.”

  Then glorious Kaśyap thus replied To Diti, as she wept and sighed: “Thy prayer is heard, dear saint! Remain Pure from all spot, and thou shalt gain A son whose arm shall take the life Of Indra in the battle strife. For full a thousand years endure Free from all stain, supremely pure; Then shall thy son and mine appear, Whom the three worlds shall serve with fear.” These words the glorious Kaśyap said, Then gently stroked his consort’s head, Blessed her, and bade a kind adieu, And turned him to his rites anew. Soon as her lord had left her side, Her bosom swelled with joy and pride. She sought the shade of holy boughs, And there began her awful vows. While yet she wrought her rites austere, Indra, unbidden, hastened near, With sweet observance tending her, A reverential minister. Wood, water, fire, and grass he brought, Sweet roots and woodland fruit he sought, And all her wants, the Thousand-eyed, With never-failing care, supplied, With tender love and soft caress Removing pain and weariness.

  When, of the thousand years ordained, Ten only unfulfilled remained, Thus to her son, the Thousand-eyed, The Goddess in her triumph cried: “Best of the mighty! there remain But ten short years of toil and pain; These years of penance soon will flee, And a new brother thou shalt see. Him for thy sake I’ll nobly breed, And lust of war his soul shall feed; Then free from care and sorrow thou Shalt see the worlds before him bow.”(212)




Canto XLVII. Sumati.


Thus to Lord Indra, Thousand-eyed, Softly beseeching Diti sighed. When but a blighted bud was left, Which Indra’s hand in seven had cleft:(213) “No fault, O Lord of Gods, is thine; The blame herein is only mine. But for one grace I fain would pray, As thou hast reft this hope away. This bud, O Indra, which a blight Has withered ere it saw the light— From this may seven fair spirits rise To rule the regions of the skies. Be theirs through heaven’s unbounded space On shoulders of the winds to race, My children, drest in heavenly forms, Far-famed as Maruts, Gods of storms. One God to Brahmá’s sphere assign, Let one, O Indra, watch o’er thine; And ranging through the lower air, The third the name of Váyu(214) bear. Gods let the four remaining be, And roam through space, obeying thee.”

  The Town-destroyer, Thousand-eyed, Who smote fierce Bali till he died, Joined suppliant hands, and thus replied: “Thy children heavenly forms shall wear; The names devised by thee shall bear, And, Maruts called by my decree, Shall Amrit drink and wait on me. From fear and age and sickness freed, Through the three worlds their wings shall speed.”

  Thus in the hermits’ holy shade Mother and son their compact made, And then, as fame relates, content, Home to the happy skies they went. This is the spot—so men have told— Where Lord Mahendra(215) dwelt of old, This is the blessed region where His votaress mother claimed his care. Here gentle Alambúshá bare To old Ikshváku, king and sage, Viśála, glory of his age, By whom, a monarch void of guilt, Was this fair town Viśálá built. His son was Hemachandra, still Renowned for might and warlike skill. From him the great Suchandra came; His son, Dhúmráśva, dear to fame. Next followed royal Srinjay; then Famed Sahadeva, lord of men. Next came Kuśáśva, good and mild, Whose son was Somadatta styled, And Sumati, his heir, the peer Of Gods above, now governs here. And ever through Ikshváku’s grace, Viśálá’s kings, his noble race, Are lofty-souled, and blest with length Of days, with virtue, and with strength. This night, O prince, we here will sleep; And when the day begins to peep, Our onward way will take with thee, The king of Míthilá to see.”

  Then Sumati, the king, aware Of Viśvámitra’s advent there, Came quickly forth with honour meet The lofty-minded sage to greet. Girt with his priest and lords the king Did low obeisance, worshipping, With suppliant hands, with head inclined, Thus spoke he after question kind; “Since thou hast deigned to bless my sight,   And grace awhile thy servant’s seat, High fate is mine, great Anchorite,   And none may with my bliss compete.”




Canto XLVIII. Indra And Ahalyá


When mutual courtesies had past, Viśálá’s ruler spoke at last: “These princely youths, O Sage, who vie In might with children of the sky, Heroic, born for happy fate, With elephants’ or lions’ gait, Bold as the tiger or the bull, With lotus eyes so large and full, Armed with the quiver, sword, and bow, Whose figures like the Aśvins(216) show, Like children of the deathless Powers, Come freely to these shades of ours,(217)— How have they reached on foot this place? What do they seek, and what their race? As sun and moon adorn the sky, This spot the heroes glorify. Alike in stature, port, and mien, The same fair form in each is seen,”

  He spoke; and at the monarch’s call The best of hermits told him all, How in the grove with him they dwelt, And slaughter to the demons dealt. Then wonder filled the monarch’s breast, Who tended well each royal guest. Thus entertained, the princely pair Remained that night and rested there, And with the morn’s returning ray To Mithilá pursued their way.

  When Janak’s lovely city first Upon their sight, yet distant, burst, The hermits all with joyful cries Hailed the fair town that met their eyes. Then Ráma saw a holy wood, Close, in the city’s neighbourhood, O’ergrown, deserted, marked by age, And thus addressed the mighty sage: “O reverend lord. I long to know What hermit dwelt here long ago.” Then to the prince his holy guide, Most eloquent of men, replied: “O Ráma, listen while I tell Whose was this grove, and what befell When in the fury of his rage The high saint cursed the hermitage. This was the grove—most lovely then— Of Gautam, O thou best of men, Like heaven itself, most honoured by The Gods who dwell above the sky. Here with Ahalyá at his side His fervid task the ascetic plied. Years fled in thousands. On a day It chanced the saint had gone away, When Town-destroying Indra came, And saw the beauty of the dame. The sage’s form the God endued, And thus the fair Ahalyá wooed: “Love, sweet! should brook no dull delay But snatch the moments when he may.” She knew him in the saint’s disguise, Lord Indra of the Thousand Eyes, But touched by love’s unholy fire, She yielded to the God’s desire.

  “Now, Lord of Gods!” she whispered, “flee, From Gautam save thyself and me.” Trembling with doubt and wild with dread Lord Indra from the cottage fled; But fleeing in the grove he met The home-returning anchoret, Whose wrath the Gods and fiends would shun, Such power his fervent rites had won. Fresh from the lustral flood he came, In splendour like the burning flame, With fuel for his sacred rites, And grass, the best of eremites. The Lord of Gods was sad of cheer To see the mighty saint so near, And when the holy hermit spied In hermit’s garb the Thousand-eyed, He knew the whole, his fury broke Forth on the sinner as he spoke:   “Because my form thou hast assumed, And wrought this folly, thou art doomed, For this my curse to thee shall cling, Henceforth a sad and sexless thing.”

  No empty threat that sentence came, It chilled his soul and marred his frame, His might and godlike vigour fled, And every nerve was cold and dead.

  Then on his wife his fury burst, And thus the guilty dame he cursed: “For countless years, disloyal spouse, Devoted to severest vows, Thy bed the ashes, air thy food, Here shalt thou live in solitude. This lonely grove thy home shall be, And not an eye thy form shall see. When Ráma, Daśaratha’s child, Shall seek these shades then drear and wild, His coming shall remove thy stain, And make the sinner pure again. Due honour paid to him, thy guest, Shall cleanse thy fond and erring breast, Thee to my side in bliss restore, And give thy proper shape once more.”(218)

  Thus to his guilty wife he said, Then far the holy Gautam fled, And on Himálaya’s lovely heights Spent the long years in sternest rites.”




Canto XLIX. Ahalyá Freed.


Then Ráma, following still his guide, Within the grove, with Lakshmaṇ, hied, Her vows a wondrous light had lent To that illustrious penitent. He saw the glorious lady, screened From eye of man, and God, and fiend, Like some bright portent which the care Of Brahmá launches through the air, Designed by his illusive art To flash a moment and depart: Or like the flame that leaps on high To sink involved in smoke and die: Or like the full moon shining through The wintry mist, then lost to view: Or like the sun’s reflection, cast Upon the flood, too bright to last: So was the glorious dame till then Removed from Gods’ and mortals’ ken, Till—such was Gautam’s high decree— Prince Ráma came to set her free.

  Then, with great joy that dame to meet, The sons of Raghu clapped her feet; And she, remembering Gautam’s oath, With gentle grace received them both; Then water for their feet she gave, Guest-gift, and all that strangers crave.

  The prince, of courteous rule aware, Received, as meet, the lady’s care. Then flowers came down in copious rain, And moving to the heavenly strain Of music in the skies that rang, The nymphs and minstrels danced and sang: And all the Gods with one glad voice Praised the great dame, and cried, “Rejoice! Through fervid rites no more defiled, But with thy husband reconciled.” Gautam, the holy hermit knew— For naught escaped his godlike view— That Ráma lodged beneath that shade, And hasting there his homage paid. He took Ahalyá to his side, From sin and folly purified, And let his new-found consort bear In his austerities a share.

  Then Ráma, pride of Raghu’s race, Welcomed by Gautam, face to face, Who every highest honour showed, To Mithilá pursued his road.




Canto L. Janak.


The sons of Raghu journeyed forth, Bending their steps ’twixt east and north. Soon, guided by the sage, they found, Enclosed, a sacrificial ground. Then to the best of saints, his guide, In admiration Ráma cried:

  “The high-souled king no toil has spared, But nobly for his rite prepared, How many thousand Bráhmans here, From every region, far and near, Well read in holy lore, appear! How many tents, that sages screen, With wains in hundreds, here are seen! Great Bráhman, let us find a place Where we may stay and rest a space.” The hermit did as Ráma prayed, And in a spot his lodging made, Far from the crowd, sequestered, clear, With copious water flowing near.

  Then Janak, best of kings, aware Of Viśvámitra lodging there, With Śatánanda for his guide— The priest on whom he most relied, His chaplain void of guile and stain— And others of his priestly train, Bearing the gift that greets the guest, To meet him with all honour pressed. The saint received with gladsome mind Each honour and observance kind: Then of his health he asked the king, And how his rites were prospering, Janak, with chaplain and with priest, Addressed the hermits, chief and least, Accosting all, in due degree, With proper words of courtesy. Then, with his palms together laid, The king his supplication made: “Deign, reverend lord, to sit thee down With these good saints of high renown.” Then sate the chief of hermits there, Obedient to the monarch’s prayer. Chaplain and priest, and king and peer, Sate in their order, far or near. Then thus the king began to say: “The Gods have blest my rite to-day, And with the sight of thee repaid The preparations I have made. Grateful am I, so highly blest, That thou, of saints the holiest, Hast come, O Bráhman, here with all These hermits to the festival. Twelve days, O Bráhman Sage, remain— For so the learned priests ordain— And then, O heir of Kuśik’s name, The Gods will come their dues to claim.”

  With looks that testified delight Thus spake he to the anchorite, Then with his suppliant hands upraised, He asked, as earnestly he gazed: “These princely youths, O Sage, who vie In might with children of the sky, Heroic, born for happy fate, With elephants’ or lions’ gait, Bold as the tiger and the bull, With lotus eyes so large and full, Armed with the quiver, sword and bow, Whose figures like the Aśvins show, Like children of the heavenly Powers, Come freely to these shades of ours,— How have they reached on foot this place? What do they seek, and what their race? As sun and moon adorn the sky, This spot the heroes glorify: Alike in stature, port, and mien, The same fair form in each is seen.”(219)

  Thus spoke the monarch, lofty-souled, The saint, of heart unfathomed, told How, sons of Daśaratha, they Accompanied his homeward way, How in the hermitage they dwelt, And slaughter to the demons dealt: Their journey till the spot they neared Whence fair Viśálá’s towers appeared: Ahalyá seen and freed from taint; Their meeting with her lord the saint; And how they thither came, to know The virtue of the famous bow.

  Thus Viśvámitra spoke the whole To royal Janak, great of soul, And when this wondrous tale was o’er, The glorious hermit said no more.




Canto LI. Visvámitra.


Wise Viśvámitra’s tale was done: Then sainted Gautam’s eldest son, Great Śatánanda, far-renowned, Whom long austerities had crowned With glory—as the news he heard The down upon his body stirred,— Filled full of wonder at the sight Of Ráma, felt supreme delight. When Śatánanda saw the pair Of youthful princes seated there, He turned him to the holy man Who sate at ease, and thus began: “And didst thou, mighty Sage, in truth Show clearly to this royal youth My mother, glorious far and wide, Whom penance-rites have sanctified? And did my glorious mother—she, Heiress of noble destiny— Serve her great guest with woodland store, Whom all should honour evermore? Didst thou the tale to Ráma tell Of what in ancient days befell, The sin, the misery, and the shame Of guilty God and faithless dame? And, O thou best of hermits, say, Did Ráma’s healing presence stay Her trial? was the wife restored Again to him, my sire and lord? Say, Hermit, did that sire of mine Receive her with a soul benign, When long austerities in time Had cleansed her from the taint of crime? And, son of Kuśik, let me know, Did my great-minded father show Honour to Ráma, and regard, Before he journeyed hitherward?” The hermit with attentive ear Marked all the questions of the seer: To him for eloquence far-famed, His eloquent reply he framed: “Yea, ’twas my care no task to shun, And all I had to do was done; As Reṇuká and Bhrigu’s child, The saint and dame were reconciled.”

  When the great sage had thus replied, To Ráma Śatánanda cried: “A welcome visit, Prince, is thine, Thou scion of King Raghu’s line. With him to guide thy way aright, This sage invincible in might, This Bráhman sage, most glorious-bright, By long austerities has wrought A wondrous deed, exceeding thought: Thou knowest well, O strong of arm, This sure defence from scathe and harm. None, Ráma, none is living now In all the earth more blest than thou, That thou hast won a saint so tried In fervid rites thy life to guide. Now listen, Prince, while I relate His lofty deeds and wondrous fate. He was a monarch pious-souled. His foemen in the dust he rolled; Most learned, prompt at duty’s claim, His people’s good his joy and aim.

  Of old the Lord of Life gave birth To mighty Kuśa, king of earth. His son was Kuśanábha, strong, Friend of the right, the foe of wrong. Gádhi, whose fame no time shall dim, Heir of his throne was born to him, And Viśvámitra, Gádhi’s heir, Governed the land with kingly care. While years unnumbered rolled away The monarch reigned with equal sway. At length, assembling many a band, He led his warriors round the land— Complete in tale, a mighty force, Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse. Through cities, groves, and floods he passed, O’er lofty hills, through regions vast. He reached Vaśishṭha’s pure abode, Where trees, and flowers, and creepers glowed, Where troops of sylvan creatures fed; Which saints and angels visited. Gods, fauns, and bards of heavenly race, And spirits, glorified the place; The deer their timid ways forgot, And holy Bráhmans thronged the spot. Bright in their souls, like fire, were these, Made pure by long austerities, Bound by the rule of vows severe, And each in glory Brahmá’s peer. Some fed on water, some on air, Some on the leaves that withered there. Roots and wild fruit were others’ food; All rage was checked, each sense subdued, There Bálakhilyas(220) went and came, Now breathed the prayer, now fed the flame: These, and ascetic bands beside, The sweet retirement beautified. Such was Vaśishṭha’s blest retreat, Like Brahmá’s own celestial seat, Which gladdened Viśvámitra’s eyes, Peerless for warlike enterprise.




Canto LII. Vasishtha’s Feast.


Right glad was Viśvámitra when He saw the prince of saintly men. Low at his feet the hero bent, And did obeisance, reverent.

  The king was welcomed in, and shown A seat beside the hermit’s own, Who offered him, when resting there, Fruit in due course, and woodland fare. And Viśvámitra, noblest king, Received Vaśishṭha’s welcoming, Turned to his host, and prayed him tell That he and all with him were well. Vaśishṭha to the king replied That all was well on every side, That fire, and vows, and pupils throve, And all the trees within the grove. And then the son of Brahmá, best Of all who pray with voice suppressed, Questioned with pleasant words like these The mighty king who sate at ease: “And is it well with thee? I pray; And dost thou win by virtuous sway Thy people’s love, discharging all The duties on a king that fall? Are all thy servants fostered well? Do all obey, and none rebel? Hast thou, destroyer of the foe, No enemies to overthrow? Does fortune, conqueror! still attend Thy treasure, host, and every friend? Is it all well? Does happy fate On sons and children’s children wait?”

  He spoke. The modest king replied That all was prosperous far and wide.

Thus for awhile the two conversed, As each to each his tale rehearsed, And as the happy moments flew, Their joy and friendship stronger grew. When such discourse had reached an end, Thus spoke the saint most reverend To royal Viśvámitra, while His features brightened with a smile: “O mighty lord of men. I fain Would banquet thee and all thy train In mode that suits thy station high: And do not thou my prayer deny. Let my good lord with favour take The offering that I fain would make, And let me honour, ere we part, My royal guest with loving heart.”

  Him Viśvámitra thus addressed: “Why make, O Saint, this new request? Thy welcome and each gracious word Sufficient honour have conferred. Thou gavest roots and fruit to eat, The treasures of this pure retreat, And water for my mouth and feet; And—boon I prize above the rest— Thy presence has mine eyesight blest. Honoured by thee in every way, To whom all honour all should pay, I now will go. My lord, Good-bye! Regard me with a friendly eye.”

  Him speaking thus Vaśishṭha stayed, And still to share his banquet prayed. The will of Gádhi’s son he bent, And won the monarch to consent, Who spoke in answer. “Let it be, Great Hermit, as it pleases thee.” When, best of those who breathe the prayer, He heard the king his will declare, He called the cow of spotted skin, All spot without, all pure within. “Come, Dapple-skin,” he cried, “with speed; Hear thou my words and help at need. My heart is set to entertain This monarch and his mighty train With sumptuous meal and worthy fare; Be thine the banquet to prepare. Each dainty cate, each goodly dish, Of six-fold taste(221) as each may wish— All these, O cow of heavenly power, Rain down for me in copious shower: Viands and drink for tooth and lip, To eat, to suck, to quaff, to sip— Of these sufficient, and to spare, O plenty-giving cow, prepare.”




Canto LIII. Visvámitra’s Request.


Thus charged, O slayer of thy foes, The cow from whom all plenty flows, Obedient to her saintly lord, Viands to suit each taste, outpoured. Honey she gave, and roasted grain, Mead sweet with flowers, and sugar-cane. Each beverage of flavour rare, An food of every sort, were there: Hills of hot rice, and sweetened cakes, And curdled milk and soup in lakes. Vast beakers foaming to the brim With sugared drink prepared for him, And dainty sweetmeats, deftly made, Before the hermit’s guests were laid. So well regaled, so nobly fed, The mighty army banqueted, And all the train, from chief to least, Delighted in Vaśishṭha’s feast. Then Viśvámitra, royal sage, Surrounded by his vassalage, Prince, peer, and counsellor, and all From highest lord to lowest thrall, Thus feasted, to Vaśishṭha cried With joy, supremely gratified: “Rich honour I, thus entertained, Most honourable lord, have gained: Now hear, before I journey hence, My words, O skilled in eloquence. Bought for a hundred thousand kine, Let Dapple-skin, O Saint, be mine. A wondrous jewel is thy cow, And gems are for the monarch’s brow.(222) To me her rightful lord resign This Dapple-skin thou callest thine.”

  The great Vaśishṭha, thus addressed, Arch-hermit of the holy breast, To Viśvámitra answer made, The king whom all the land obeyed: “Not for a hundred thousand,—nay, Not if ten million thou wouldst pay, With silver heaps the price to swell,— Will I my cow, O Monarch, sell. Unmeet for her is such a fate. That I my friend should alienate. As glory with the virtuous, she For ever makes her home with me. On her mine offerings which ascend To Gods and spirits all depend: My very life is due to her, My guardian, friend, and minister. The feeding of the sacred flame,(223) The dole which living creatures claim.(224) The mighty sacrifice by fire, Each formula the rites require,(225) And various saving lore beside, Are by her aid, in sooth, supplied. The banquet which thy host has shared, Believe it, was by her prepared, In her mine only treasures lie, She cheers mine heart and charms mine eye. And reasons more could I assign Why Dapple-skin can ne’er be thine.”

  The royal sage, his suit denied, With eloquence more earnest cried: “Tusked elephants, a goodly train, Each with a golden girth and chain, Whose goads with gold well fashioned shine— Of these be twice seven thousand thine. And four-horse cars with gold made bright, With steeds most beautifully white, Whose bells make music as they go, Eight hundred, Saint, will I bestow. Eleven thousand mettled steeds From famous lands, of noble breeds— These will I gladly give, O thou Devoted to each holy vow. Ten million heifers, fair to view, Whose sides are marked with every hue— These in exchange will I assign; But let thy Dapple-skin be mine. Ask what thou wilt, and piles untold Of priceless gems and gleaming gold, O best of Bráhmans, shall be thine; But let thy Dapple-skin be mine.”

  The great Vaśishṭha, thus addressed, Made answer to the king’s request: “Ne’er will I give my cow away, My gem, my wealth, my life and stay. My worship at the moon’s first show, And at the full, to her I owe; And sacrifices small and great, Which largess due and gifts await. From her alone, their root, O King, My rites and holy service spring. What boots it further words to say? I will not give my cow away Who yields me what I ask each day.”




Canto LIV. The Battle.


As Saint Vaśishṭha answered so, Nor let the cow of plenty go, The monarch, as a last resource, Began to drag her off by force. While the king’s servants tore away Their moaning, miserable prey, Sad, sick at heart, and sore distressed, She pondered thus within her breast: “Why am I thus forsaken? why Betrayed by him of soul most high. Vaśishṭha, ravished by the hands Of soldiers of the monarch’s bands? Ah me! what evil have I done Against the lofty-minded one, That he, so pious, can expose The innocent whose love he knows?” In her sad breast as thus she thought, And heaved deep sighs with anguish fraught, With wondrous speed away she fled, And back to Saint Vaśishṭha sped. She hurled by hundreds to the ground The menial crew that hemmed her round, And flying swifter than the blast Before the saint herself she cast. There Dapple-skin before the saint Stood moaning forth her sad complaint, And wept and lowed: such tones as come From wandering cloud or distant drum. “O son of Brahmá,” thus cried she, “Why hast thou thus forsaken me, That the king’s men, before thy face, Bear off thy servant from her place?”

  Then thus the Bráhman saint replied To her whose heart with woe was tried, And grieving for his favourite’s sake, As to a suffering sister spake: “I leave thee not: dismiss the thought; Nor, duteous, hast thou failed in aught. This king, o’erweening in the pride Of power, has reft thee from my side. Little, I ween, my strength could do ’Gainst him, a mighty warrior too. Strong, as a soldier born and bred,— Great, as a king whom regions dread. See! what a host the conqueror leads, With elephants, and cars, and steeds. O’er countless bands his pennons fly; So is he mightier far than I.” He spoke. Then she, in lowly mood, To that high saint her speech renewed: “So judge not they who wisest are: The Bráhman’s might is mightier far. For Bráhmans strength from Heaven derive, And warriors bow when Bráhmans strive. A boundless power ’tis thine to wield: To such a king thou shouldst not yield, Who, very mighty though he be,— So fierce thy strength,—must bow to thee. Command me, Saint. Thy power divine Has brought me here and made me thine; And I, howe’er the tyrant boast, Will tame his pride and slay his host.” Then cried the glorious sage: “Create A mighty force the foe to mate.”

  She lowed, and quickened into life, Pahlavas,(226) burning for the strife, King Viśvámitra’s army slew Before the very leader’s view. The monarch in excessive ire, His eyes with fury darting fire, Rained every missile on the foe Till all the Pahlavas were low. She, seeing all her champions slain, Lying by thousands on the plain. Created, by her mere desire, Yavans and Śakas, fierce and dire. And all the ground was overspread With Yavans and with Śakas dread: A host of warriors bright and strong, And numberless in closest throng: The threads within the lotus stem, So densely packed, might equal them. In gold-hued mail ’against war’s attacks, Each bore a sword and battle-axe, The royal host, where’er these came, Fell as if burnt with ravening flame.

  The monarch, famous through the world Again his fearful weapons hurled, That made Kámbojas,(227) Barbars,(228) all, With Yavans, troubled, flee and fall.




Canto LV. The Hermitage Burnt.


So o’er the field that host lay strown, By Viśvámitra’s darts o’erthrown. Then thus Vaśishṭha charged the cow: “Create with all thy vigour now.”

  Forth sprang Kámbojas, as she lowed; Bright as the sun their faces glowed, Forth from her udder Barbars poured,— Soldiers who brandished spear and sword,— And Yavans with their shafts and darts, And Śakas from her hinder parts. And every pore upon her fell, And every hair-producing cell, With Mlechchhas(229) and Kirátas(230) teemed, And forth with them Hárítas streamed. And Viśvámitra’s mighty force, Car, elephant, and foot, and horse, Fell in a moment’s time, subdued By that tremendous multitude. The monarch’s hundred sons, whose eyes Beheld the rout in wild surprise, Armed with all weapons, mad with rage, Rushed fiercely on the holy sage. One cry he raised, one glance he shot, And all fell scorched upon the spot: Burnt by the sage to ashes, they With horse, and foot, and chariot, lay. The monarch mourned, with shame and pain, His army lost, his children slain, Like Ocean when his roar is hushed, Or some great snake whose fangs are crushed: Or as in swift eclipse the Sun Dark with the doom he cannot shun: Or a poor bird with mangled wing— So, reft of sons and host, the king No longer, by ambition fired, The pride of war his breast inspired. He gave his empire to his son— Of all he had, the only one: And bade him rule as kings are taught Then straight a hermit-grove he sought. Far to Himálaya’s side he fled, Which bards and Nágas visited, And, Mahádeva’s(231) grace to earn, He gave his life to penance stern. A lengthened season thus passed by, When Śiva’s self, the Lord most High, Whose banner shows the pictured bull,(232) Appeared, the God most bountiful:

  “Why fervent thus in toil and pain? What brings thee here? what boon to gain? Thy heart’s desire, O Monarch, speak: I grant the boons which mortals seek.” The king, his adoration paid, To Mahádeva answer made: “If thou hast deemed me fit to win Thy favour, O thou void of sin, On me, O mighty God, bestow The wondrous science of the bow, All mine, complete in every part, With secret spell and mystic art. To me be all the arms revealed That Gods, and saints, and Titans wield, And every dart that arms the hands Of spirits, fiends and minstrel bands, Be mine, O Lord supreme in place, This token of thy boundless grace.”

  The Lord of Gods then gave consent, And to his heavenly mansion went. Triumphant in the arms he held, The monarch’s breast with glory swelled. So swells the ocean, when upon His breast the full moon’s beams have shone. Already in his mind he viewed Vaśishṭha at his feet subdued. He sought that hermit’s grove, and there Launched his dire weapons through the air, Till scorched by might that none could stay The hermitage in ashes lay. Where’er the inmates saw, aghast, The dart that Viśvámitra cast, To every side they turned and fled In hundreds forth disquieted. Vaśishṭha’s pupils caught the fear, And every bird and every deer, And fled in wild confusion forth Eastward and westward, south and north, And so Vaśishṭha’s holy shade A solitary wild was made, Silent awhile, for not a sound Disturbed the hush that was around.

  Vaśishṭha then, with eager cry, Called, “Fear not, friends, nor seek to fly. This son of Gádhi dies to-day, Like hoar-frost in the morning’s ray.” Thus having said, the glorious sage Spoke to the king in words of rage: “Because thou hast destroyed this grove Which long in holy quiet throve, By folly urged to senseless crime, Now shalt thou die before thy time.”




Canto LVI. Visvámitra’s Vow.


But Viśvámitra, at the threat Of that illustrious anchoret, Cried, as he launched with ready hand A fiery weapon, “Stand, O Stand!” Vaśishṭha, wild with rage and hate, Raising, as ’twere the Rod of Fate, His mighty Bráhman wand on high, To Viśvámitra made reply: “Nay, stand, O Warrior thou, and show What soldier can, ’gainst Bráhman foe. O Gádhi’s son, thy days are told; Thy pride is tamed, thy dart is cold. How shall a warrior’s puissance dare With Bráhman’s awful strength compare? To-day, base Warrior, shall thou feel That God-sent might is more than steel.” He raised his Bráhman staff, nor missed The fiery dart that near him hissed: And quenched the fearful weapon fell, As flame beneath the billow’s swell.

  Then Gádhi’s son in fury threw Lord Varuṇ’s arm and Rudra’s too: Indra’s fierce bolt that all destroys; That which the Lord of Herds employs: The Human, that which minstrels keep, The deadly Lure, the endless Sleep: The Yawner, and the dart which charms; Lament and Torture, fearful arms: The Terrible, the dart which dries, The Thunderbolt which quenchless flies, And Fate’s dread net, and Brahmá’s noose, And that which waits for Varuṇ’s use: The dart he loves who wields the bow Pináka, and twin bolts that glow With fury as they flash and fly, The quenchless Liquid and the Dry: The dart of Vengeance, swift to kill: The Goblins’ dart, the Curlew’s Bill: The discus both of Fate and Right, And Vishṇu’s, of unerring flight: The Wind-God’s dart, the Troubler dread, The weapon named the Horse’s Head. From his fierce hand two spears were thrown, And the great mace that smashes bone; The dart of spirits of the air, And that which Fate exults to bear: The Trident dart which slaughters foes, And that which hanging skulls compose:(233) These fearful darts in fiery rain He hurled upon the saint amain, An awful miracle to view. But as the ceaseless tempest flew, The sage with wand of God-sent power Still swallowed up that fiery shower.

  Then Gádhi’s son, when these had failed, With Brahmá’s dart his foe assailed. The Gods, with Indra at their head, And Nágas, quailed disquieted, And saints and minstrels, when they saw The king that awful weapon draw; And the three worlds were filled with dread, And trembled as the missile sped.

  The saint, with Bráhman wand, empowered By lore divine that dart devoured. Nor could the triple world withdraw Rapt gazes from that sight of awe; For as he swallowed down the dart Of Brahmá, sparks from every part, From finest pore and hair-cell, broke Enveloped in a veil of smoke. The staff he waved was all aglow Like Yáma’s sceptre, King below, Or like the lurid fire of Fate Whose rage the worlds will desolate.

  The hermits, whom that sight had awed, Extolled the saint, with hymn and laud: “Thy power, O Sage, is ne’er in vain: Now with thy might thy might restrain. Be gracious, Master, and allow The worlds to rest from trouble now; For Viśvámitra, strong and dread, By thee has been discomfited.”

  Then, thus addressed, the saint, well pleased, The fury of his wrath appeased. The king, o’erpowered and ashamed, With many a deep-drawn sigh exclaimed: “Ah! Warriors’ strength is poor and slight; A Bráhman’s power is truly might. This Bráhman staff the hermit held The fury of my darts has quelled. This truth within my heart impressed, With senses ruled and tranquil breast My task austere will I begin, And Bráhmanhood will strive to win.”




Canto LVII. Trisanku.


Then with his heart consumed with woe, Still brooding on his overthrow By the great saint he had defied, At every breath the monarch sighed. Forth from his home his queen he led, And to a land far southward fled. There, fruit and roots his only food, He practised penance, sense-subdued, And in that solitary spot Four virtuous sons the king begot: Havishyand, from the offering named, And Madhushyand, for sweetness famed, Mahárath, chariot-borne in fight, And Driḍhanetra strong of sight.

  A thousand years had passed away, When Brahmá, Sire whom all obey, Addressed in pleasant words like these Him rich in long austerities: “Thou by the penance, Kuśik’s son, A place ’mid royal saints hast won. Pleased with thy constant penance, we This lofty rank assign to thee.”

  Thus spoke the glorious Lord most High Father of earth and air and sky, And with the Gods around him spread Home to his changeless sphere he sped. But Viśvámitra scorned the grace, And bent in shame his angry face. Burning with rage, o’erwhelmed with grief, Thus in his heart exclaimed the chief: “No fruit, I ween, have I secured By strictest penance long endured, If Gods and all the saints decree To make but royal saint of me.” Thus pondering, he with sense subdued, With sternest zeal his vows renewed. Then reigned a monarch, true of soul, Who kept each sense in firm control; Of old Ikshváku’s line he came, That glories in Triśanku’s(234) name. Within his breast, O Raghu’s child, Arose a longing, strong and wild, Great offerings to the Gods to pay, And win, alive, to heaven his way. His priest Vaśishṭha’s aid he sought, And told him of his secret thought. But wise Vaśishṭha showed the hope Was far beyond the monarch’s scope. Triśanku then, his suit denied, Far to the southern region hied, To beg Vaśishṭha’s sons to aid The mighty plan his soul had made. There King Triśanku, far renowned, Vaśishṭha’s hundred children found, Each on his fervent vows intent, For mind and fame preëminent. To these the famous king applied, Wise children of his holy guide. Saluting each in order due. His eyes, for shame, he downward threw, And reverent hands together pressed, The glorious company addressed: “I as a humble suppliant seek Succour of you who aid the weak. A mighty offering I would pay, But sage Vaśishṭha answered, Nay. Be yours permission to accord, And to my rites your help afford. Sons of my guide, to each of you With lowly reverence here I sue; To each, intent on penance-vow, O Bráhmans, low my head I bow, And pray you each with ready heart In my great rite to bear a part, That in the body I may rise And dwell with Gods within the skies. Sons of my guide, none else I see Can give what he refuses me. Ikshváku’s children still depend Upon their guide most reverend; And you, as nearest in degree To him, my deities shall be!”




Canto LVIII. Trisanku Cursed.


Triśanku’s speech the hundred heard, And thus replied, to anger stirred: “Why foolish King, by him denied, Whose truthful lips have never lied, Dost thou transgress his prudent rule, And seek, for aid, another school?(235) Ikshváku’s sons have aye relied Most surely on their holy guide: Then how dost thou, fond Monarch, dare Transgress the rule his lips declare? “Thy wish is vain,” the saint replied, And bade thee cast the plan aside. Then how can we, his sons, pretend In such a rite our aid to lend? O Monarch, of the childish heart, Home to thy royal town depart. That mighty saint, thy priest and guide, At noblest rites may well preside: The worlds for sacrifice combined A worthier priest could never find.”

  Such speech of theirs the monarch heard, Though rage distorted every word, And to the hermits made reply: “You, like your sire, my suit deny. For other aid I turn from you: So, rich in penance, Saints, adieu!”

  Vaśishṭha’s children heard, and guessed His evil purpose scarce expressed, And cried, while rage their bosoms burned, “Be to a vile Chaṇḍála(236) turned!” This said, with lofty thoughts inspired, Each to his own retreat retired.

  That night Triśanku underwent Sad change in shape and lineament. Next morn, an outcast swart of hue, His dusky cloth he round him drew. His hair had fallen from his head, And roughness o’er his skin was spread. Such wreaths adorned him as are found To flourish on the funeral ground. Each armlet was an iron ring: Such was the figure of the king, That every counsellor and peer, And following townsman, fled in fear.

  Alone, unyielding to dismay, Though burnt by anguish night and day, Great Viśvámitra’s side he sought, Whose treasures were by penance bought.

  The hermit with his tender eyes Looked on Triśanku’s altered guise, And grieving at his ruined state Addressed him thus, compassionate: “Great King,” the pious hermit said, “What cause thy steps has hither led, Ayodhyá’s mighty Sovereign, whom A curse has plagued with outcast’s doom?” In vile Chaṇḍála(237) shape, the king Heard Viśvámitra’s questioning, And, suppliant palm to palm applied, With answering eloquence he cried: “My priest and all his sons refused To aid the plan on which I mused. Failing to win the boon I sought, To this condition I was brought. I, in the body, Saint, would fain A mansion in the skies obtain. I planned a hundred rites for this, But still was doomed the fruit to miss. Pure are my lips from falsehood’s stain, And pure they ever shall remain,— Yea, by a Warrior’s faith I swear,— Though I be tried with grief and care. Unnumbered rites to Heaven I paid, With righteous care the sceptre swayed; And holy priest and high-souled guide My modest conduct gratified. But, O thou best of hermits, they Oppose my wish these rites to pay; They one and all refuse consent, Nor aid me in my high intent. Fate is, I ween, the power supreme, Man’s effort but an idle dream, Fate whirls our plans, our all away; Fate is our only hope and stay; Now deign, O blessed Saint, to aid Me, even me by Fate betrayed, Who come, a suppliant, sore distressed, One grace, O Hermit, to request. No other hope or way I see: No other refuge waits for me. Oh, aid me in my fallen state, And human will shall conquer Fate.”




Canto LIX. The Sons Of Vasishtha.


Then Kuśik’s son, by pity warmed, Spoke sweetly to the king transformed: “Hail! glory of Ikshváku’s line: I know how bright thy virtues shine. Dismiss thy fear, O noblest Chief, For I myself will bring relief. The holiest saints will I invite To celebrate thy purposed rite: So shall thy vow, O King, succeed, And from thy cares shalt thou be freed. Thou in the form which now thou hast, Transfigured by the curse they cast,— Yea, in the body, King, shalt flee, Transported, where thou fain wouldst be. O Lord of men, I ween that thou Hast heaven within thy hand e’en now, For very wisely hast thou done, And refuge sought with Kuśik’s son.”

  Thus having said, the sage addressed His sons, of men the holiest, And bade the prudent saints whate’er Was needed for the rite prepare. The pupils he was wont to teach He summoned next, and spoke this speech: “Go bid Vaśishṭha’a sons appear, And all the saints be gathered here. And what they one and all reply When summoned by this mandate high, To me with faithful care report, Omit no word and none distort.”

  The pupils heard, and prompt obeyed, To every side their way they made. Then swift from every quarter sped The sages in the Vedas read. Back to that saint the envoys came, Whose glory shone like burning flame, And told him in their faithful speech The answer that they bore from each: “Submissive to thy word, O Seer, The holy men are gathering here. By all was meet obedience shown: Mahodaya(238) refused alone. And now, O Chief of hermits, hear What answer, chilling us with fear, Vaśishṭha’s hundred sons returned, Thick-speaking as with rage they burned: “How will the Gods and saints partake The offerings that the prince would make, And he a vile and outcast thing, His ministrant one born a king? Can we, great Bráhmans, eat his food, And think to win beatitude, By Viśvámitra purified?” Thus sire and sons in scorn replied, And as these bitter words they said, Wild fury made their eyeballs red.

  Their answer when the arch-hermit heard, His tranquil eyes with rage were blurred; Great fury in his bosom woke, And thus unto the youths he spoke: “Me, blameless me they dare to blame, And disallow the righteous claim My fierce austerities have earned: To ashes be the sinners turned. Caught in the noose of Fate shall they To Yáma’s kingdom sink to-day. Seven hundred times shall they be born To wear the clothes the dead have worn. Dregs of the dregs, too vile to hate, The flesh of dogs their maws shall sate. In hideous form, in loathsome weed, A sad existence each shall lead. Mahodaya too, the fool who fain My stainless life would try to stain, Stained in the world with long disgrace Shall sink into a fowler’s place. Rejoicing guiltless blood to spill, No pity through his breast shall thrill. Cursed by my wrath for many a day, His wretched life for sin shall pay.”

  Thus, girt with hermit, saint, and priest, Great Viśvámitra spoke—and ceased.




Canto LX. Trisanku’s Ascension.


So with ascetic might, in ire, He smote the children and the sire. Then Viśvámitra, far-renowned, Addressed the saints who gathered round: “See by my side Triśanku stand, Ikshváku’s son, of liberal hand. Most virtuous and gentle, he Seeks refuge in his woe with me. Now, holy men, with me unite, And order so his purposed rite That in the body he may rise And win a mansion in the skies.”

  They heard his speech with ready ear And, every bosom filled with fear Of Viśvámitra, wise and great, Spoke each to each in brief debate: “The breast of Kuśik’s son, we know, With furious wrath is quick to glow. Whate’er the words he wills to say, We must, be very sure, obey. Fierce is our lord as fire, and straight May curse us all infuriate. So let us in these rites engage, As ordered by the holy sage. And with our best endeavour strive That King Ikshváku’s son, alive, In body to the skies may go By his great might who wills it so.”

  Then was the rite begun with care: All requisites and means were there: And glorious Viśvámitra lent His willing aid as president. And all the sacred rites were done By rule and use, omitting none. By chaplain-priest, the hymns who knew, In decent form and order due. Some time in sacrifice had past, And Viśvámitra made, at last, The solemn offering with the prayer That all the Gods might come and share. But the Immortals, one and all, Refused to hear the hermit’s call.

  Then red with rage his eyeballs blazed: The sacred ladle high he raised, And cried to King Ikshváku’s son: “Behold my power, by penance won: Now by the might my merits lend, Ikshváku’s child, to heaven ascend. In living frame the skies attain, Which mortals thus can scarcely gain. My vows austere, so long endured, Have, as I ween, some fruit assured. Upon its virtue, King, rely, And in thy body reach the sky.”

  His speech had scarcely reached its close, When, as he stood, the sovereign rose, And mounted swiftly to the skies Before the wondering hermits’ eyes.

  But Indra, when he saw the king His blissful regions entering, With all the army of the Blest Thus cried unto the unbidden guest: “With thy best speed, Triśanku, flee: Here is no home prepared for thee. By thy great master’s curse brought low, Go, falling headlong, earthward go.”

  Thus by the Lord of Gods addressed, Triśanku fell from fancied rest, And screaming in his swift descent, “O, save me, Hermit!” down he went. And Viśvámitra heard his cry, And marked him falling from the sky, And giving all his passion sway, Cried out in fury, “Stay, O stay!” By penance-power and holy lore, Like Him who framed the worlds of yore, Seven other saints he fixed on high To star with light the southern sky. Girt with his sages forth he went, And southward in the firmament New wreathed stars prepared to set In many a sparkling coronet. He threatened, blind with rage and hate, Another Indra to create, Or, from his throne the ruler hurled, All Indraless to leave the world. Yea, borne away by passion’s storm, The sage began new Gods to form. But then each Titan, God, and saint, Confused with terror, sick and faint, To high souled Viśvámitra hied, And with soft words to soothe him tried: “Lord of high destiny, this king, To whom his master’s curses cling, No heavenly home deserves to gain, Unpurified from curse and stain.”

  The son of Kuśik, undeterred, The pleading of the Immortals heard, And thus in haughty words expressed The changeless purpose of his breast: “Content ye, Gods: I soothly sware Triśanku to the skies to bear Clothed in his body, nor can I My promise cancel or deny. Embodied let the king ascend To life in heaven that ne’er shall end. And let these new-made stars of mine Firm and secure for ever shine. Let these, my work, remain secure Long as the earth and heaven endure. This, all ye Gods, I crave: do you Allow the boon for which I sue.” Then all the Gods their answer made: “So be it, Saint, as thou hast prayed. Beyond the sun’s diurnal way Thy countless stars in heaven shall stay: And ’mid them hung, as one divine, Head downward shall Triśanku shine; And all thy stars shall ever fling Their rays attendant on the king.”(239)

  The mighty saint, with glory crowned, With all the sages compassed round, Praised by the Gods, gave full assent, And Gods and sages homeward went.




Canto LXI. Sunahsepha.


Then Viśvámitra, when the Blest Had sought their homes of heavenly rest, Thus, mighty Prince, his counsel laid Before the dwellers of the shade: “The southern land where now we are Offers this check our rites to bar:(240) To other regions let us speed, And ply our tasks from trouble freed. Now turn we to the distant west. To Pushkar’s(241) wood where hermits rest, And there to rites austere apply, For not a grove with that can vie.”

  The saint, in glory’s light arrayed, In Pushkar’s wood his dwelling made, And living there on roots and fruit Did penance stern and resolute.

  The king who filled Ayodhyá’s throne, By Ambarísha’s name far known, At that same time, it chanced, began A sacrificial rite to plan. But Indra took by force away The charger that the king would slay. The victim lost, the Bráhman sped To Ambarísha’s side, and said: “Gone is the steed, O King, and this Is due to thee, in care remiss. Such heedless faults will kings destroy Who fail to guard what they enjoy. The flaw is desperate: we need The charger, or a man to bleed. Quick! bring a man if not the horse, That so the rite may have its course.”

  The glory of Ikshváku’s line Made offer of a thousand kine, And sought to buy at lordly price A victim for the sacrifice. To many a distant land he drove, To many a people, town, and grove, And holy shades where hermits rest, Pursuing still his eager quest. At length on Bhrigu’s sacred height The saint Richíka met his sight Sitting beneath the holy boughs. His children near him, and his spouse.

  The mighty lord drew near, assayed To win his grace, and reverence paid; And then the sainted king addressed The Bráhman saint with this request: “Bought with a hundred thousand kine, Give me, O Sage, a son of thine To be a victim in the rite, And thanks the favour shall requite. For I have roamed all countries round, Nor sacrificial victim found. Then, gentle Hermit, deign to spare One child amid the number there.”

  Then to the monarch’s speech replied The hermit, penance-glorified: “For countless kine, for hills of gold, Mine eldest son shall ne’er be sold.” But, when she heard the saint’s reply, The children’s mother, standing nigh, Words such as these in answer said To Ambarísha, monarch dread: “My lord, the saint, has spoken well: His eldest child he will not sell. And know, great Monarch, that above The rest my youngest born I love. ’Tis ever thus: the father’s joy Is centred in his eldest boy. The mother loves her darling best Whom last she rocked upon her breast: My youngest I will ne’er forsake.”

  As thus the sire and mother spake, Young Śunahśepha, of the three The midmost, cried unurged and free: “My sire withholds his eldest son, My mother keeps her youngest one: Then take me with thee, King: I ween The son is sold who comes between.” The king with joy his home resought, And took the prize his kine had bought. He bade the youth his car ascend, And hastened back the rites to end.(242)




Canto LXII. Ambarísha’s Sacrifice.


As thus the king that youth conveyed, His weary steeds at length he stayed At height of noon their rest to take Upon the bank of Pushkar’s lake. There while the king enjoyed repose The captive Śunahśepha rose, And hasting to the water’s side His uncle Viśvámitra spied, With many a hermit ’neath the trees Engaged in stern austerities.

  Distracted with the toil and thirst, With woeful mien, away he burst, Swift to the hermit’s breast he flew, And weeping thus began to sue: “No sire have I, no mother dear, No kith or kin my heart to cheer: As justice bids, O Hermit, deign To save me from the threatened pain. O thou to whom the wretched flee, And find a saviour, Saint, in thee, Now let the king obtain his will, And me my length of days fulfil, That rites austere I too may share, May rise to heaven and rest me there. With tender soul and gentle brow Be guardian of the orphan thou, And as a father pities, so Preserve me from my fear and woe.”

  When Viśvámitra, glorious saint, Had heard the boy’s heart-rending plaint. He soothed his grief, his tears he dried, Then called his sons to him, and cried: “The time is come for you to show The duty and the aid bestow For which, regarding future life, A man gives children to his wife. This hermit’s son, whom here you see A suppliant, refuge seeks with me. O sons, the friendless youth befriend, And, pleasing me, his life defend. For holy works you all have wrought, True to the virtuous life I taught. Go, and as victims doomed to bleed, Die, and Lord Agni’s hunger feed. So shall the rite completed end, This orphan gain a saving friend, Due offerings to the Gods be paid, And your own father’s voice obeyed.”

  Then Madhushyand and all the rest Answered their sire with scorn and jest: “What! aid to others’ sons afford, And leave thine own to die, my lord! To us it seems a horrid deed, As ’twere on one’s own flesh to feed.”

  The hermit heard his sons’ reply, And burning rage inflamed his eye. Then forth his words of fury burst: “Audacious speech, by virtue cursed! It lifts on end each shuddering hair— My charge to scorn! my wrath to dare! You, like Vaśishṭha’s evil brood, Shall make the flesh of dogs your food A thousand years in many a birth, And punished thus shall dwell on earth.”

  Thus on his sons his curse he laid. Then calmed again that youth dismayed, And blessed him with his saving aid: “When in the sacred fetters bound, And with a purple garland crowned, At Vishṇu’s post thou standest tied, With lauds be Agni glorified. And these two hymns of holy praise Forget not, Hermit’s son, to raise In the king’s rite, and thou shalt be Lord of thy wish, preserved, and free.”

  He learnt the hymns with mind intent, And from the hermit’s presence went. To Ambarísha thus he spake: “Let us our onward journey take. Haste to thy home, O King, nor stay The lustral rites with slow delay.”

  The boy’s address the monarch cheered, And soon the sacred ground he neared. The convocation’s high decree Declared the youth from blemish free; Clothed in red raiment he was tied A victim at the pillar’s side. There bound, the Fire-God’s hymn he raised, And Indra and Upendra praised. Thousand-eyed Vishṇu, pleased to hear The mystic laud, inclined his ear, And won by worship, swift to save, Long life to Śunahśepha gave. The king in bounteous measure gained The fruit of sacrifice ordained, By grace of Him who rules the skies, Lord Indra of the thousand eyes.

  And Viśvámitra evermore. Pursued his task on Pushkar’s shore Until a thousand years had past In fierce austerity and fast.




Canto LXIII. Menaká.


A thousand years had thus flown by When all the Gods within the sky, Eager that he the fruit might gain Of fervent rite and holy pain, Approached the great ascetic, now Bathed after toil and ended vow. Then Brahmá speaking for the rest With sweetest words the sage addressed: “Hail, Saint! This high and holy name Thy rites have won, thy merits claim.”

  Thus spoke the Lord whom Gods revere, And sought again his heavenly sphere. But Viśvámitra, more intent, His mind to sterner penance bent.   So many a season rolled away, When Menaká, fair nymph, one day Came down from Paradise to lave Her perfect limbs in Pushkar’s wave, The glorious son of Kuśik saw That peerless shape without a flaw Flash through the flood’s translucent shroud Like lightning gleaming through a cloud. He saw her in that lone retreat, Most beautiful from head to feet, And by Kandarpa’s(243) might subdued He thus addressed her as he viewed: “Welcome, sweet nymph! O deign, I pray, In these calm shades awhile to stay. To me some gracious favour show, For love has set my breast aglow.”

  He spoke. The fairest of the fair Made for awhile her dwelling there, While day by day the wild delight Stayed vow austere and fervent rite There as the winsome charmer wove Her spells around him in the grove, And bound him in a golden chain, Five sweet years fled, and five again. Then Viśvámitra woke to shame, And, fraught with anguish, memory came For quick he knew, with anger fired, That all the Immortals had conspired To lap his careless soul in ease, And mar his long austerities. “Ten years have past, each day and night Unheeded in delusive flight. So long my fervent rites were stayed, While thus I lay by love betrayed.” As thus long sighs the hermit heaved, And, touched with deep repentance, grieved, He saw the fair one standing nigh With suppliant hands and trembling eye. With gentle words he bade her go, Then sought the northern hills of snow. With firm resolve he vowed to beat The might of love beneath his feet. Still northward to the distant side Of Kauśikí(244), the hermit hide, And gave his life to penance there With rites austere most hard to bear. A thousand years went by, and still He laboured on the northern hill With pains so terrible and drear That all the Gods were chilled with fear, And Gods and saints, for swift advice, Met in the halls of Paradise. “Let Kuśik’s son,” they counselled, “be A Mighty saint by just decree.” His ear to hear their counsel lent The Sire of worlds, omnipotent. To him enriched by rites severe He spoke in accents sweet to hear: “Hail, Mighty Saint! dear son, all hail! Thy fervour wins, thy toils prevail. Won by thy vows and zeal intense I give this high preëminence.” He to the General Sire replied, Not sad, nor wholly satisfied: “When thou, O Brahmá, shalt declare The title, great beyond compare, Of Bráhman saint my worthy meed, Hard earned by many a holy deed, Then may I deem in sooth I hold Each sense of body well controlled.” Then Brahmá cried, “Not yet, not yet: Toil on awhile O Anchoret!”

  Thus having said to heaven he went, The saint, upon his task intent, Began his labours to renew, Which sterner yet and fiercer grew. His arms upraised, without a rest, With but one foot the earth he pressed; The air his food, the hermit stood Still as a pillar hewn from wood. Around him in the summer days Five mighty fires combined to blaze. In floods of rain no veil was spread Save clouds, to canopy his head. In the dank dews both night and day Couched in the stream the hermit lay. Thus, till a thousand years had fled, He plied his task of penance dread. Then Vishṇu and the Gods with awe The labours of the hermit saw, And Śakra, in his troubled breast, Lord of the skies, his fear confessed. And brooded on a plan to spoil The merits of the hermit’s toil. Encompassed by his Gods of Storm He summoned Rambhá, fair of form, And spoke a speech for woe and weal, The saint to mar, the God to heal.




Canto LXIV. Rambhá.


“A great emprise, O lovely maid, To save the Gods, awaits thine aid: To bind the son of Kuśik sure, And take his soul with love’s sweet lure.” Thus order’d by the Thousand-eyed The suppliant nymph in fear replied: “O Lord of Gods, this mighty sage Is very fierce and swift to rage. I doubt not, he so dread and stern On me his scorching wrath will turn. Of this, my lord, am I afraid: Have mercy on a timid maid.” Her suppliant hands began to shake, When thus again Lord Indra spake: “O Rambhá, drive thy fears away, And as I bid do thou obey. In Koïl’s form, who takes the heart When trees in spring to blossom start, I, with Kandarpa for my friend, Close to thy side mine aid will lend. Do thou thy beauteous splendour arm With every grace and winsome charm, And from his awful rites seduce This Kuśik’s son, the stern recluse.”

  Lord Indra ceased. The nymph obeyed: In all her loveliest charms arrayed, With winning ways and witching smile She sought the hermit to beguile. The sweet note of that tuneful bird The saint with ravished bosom heard, And on his heart a rapture passed As on the nymph a look he cast. But when he heard the bird prolong His sweet incomparable song, And saw the nymph with winning smile, The hermit’s heart perceived the wile. And straight he knew the Thousand-eyed A plot against his peace had tried. Then Kuśik’s son indignant laid His curse upon the heavenly maid: “Because thou wouldst my soul engage Who fight to conquer love and rage, Stand, till ten thousand years have flown, Ill-fated maid, transformed to stone. A Bráhman then, in glory strong, Mighty through penance stern and long, Shall free thee from thine altered shape; Thou from my curse shalt then escape.” But when the saint had cursed her so, His breast was burnt with fires of woe, Grieved that long effort to restrain His mighty wrath was all in vain. Cursed by the angry sage’s power, She stood in stone that selfsame hour. Kandarpa heard the words he said, And quickly from his presence fled. His fall beneath his passion’s sway Had reft the hermit’s meed away. Unconquered yet his secret foes, The humbled saint refused repose: “No more shall rage my bosom till, Sealed be my lips, my tongue be still. My very breath henceforth I hold Until a thousand years are told: Victorious o’er each erring sense, I’ll dry my frame with abstinence, Until by penance duly done A Bráhman’s rank be bought and won. For countless years, as still as death, I taste no food, I draw no breath, And as I toil my frame shall stand Unharmed by time’s destroying hand.”




Canto LXV. Visvámitra’s Triumph


Then from Himálaya’s heights of snow, The glorious saint prepared to go, And dwelling in the distant east His penance and his toil increased. A thousand years his lips he held Closed by a vow unparalleled, And other marvels passing thought, Unrivalled in the world, he wrought. In all the thousand years his frame Dry as a log of wood became. By many a cross and check beset, Rage had not stormed his bosom yet. With iron will that naught could bend He plied his labour till the end. So when the weary years were o’er, Freed from his vow so stern and sore, The hermit, all his penance sped, Sate down to eat his meal of bread. Then Indra, clad in Bráhman guise, Asked him for food with hungry eyes. The mighty saint, with steadfast soul, To the false Bráhman gave the whole, And when no scrap for him remained, Fasting and faint, from speech refrained. His silent vow he would not break: No breath he heaved, no word he spake, Then as he checked his breath, behold! Around his brow thick smoke-clouds rolled And the three worlds, as if o’erspread With ravening flames, were filled with dread. Then God and saint and bard, convened, And Nága lord, and snake, and fiend, Thus to the General Father cried, Distracted, sad, and terrified: “Against the hermit, sore assailed, Lure, scathe, and scorn have naught availed, Proof against rage and treacherous art He keeps his vow with constant heart. Now if his toils assist him naught To gain the boon his soul has sought, He through the worlds will ruin send That fixt and moving things shall end, The regions now are dark with doom, No friendly ray relieves the gloom. Each ocean foams with maddened tide, The shrinking hills in fear subside. Trembles the earth with feverous throe The wind in fitful tempest blows. No cure we see with troubled eyes: And atheist brood on earth may rise. The triple world is wild with care, Or spiritless in dull despair. Before that saint the sun is dim, His blessed light eclipsed by him. Now ere the saint resolve to bring Destruction on each living thing, Let us appease, while yet we may, Him bright as fire, like fire to slay. Yea, as the fiery flood of Fate Lays all creation desolate, He o’er the conquered Gods may reign: O, grant him what he longs to gain.”

Then all the Blest, by Brahmá led, Approached the saint and sweetly said: “Hail, Bráhman Saint! for such thy place: Thy vows austere have won our grace. A Bráhman’s rank thy penance stern And ceaseless labour richly earn. I with the Gods of Storm decree Long life, O Bráhman Saint, to thee. May peace and joy thy soul possess: Go where thou wilt in happiness.”

  Thus by the General Sire addressed, Joy and high triumph filled his breast. His head in adoration bowed, Thus spoke he to the Immortal crowd: “If I, ye Gods, have gained at last Both length of days and Bráhman caste, Grant that the high mysterious name, And holy Vedas, own my claim, And that the formula to bless The sacrifice, its lord confess. And let Vaśishṭha, who excels In Warriors’ art and mystic spells, In love of God without a peer, Confirm the boon you promise here.”

  With Brahmá’s son Vaśishṭha, best Of those who pray with voice repressed, The Gods by earnest prayer prevailed, And thus his new-made friend he hailed: “Thy title now is sure and good To rights of saintly Bráhmanhood.” Thus spake the sage. The Gods, content, Back to their heavenly mansions went. And Viśvámitra, pious-souled, Among the Bráhman saints enrolled, On reverend Vaśishṭha pressed The honours due to holy guest. Successful in his high pursuit, The sage, in penance resolute, Walked in his pilgrim wanderings o’er The whole broad land from shore to shore. ’Twas thus the saint, O Raghu’s son, His rank among the Bráhmans won. Best of all hermits, Prince, is he; In him incarnate Penance see. Friend of the right, who shrinks from ill, Heroic powers attend him still.”

  The Bráhman, versed in ancient lore, Thus closed his tale, and said no more, To Śatánanda Kuśik’s son Cried in delight, Well done! well done! Then Janak, at the tale amazed, Spoke thus with suppliant hands upraised: “High fate is mine, O Sage, I deem, And thanks I owe for bliss supreme, That thou and Raghu’s children too Have come my sacrifice to view. To look on thee with blessed eyes Exalts my soul and purifies. Yea, thus to see thee face to face Enriches me with store of grace. Thy holy labours wrought of old, And mighty penance, fully told, Ráma and I with great delight Have heard, O glorious Anchorite. Unrivalled thine ascetic deeds: Thy might, O Saint, all might exceeds. No thought may scan, no limit bound The virtues that in thee are found. The story of thy wondrous fate My thirsty ears can never sate. The hour of evening rites is near: The sun declines in swift career. At early dawn, O Hermit, deign To let me see thy face again. Best of ascetics, part in bliss: Do thou thy servant now dismiss.”

  The saint approved, and glad and kind Dismissed the king with joyful mind Around the sage King Janak went With priests and kinsmen reverent. Then Viśvámitra, honoured so, By those high-minded, rose to go, And with the princes took his way To seek the lodging where they lay.




Canto LXVI. Janak’s Speech.


With cloudless lustre rose the sun; The king, his morning worship done, Ordered his heralds to invite The princes and the anchorite. With honour, as the laws decree, The monarch entertained the three. Then to the youths and saintly man Videha’s lord this speech began: “O blameless Saint, most welcome thou! If I may please thee tell me how. Speak, mighty lord, whom all revere, ’Tis thine to order, mine to hear.”

  Thus he on mighty thoughts intent; Then thus the sage most eloquent: “King Daśaratha’s sons, this pair Of warriors famous everywhere, Are come that best of bows to see That lies a treasure stored by thee. This, mighty Janak, deign to show, That they may look upon the bow, And then, contented, homeward go.” Then royal Janak spoke in turn: “O best of Saints, the story learn Why this famed bow, a noble prize, A treasure in my palace lies. A monarch, Devarát by name, Who sixth from ancient Nimi came, Held it as ruler of the land, A pledge in his successive hand. This bow the mighty Rudra bore At Daksha’s(245) sacrifice of yore, When carnage of the Immortals stained The rite that Daksha had ordained. Then as the Gods sore wounded fled, Victorious Rudra, mocking, said: “Because, O Gods, ye gave me naught When I my rightful portion sought, Your dearest parts I will not spare, But with my bow your frames will tear.”

  The Sons of Heaven, in wild alarm, Soft flatteries tried his rage to charm. Then Bhava, Lord whom Gods adore, Grew kind and friendly as before, And every torn and mangled limb Was safe and sound restored by him. Thenceforth this bow, the gem of bows, That freed the God of Gods from foes, Stored by our great forefathers lay A treasure and a pride for aye. Once, as it chanced, I ploughed the ground, When sudden, ’neath the share was found An infant springing from the earth, Named Sítá from her secret birth.(246) In strength and grace the maiden grew, My cherished daughter, fair to view. I vowed her, of no mortal birth, Meet prize for noblest hero’s worth. In strength and grace the maiden grew, And many a monarch came to woo. To all the princely suitors I Gave, mighty Saint, the same reply: “I give not thus my daughter, she Prize of heroic worth shall be.(247) To Míthilá the suitors pressed Their power and might to manifest. To all who came with hearts aglow I offered Śiva’s wondrous bow. Not one of all the royal band Could raise or take the bow in hand. The suitors’ puny might I spurned, And back the feeble princes turned. Enraged thereat, the warriors met, With force combined my town beset. Stung to the heart with scorn and shame, With war and threats they madly came, Besieged my peaceful walls, and long To Míthilá did grievous wrong. There, wasting all, a year they lay, And brought my treasures to decay, Filling my soul, O Hermit chief, With bitter woe and hopeless grief. At last by long-wrought penance I Won favour with the Gods on high, Who with my labours well content A four-fold host to aid me sent. Then swift the baffled heroes fled To all the winds discomfited— Wrong-doers, with their lords and host, And all their valour’s idle boast. This heavenly bow, exceeding bright, These youths shall see, O Anchorite. Then if young Ráma’s hand can string The bow that baffled lord and king, To him I give, as I have sworn, My Sítá, not of woman born.”




Canto LXVII. The Breaking Of The Bow.


Then spoke again the great recluse: “This mighty bow, O King, produce.” King Janak, at the saint’s request, This order to his train addressed: “Let the great bow be hither borne, Which flowery wreaths and scents adorn.” Soon as the monarch’s words were said, His servants to the city sped, Five thousand youths in number, all Of manly strength and stature tall, The ponderous eight-wheeled chest that held The heavenly bow, with toil propelled. At length they brought that iron chest, And thus the godlike king addressed: “This best of bows, O lord, we bring, Respected by each chief and king, And place it for these youths to see, If, Sovereign, such thy pleasure be.”

  With suppliant palm to palm applied King Janak to the strangers cried: “This gem of bows, O Bráhman Sage, Our race has prized from age to age, Too strong for those who yet have reigned, Though great in might each nerve they strained. Titan and fiend its strength defies, God, spirit, minstrel of the skies. And bard above and snake below Are baffled by this glorious bow. Then how may human prowess hope With such a bow as this to cope? What man with valour’s choicest gift This bow can draw, or string, or lift? Yet let the princes, holy Seer, Behold it: it is present here.”

  Then spoke the hermit pious-souled: “Ráma, dear son, the bow behold.” Then Ráma at his word unclosed The chest wherein its might reposed, Thus crying, as he viewed it: “Lo! I lay mine hand upon the bow: May happy luck my hope attend Its heavenly strength to lift or bend.” “Good luck be thine,” the hermit cried: “Assay the task!” the king replied. Then Raghu’s son, as if in sport, Before the thousands of the court, The weapon by the middle raised That all the crowd in wonder gazed. With steady arm the string he drew Till burst the mighty bow in two. As snapped the bow, an awful clang, Loud as the shriek of tempests, rang. The earth, affrighted, shook amain As when a hill is rent in twain. Then, senseless at the fearful sound, The people fell upon the ground: None save the king, the princely pair, And the great saint, the shock could bear.

  When woke to sense the stricken train, And Janak’s soul was calm again, With suppliant hands and reverent head, These words, most eloquent, he said: “O Saint, Prince Ráma stands alone: His peerless might he well has shown. A marvel has the hero wrought Beyond belief, surpassing thought. My child, to royal Ráma wed, New glory on our line will shed: And true my promise will remain That hero’s worth the bride should gain. Dearer to me than light and life, My Sítá shall be Ráma’s wife. If thou, O Bráhman, leave concede, My counsellors, with eager speed, Borne in their flying cars, to fair Ayodhyá’s town the news shall bear, With courteous message to entreat The king to grace my royal seat. This to the monarch shall they tell, The bride is his who won her well: And his two sons are resting here Protected by the holy seer. So, at his pleasure, let them lead The sovereign to my town with speed.”

  The hermit to his prayer inclined And Janak, lord of virtuous mind, With charges, to Ayodhyá sent His ministers: and forth they went.




Canto LXVIII. The Envoys’ Speech.


Three nights upon the road they passed To rest the steeds that bore them fast, And reached Ayodhyá’s town at last. Then straight at Daśaratha’s call They stood within the royal hall, Where, like a God, inspiring awe, The venerable king they saw. With suppliant palm to palm applied, And all their terror laid aside, They spoke to him upon the throne With modest words, in gentle tone: “Janak, Videha’s king, O Sire, Has sent us hither to inquire The health of thee his friend most dear, Of all thy priests and every peer. Next Kuśik’s son consenting, thus King Janak speaks, dread liege, by us: “I made a promise and decree That valour’s prize my child should be. Kings, worthless found in worth’s assay, With mien dejected turned away. Thy sons, by Viśvámitra led, Unurged, my city visited, And peerless in their might have gained My daughter, as my vow ordained. Full in a vast assembly’s view Thy hero Ráma broke in two The gem of bows, of monstrous size, That came a treasure from the skies. Ordained the prize of hero’s might, Sítá my child is his by right. Fain would I keep my promise made, If thou, O King, approve and aid. Come to my town thy son to see: Bring holy guide and priest with thee. O lord of kings, my suit allow, And let me keep my promised vow. So joying for thy children’s sake Their triumph too shalt thou partake, With Viśvámitra’s high consent.” Such words with friendship eloquent Spoke Janak, fair Videha’s king, By Śatánanda’s counselling.”

  The envoys thus the king addressed, And mighty joy his heart possessed. To Vámadeva quick he cried, Vaśishṭha, and his lords beside: “Lakshmaṇ, and he, my princely boy Who fills Kauśalyá’s soul with joy, By Viśvámitra guarded well Among the good Videhans dwell. Their ruler Janak, prompt to own The peerless might my child has shown, To him would knit in holy ties His daughter, valour’s lovely prize. If Janak’s plan seem good to you, Come, speed we to his city too, Nor let occasion idly by.”

  He ceased. There came a glad reply From priest and mighty saint and all The councillors who thronged the hall. Then cried the king with joyous heart: “To-morrow let us all depart.”

  That night the envoys entertained With honour and all care remained.




Canto LXIX. Dasaratha’s Visit.


Soon as the shades of night had fled, Thus to the wise Sumantra said The happy king, while priest and peer, Each in his place, were standing near: “Let all my treasurers to-day, Set foremost in the long array, With gold and precious gems supplied In bounteous store, together ride. And send you out a mighty force, Foot, chariot, elephant, and horse. Besides, let many a car of state, And noblest steeds, my will await. Vaśishṭha, Vámadeva sage, And Márkaṇdeya’s reverend age, Jáváli, Kaśyap’s godlike seed, And wise Kátyáyana, shall lead. Thy care, Sumantra, let it be To yoke a chariot now for me, That so we part without delay: These envoys hasten me away.”

  So fared he forth. That host, with speed, Quadruple, as the king decreed, With priests to head the bright array, Followed the monarch on his way. Four days they travelled on the road, And eve Videha’s kingdom showed. Janak had left his royal seat The venerable king to greet, And, noblest, with these words addressed That noblest lord, his happy guest: “Hail, best of kings: a blessed fate Has led thee, Monarch, to my state. Thy sons, supreme in high emprise, Will gladden now their father’s eyes. And high my fate, that hither leads Vaśishṭha, bright with holy deeds, Girt with these sages far-renowned, Like Indra with the Gods around. Joy! joy! for vanquished are my foes: Joy! for my house in glory grows, With Raghu’s noblest sons allied, Supreme in strength and valour’s pride. To-morrow with its early light Will shine on my completed rite. Then, sanctioned by the saints and thee, The marriage of thy Ráma see.”

  Then Daśaratha, best of those Whose speech in graceful order flows, With gathered saints on every side, Thus to the lord of earth replied: “A truth is this I long have known, A favour is the giver’s own. What thou shalt bid, O good and true, We, as our power permits, will do.”

  That answer of the truthful lord, With virtuous worth and honour stored, Janak, Videha’s noble king, Heard gladly, greatly marvelling. With bosoms filled with pleasure met Long-parted saint and anchoret, And linked in friendship’s tie they spent The peaceful night in great content.

  Ráma and Lakshmaṇ thither sped, By sainted Viśvámitra led, And bent in filial love to greet Their father, and embraced his feet. The aged king, rejoiced to hear And see again his children dear, Honoured by Janak’s thoughtful care, With great enjoyment rested there. King Janak, with attentive heed, Consulted first his daughters’ need, And ordered all to speed the rite; Then rested also for the night.




Canto LXX. The Maidens Sought.


Then with the morn’s returning sun. King Janak, when his rites were done, Skilled all the charms of speech to know, Spoke to wise Śatánanda so: “My brother, lord of glorious fame, My younger, Kuśadhwaj by name, Whose virtuous life has won renown, Has settled in a lovely town, Sánkáśyá, decked with grace divine, Whose glories bright as Pushpak’s shine, While Ikshumatí rolls her wave Her lofty rampart’s foot to lave. Him, holy priest, I long to see: The guardian of my rite is he: That my dear brother may not miss A share of mine expected bliss.”

  Thus in the presence of the priest The royal Janak spoke, and ceased. Then came his henchmen, prompt and brave, To whom his charge the monarch gave. Soon as they heard his will, in haste With fleetest steeds away they raced, To lead with them that lord of kings, As Indra’s call Lord Vishṇu brings. Sánkáśyá’s walls they duly gained, And audience of the king obtained. To him they told the news they brought Of marvels past and Janak’s thought. Soon as the king the story knew From those good envoys swift and true, To Janak’s wish he gave assent, And swift to Míthilá he went. He paid to Janak reverence due, And holy Śatánanda too, Then sate him on a glorious seat For kings or Gods celestial meet. Soon as the brothers, noble pair Peerless in might, were seated there, They gave the wise Sudáman, best Of councillors, their high behest: “Go, noble councillor,” they cried, “And hither to our presence guide Ikshváku’s son, Ayodhyá’s lord, Invincible by foeman’s sword, With both his sons, each holy seer, And every minister and peer.” Sudáman to the palace flew, And saw the mighty king who threw Splendour on Raghu’s splendid race, Then bowed his head with seemly grace: “O King, whose hand Ayodhyá sways, My lord, whom Míthilá obeys, Yearns with desire, if thou agree, Thee with thy guide and priest to see.” Soon as the councillor had ceased, The king, with saint and peer and priest, Sought, speeding through the palace gate, The hall where Janak held his state. There, with his nobles round him spread, Thus to Videha’s lord be said: “Thou knowest, King, whose aid divine Protects Ikshváku’s royal line. In every need, whate’er befall, The saint Vaśishṭha speaks for all. If Viśvámitra so allow, And all the saints around me now, The sage will speak, at my desire, As order and the truth require.”

  Soon as the king his lips had stilled, Up rose Vaśishṭha, speaker skilled. And to Videha’s lord began In flowing words that holy man: “From viewless Nature Brahmá rose, No change, no end, no waste he knows. A son had he Maríchi styled, And Kaśyap was Maríchi’s child. From him Vivasvat sprang: from him Manu whose fame shall ne’er be dim. Manu, who life to mortals gave, Begot Ikshváku good and brave. First of Ayodhyá’s kings was he, Pride of her famous dynasty. From him the glorious Kukshi sprang, Whose fame through all the regions rang. Rival of Kukshi’s ancient fame, His heir, the great Vikukshi, came, His son was Váṇa, lord of might; His Anaraṇya, strong to fight. His son was Prithu, glorious name; From him the good Triśanku came. He left a son renowned afar, Known by the name of Dhundhumár. His son, who drove the mighty car, Was Yuvanáśva, feared in war. He passed away. Him followed then His son Mándhátá, king of men. His son was blest in high emprise, Susandhi, fortunate and wise. Two noble sons had he, to wit Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. Bharat was Dhruvasandhi’s son, And glorious fame that monarch won. The warrior Asit he begot. Asit had warfare, fierce and hot, With rival kings in many a spot, Haihayas, Tálajanghas styled, And Śaśivindus, strong and wild. Long time he strove, but forced to yield Fled from his kingdom and the field. With his two wives away he fled Where high Himálaya lifts his head, And, all his wealth and glory past, He paid the dues of Fate at last. The wives he left had both conceived— So is the ancient tale believed— One, of her rival’s hopes afraid Fell poison in her viands laid. It chanced that Chyavan, Bhrigu’s child, Had wandered to that pathless wild, And there Himálaya’s lovely height Detained him with a strange delight. There came the other widowed queen, With lotus eyes and beauteous mien, Longing a noble son to bear, And wooed the saint with earnest prayer. When thus Kálindi,(248) fairest dame, With reverent supplication came, To her the holy sage replied: “Born with the poison from thy side, O happy Queen, shall spring ere long An infant fortunate and strong. Then weep no more, and check thy sighs, Sweet lady of the lotus eyes.” The queen, who loved her perished lord, For meet reply, the saint adored, And, of her husband long bereaved, She bore a son by him conceived. Because her rival mixed the bane To render her conception vain, And fruit unripened to destroy, Sagar(249) she called her darling boy. To Sagar Asamanj was heir: Bright Anśumán his consort bare. Anśumán’s son, Dilípa famed, Begot a son Bhagírath named. From him the great Kakutstha rose: From him came Raghu, feared by foes, Of him sprang Purushádak bold, Fierce hero of gigantic mould: Kalmáshapáda’s name he bore, Because his feet were spotted o’er.(250) From him came Śankaṇ, and from him Sudarśan, fair in face and limb. From beautiful Sudarśan came Prince Agnivarṇa, bright as flame. His son was Śíghraga, for speed Unmatched; and Maru was his seed. Praśuśruka was Maru’s child; His son was Ambarísha styled. Nahush was Ambarísha’s heir, The mighty lord of regions fair: Nahush begot Yayáti: he, Nábhág of happy destiny. Son of Nábhág was Aja: his, The glorious Daśaratha is, Whose noble children boast to be Ráma and Lakshmaṇ, whom we see. Thus do those kings of purest race Their lineage from Ikshváku trace: Their hero lives the right maintained, Their lips with falsehood ne’er were stained. In Ráma’s and in Lakshmaṇ’s name Thy daughters as their wives I claim, So shall in equal bands be tied Each peerless youth with peerless bride.”




Canto LXXI. Janak’s Pedigree.


Then to the saint supremely wise King Janak spoke in suppliant guise: “Deign, Hermit, with attentive ear, Mv race’s origin to hear. When kings a daughter’s hand bestow, ’Tis right their line and fame to show. There was a king whose deeds and worth Spread wide his name through heaven and earth, Nimi, most virtuous e’en from youth, The best of all who love the truth. His son and heir was Mithi, and His Janak, first who ruled this land. He left a son Udávasu, Blest with all virtues, good and true. His son was Nandivardhan, dear For pious heart and worth sincere. His son Suketu, hero brave, To Devarát, existence gave. King Devarát, a royal sage, For virtue, glory of the age, Begot Vrihadratha; and he Begot, his worthy heir to be, The splendid hero Mahábír Who long in glory governed here. His son was Sudhriti, a youth Firm in his purpose, brave in sooth, His son was Dhrisṭaketu, blest With pious will and holy breast. The fame of royal saint he won: Haryaśva was his princely son. Haryaśva’s son was Maru, who Begot Pratíndhak, wise and true. Next Kírtiratha held the throne, His son, for gentle virtues known. Then followed Devamidha, then Vibudh, Mahándhrak, kings of men. Mahándhrak’s son, of boundless might, Was Kírtirát, who loved the right. He passed away, a sainted king, And Maháromá following To Swarṇaromá left the state. Then Hraśvaromá, good and great, Succeeded, and to him a pair Of sons his royal consort bare, Elder of these I boast to be: Brave Kuśadhwaj is next to me.(251) Me then, the elder of the twain, My sire anointed here to reign. He bade me tend my brother well, Then to the forest went to dwell. He sought the heavens, and I sustained The burden as by law ordained, And noble Kuśadhwaj, the peer Of Gods, I ever held most dear. Then came Sánkáśyá’s mighty lord, Sudhanvá, threatening siege and sword, And bade me swift on him bestow Śiva’s incomparable bow, And Sítá of the lotus eyes: But I refused each peerless prize. Then, host to host, we met the foes, And fierce the din of battle rose, Sudhanvá, foremost of his band, Fell smitten by my single hand. When thus Sánkáśyá’s lord was slain, I sanctified, as laws ordain, My brother in his stead to reign, Thus are we brothers, Saint most high The younger he, the elder I. Now, mighty Sage, my spirit joys To give these maidens to the boys. Let Sítá be to Ráma tied. And Urmilá be Lakshmaṇ’s bride. First give, O King, the gift of cows, As dowry of each royal spouse, Due offerings to the spirits pay, And solemnize the wedding-day. The moon tonight, O royal Sage, In Maghá’s(252) House takes harbourage; On the third night his rays benign In second Phálguni(253) will shine: Be that the day, with prosperous fate, The nuptial rites to celebrate.”




Canto LXXII. The Gift Of Kine.


When royal Janak’s words were done, Joined with Vaśishṭha Kuśik’s son, The mighty sage began his speech: “No mind may soar, no thought can reach The glories of Ikshváku’s line, Or, great Videha’s King, of thine: None in the whole wide world may vie With them in fame and honours high. Well matched, I ween, in holy bands, These peerless pairs will join their hands. But hear me as I speak once more; Thy brother, skilled in duty’s lore, Has at his home a royal pair Of daughters most divinely fair. I for the hands of these sweet two For Bharat and Śatrughna sue, Both princes of heroic mould, Wise, fair of form, and lofty-souled. All Daśaratha’s sons, I ween, Own each young grace of form and mien: Brave as the Gods are they, nor yield To the great Lords the worlds who shield. By these, good Prince of merits high, Ikshváku’s house with thine ally.”

  The suit the holy sage preferred, With willing ear the monarch heard: Vaśishṭha’s lips the counsel praised: Then spake the king with hands upraised: “Now blest indeed my race I deem, Which your high will, O Saints supreme, With Daśaratha’s house unites In bonds of love and marriage rites. So be it done. My nieces twain Let Bharat and Śatrughna gain, And the four youths the selfsame day Four maiden hands in theirs shall lay. No day so lucky may compare, For marriage—so the wise declare— With the last day of Phálguni Ruled by the genial deity.” Then with raised hands in reverence due To those arch-saints he spoke anew: “I am your pupil, ever true: To me high favour have ye shown; Come, sit ye on my royal throne, For Daśaratha rules these towers E’en as Ayodhyá now is ours. Do with your own whate’er ye choose: Your lordship here will none refuse.”

  He spoke, and to Videha’s king Thus Daśaratha, answering: “Boundless your virtues, lords, whose sway The realms of Mithilá obey. With honouring care you entertain. Both holy sage and royal train. Now to my house my steps I bend— May blessings still on you at end— Due offerings to the shades to pay.” Thus spoke the king, and turned away: To Janak first he bade adieu, Then followed fast those holy two. The monarch reached his palace where The rites were paid with solemn care. When the next sun began to shine He rose and made his gift of kine. A hundred thousand cows prepared For each young prince the Bráhmans shared. Each had her horns adorned with gold; And duly was the number told, Four hundred thousand perfect tale: Each brought a calf, each filled a pail. And when that glorious task was o’er, The monarch with his children four, Showed like the Lord of Life divine When the worlds’ guardians round him shine.




Canto LXXIII. The Nuptials.


On that same day that saw the king His gift of kine distributing, The lord of Kekaya’s son, by name Yudhájit, Bharat’s uncle, came, Asked of the monarch’s health, and then Addressed the reverend king of men: “The lord of Kekaya’s realm by me Sends greeting, noble King, to thee: Asks if the friends thy prayers would bless Uninterrupted health possess. Right anxious, mighty King, is he My sister’s princely boy to see. For this I sought Ayodhyá fair The message of my sire to bear. There learning, O my liege, that thou With sons and noble kinsmen now Wast resting here, I sought the place Longing to see my nephew’s face.” The king with kind observance cheered His friend by tender ties endeared, And every choicest honour pressed Upon his honourable guest.

  That night with all his children spent, At morn King Daśaratha went, Behind Vaśishṭha and the rest, To the fair ground for rites addressed. Then when the lucky hour was nigh Called Victory, of omen high, Came Ráma, after vow and prayer For nuptial bliss and fortune fair, With the three youths in bright attire, And stood beside his royal sire. To Janak then Vaśishṭha sped, And to Videha’s monarch said: “O King, Ayodhyá’s ruler now Has breathed the prayer and vowed the vow, And with his sons expecting stands The giver of the maidens’ hands. The giver and the taker both Must ratify a mutual oath. Perform the part for which we wait, And rites of marriage celebrate.”

  Skilled in the laws which Scriptures teach, He answered thus Vaśishṭha’s speech: “O Saint, what warder bars the gate? Whose bidding can the king await? In one’s own house what doubt is shown? This kingdom, Sage, is all thine own. E’en now the maidens may be found Within the sacrificial ground: Each vow is vowed and prayed each prayer, And they, like fire, are shining there. Here by the shrine my place I took Expecting thee with eager look, No bar the nuptial rites should stay: What cause have we for more delay?” When Janak’s speech the monarch heard, To sons and saints he gave the word, And set them in the holy ring, Then to Vaśishṭha spoke the king Of Mithilá: “O mighty Sage, Now let this task thy care engage, And lend thine aid and counsel wise The nuptial rites to solemnize.”

  The saint Vaśishṭha gave assent, And quickly to the task he went, With Viśvámitra, nothing loth, And Śatánanda aiding both. Then, as the rules prescribe, they made An altar in the midst, and laid Fresh wreaths of fragrant flowers thereon. The golden ladles round it shone; And many a vase, which branches hid Fixed in the perforated lid, And sprays, and cups, and censers there Stood filled with incense rich and rare; Shell-bowls, and spoons, and salvers dressed With gifts that greet the honoured guest; Piles of parched rice some dishes bore, Others with corn prepared ran o’er; And holy grass was duly spread In equal lengths, while prayers were said. Next chief of saints, Vaśishṭha came And laid the offering in the flame. Then by the hand King Janak drew His Sítá, beautiful to view, And placed her, bright in rich attire, Ráma to face, before the fire, Thus speaking to the royal boy Who filled Kauśalyá’s heart with joy: “Here Sítá stands, my daughter fair, The duties of thy life to share. Take from her father, take thy bride; Join hand to hand, and bliss betide! A faithful wife, most blest is she, And as thy shade will follow thee.”

  Thus as he spoke the monarch threw O’er her young limbs the holy dew, While Gods and saints were heard to swell The joyous cry, ’Tis well! ’Tis well! His daughter Sítá thus bestowed, O’er whom the sacred drops had flowed. King Janak’s heart with rapture glowed. Then to Prince Lakshmaṇ thus he cried: “Take Urmilá thine offered bride, And clasp her hand within thine own Ere yet the lucky hour be flown.” Then to Prince Bharat thus cried he; “Come, take the hand of Mándavi.” Then to Śatrughna: “In thy grasp The hand of Srutakírti clasp. Now, Raghu’s sons, may all of you Be gentle to your wives and true; Keep well the vows you make to-day, Nor let occasion slip away.”

  King Janak’s word the youths obeyed; The maidens’ hands in theirs they laid. Then with their brides the princes went With ordered steps and reverent Round both the fire and Janak, round The sages and the sacred ground.

  A flowery flood of lucid dyes In rain descended from the skies, While with celestial voices blent Sweet strains from many an instrument, And the nymphs danced in joyous throng Responsive to the minstrel’s song. Such signs of exultation they Saw on the princes’ wedding day. Still rang the heavenly music’s sound When Raghu’s sons thrice circled round The fire, each one with reverent head, And homeward then their brides they led. They to the sumptuous palace hied That Janak’s care had seen supplied. The monarch girt with saint and peer Still fondly gazing followed near.




Canto LXXIV. Ráma With The Axe.(254)


Soon as the night had reached its close The hermit Viśvámitra rose; To both the kings he bade adieu And to the northern hill withdrew. Ayodhyá’s lord of high renown Received farewell, and sought his town. Then as each daughter left her bower King Janak gave a splendid dower, Rugs, precious silks, a warrior force, Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse, Divine to see and well arrayed; And many a skilful tiring-maid, And many a young and trusty slave The father of the ladies gave. Silver and coral, gold and pearls He gave to his beloved girls. These precious gifts the king bestowed And sped his guest upon his road. The lord of Mithilá’s sweet town Rode to his court and lighted down. Ayodhyá’s monarch, glad and gay, Led by the seers pursued his way With his dear sons of lofty mind: The royal army marched behind. As on he fared the voice he heard Around of many a dismal bird, And every beast in wild affright Began to hurry to the right. The monarch to Vaśishṭha cried: “What strange misfortune will betide? Why do the beasts in terror fly, And birds of evil omen cry? What is it shakes my heart with dread? Why is my soul disquieted?”

  Soon as he heard, the mighty saint Thus answered Daśaratha’s plaint In sweetest tone: “Now, Monarch, mark, And learn from me the meaning dark. The voices of the birds of air Great peril to the host declare: The moving beasts the dread allay, So drive thy whelming fear away,”

  As he and Daśaratha spoke A tempest from the welkin broke, That shook the spacious earth amain And hurled high trees upon the plain. The sun grew dark with murky cloud, And o’er the skies was cast a shroud, While o’er the army, faint with dread, A veil of dust and ashes spread. King, princes, saints their sense retained, Fear-stupefied the rest remained. At length, their wits returning, all Beneath the gloom and ashy pall Saw Jamadagni’s son with dread, His long hair twisted round his head, Who, sprung from Bhrigu, loved to beat The proudest kings beneath his feet. Firm as Kailása’s hill he showed, Fierce as the fire of doom he glowed. His axe upon his shoulder lay, His bow was ready for the fray, With thirsty arrows wont to fly Like Lightnings from the angry sky. A long keen arrow forth he drew, Invincible like those which flew From Śiva’s ever-conquering bow And Tripura in death laid low.

  When his wild form, that struck with awe, Fearful as ravening flame, they saw, Vaśishṭha and the saints whose care Was sacrifice and muttered prayer, Drew close together, each to each, And questioned thus with bated speech: “Indignant at his father’s fate Will he on warriors vent his hate, The slayers of his father slay, And sweep the loathed race away? But when of old his fury raged Seas of their blood his wrath assuaged: So doubtless now he has not planned To slay all warriors in the land.”

  Then with a gift the saints drew near To Bhrigu’s son whose look was fear, And Ráma! Ráma! soft they cried. The gift he took, no word replied. Then Bhrigu’s son his silence broke And thus to Ráma Ráma spoke:




Canto LXXV. The Parle.


“Heroic Ráma, men proclaim The marvels of thy matchless fame, And I from loud-voiced rumour know The exploit of the broken bow, Yea, bent and broken, mighty Chief, A feat most wondrous, past belief. Stirred by thy fame thy face I sought: A peerless bow I too have brought. This mighty weapon, strong and dire, Great Jamadagni owned, my sire. Draw with its shaft my father’s bow, And thus thy might, O Ráma, show. This proof of prowess let me see— The weapon bent and drawn by thee; Then single fight our strength shall try, And this shall raise thy glory high.”

  King Daśaratha heard with dread The boastful speech, and thus he said; Raising his hands in suppliant guise, With pallid cheek and timid eyes: “Forgetful of the bloody feud Ascetic toils hast thou pursued; Then, Bráhman, let thy children be Untroubled and from danger free. Sprung of the race of Bhrigu, who Read holy lore, to vows most true, Thou swarest to the Thousand-eyed And thy fierce axe was cast aside. Thou turnedst to thy rites away Leaving the earth to Kaśyap’s sway, And wentest far a grove to seek Beneath Mahendra’s(255) mountain peak. Now, mighty Hermit, art thou here To slay us all with doom severe? For if alone my Ráma fall, We share his fate and perish all.”

  As thus the aged sire complained The mighty chief no answer deigned. To Ráma only thus he cried: “Two bows, the Heavenly Artist’s pride, Celestial, peerless, vast, and strong, By all the worlds were honoured long. One to the Three-eyed God(256) was given, By glory to the conflict driven, Thus armed fierce Tripura he slew: And then by thee ’twas burst in two. The second bow, which few may brave, The highest Gods to Vishṇu gave. This bow I hold; before it fall The foeman’s fenced tower and wall. Then prayed the Gods the Sire Most High By some unerring proof to try Were praise for might Lord Vishṇu’s due, Or his whose Neck is stained with Blue.(257) The mighty Sire their wishes knew, And he whose lips are ever true Caused the two Gods to meet as foes. Then fierce the rage of battle rose: Bristled in dread each starting hair As Śiva strove with Vishṇu there. But Vishṇu raised his voice amain. And Śiva’s bowstring twanged in vain; Its master of the Three bright Eyes Stood fixt in fury and surprise. Then all the dwellers in the sky, Minstrel, and saint, and God drew nigh, And prayed them that the strife might cease, And the great rivals met in peace. ’Twas seen how Śiva’s bow has failed Unnerved, when Vishṇu’s might assailed, And Gods and heavenly sages thence To Vishnu gave preëminence. Then glorious Śiva in his rage Gave it to Devarát the sage Who ruled Videha’s fertile land, To pass it down from hand to hand. But this my bow, whose shafts smite down The foeman’s fenced tower and town, To great Richíka Vishṇu lent To be a pledge and ornament, Then Jamadagni, Bráhman dread, My sire, the bow inherited. But Arjun stooped to treachery vile And slew my noble sire by guile, Whose penance awful strength had gained, Whose hand the God-given bow retained. I heard indignant how he fell By mournful fate, too sad to tell. My vengeful fury since that time Scourges all Warriors for the crime. As generations spring to life I war them down in endless strife. All earth I brought beneath my sway, And gave it for his meed and pay To holy Kaśyap, when of yore The rites performed by him were o’er. Then to Mahendra’s hill I turned Strong in the strength that penance earned, And toiled upon his lofty head By Gods immortal visited. The breaking of the bow I knew From startled Gods conversing, through The airy regions, of thy deed, And hither came with swiftest speed. Now, for thy Warrior’s honour sake, This best of bows, O Ráma, take: This, owned by Vishṇu’s self of old, My sire and grandsire loved to hold. Drawn to its head upon the string, One town-destroying arrow bring; If this thou can, O hero, I In single fight thy strength will try.”




Canto LXXVI. Debarred From Heaven.


The haughty challenge, undeterred The son of Daśaratha heard, And cried, while reverence for his sire Checked the full torrent of his ire: “Before this day have I been told The deed that stained thy hands of old. But pity bids my soul forget: Thy father, murdered, claimed the debt. My strength, O Chief, thou deemest slight, Too feeble for a Warrior’s might. Now will I show thy wondering eyes The prowess which they dare despise.”

  He hastened then with graceful ease That mighty bow and shaft to seize. His hand the weapon strung and swayed: The arrow on the string was laid. Then Jamadagni’s son he eyed, And thus in words of fury cried: “Thou art a Bráhman, still to be Most highly honoured, Chief, by me. For Viśvámitra’s sake beside Shall reverence due be ne’er denied. Though mine the power, I would not send A dart at thee thy life to end. But thy great power to wander free, Which penance-rites have won for thee, Or glorious worlds from thee to wrest, Is the firm purpose of my breast, And Vishṇu’s dart which now I strain Can ne’er be shot to fall in vain: It strikes the mighty, and it stuns The madness of the haughty ones.”

  Then Gods, and saints and heavenly choir Preceded by the General Sire, Met in the air and gazed below On Ráma with that wondrous bow. Nymph, minstrel, angel, all were there, Snake-God, and spirit of the air, Giant, and bard, and gryphon, met, Their eyes upon the marvel set. In senseless hush the world was chained While Ráma’s hand the bow retained, And Jamadagni’s son amazed And powerless on the hero gazed. Then when his swelling heart had shrunk, And his proud strength in torpor sunk, Scarce his voice ventured, low and weak, To Ráma lotus-eyed, to speak: “When long ago I gave away The whole broad land to Kaśyap’s sway He charged me never to remain Within the limits of his reign. Obedient to my guide’s behest On earth by night I never rest. My choice is made, I will not dim Mine honour and be false to him. So, son of Raghu, leave me still The power to wander where I will, And swifter than the thought my flight Shall place me on Mahendra’s height. My mansions of eternal joy, By penance won, thou mayst destroy, My path to these thy shaft may stay. Now to the work! No more delay! I know thee Lord of Gods; I know Thy changeless might laid Madhu low. All other hands would surely fail To bend this bow. All hail! all hail! See! all the Gods have left the skies To bend on thee their eager eyes, With whose achievements none compete, Whose arm in war no God can meet. No shame is mine, I ween, for thou, Lord of the Worlds, hast dimmed my brow. Now, pious Ráma, ’tis thy part To shoot afar that glorious dart: I, when the fatal shaft is shot, Will seek that hill and tarry not.”

  He ceased. The wondrous arrow flew, And Jamadagni’s offspring knew Those glorious worlds to him were barred, Once gained by penance long and hard. Then straight the airy quarters cleared, And the mid regions bright appeared, While Gods and saints unnumbered praised Ráma, the mighty bow who raised. And Jamadagni’s son, o’erawed. Extolled his name with highest laud, With reverent steps around him strode, Then hastened on his airy road. Far from the sight of all he fled, And rested on Mahendra’s head.




Canto LXXVII. Bharat’s Departure.


Then Ráma with a cheerful mind The bow to Varuṇ’s hand resigned. Due reverence to the saints he paid, And thus addressed his sire dismayed: “As Bhrigu’s son is far from view, Now let the host its march pursue, And to Ayodhyá’s town proceed In four-fold bands, with thee to lead.”

  King Daśaratha thus addressed His lips to Ráma’s forehead pressed, And held him to his aged breast. Rejoiced in sooth was he to know That Bhrigu’s son had parted so, And hailed a second life begun For him and his victorious son. He urged the host to speed renewed, And soon Ayodhyá’s gates he viewed. High o’er the roofs gay pennons played; Tabour and drum loud music made; Fresh water cooled the royal road, And flowers in bright profusion glowed. Glad crowds with garlands thronged the ways Rejoicing on their king to gaze And all the town was bright and gay Exalting in the festive day. People and Bráhmans flocked to meet Their monarch ere he gained the street. The glorious king amid the throng Rode with his glorious sons along, And passed within his dear abode That like Himálaya’s mountain showed. And there Kauśalyá, noble queen, Sumitrá with her lovely mien, Kaikeyí of the dainty waist, And other dames his bowers who graced, Stood in the palace side by side And welcomed home each youthful bride: Fair Sítá, lofty-fated dame, Urmilá of the glorious fame, And Kuśadhwaj’s children fair, With joyous greeting and with prayer, As all in linen robes arrayed With offerings at the altars prayed. Due reverence paid to God above, Each princess gave her soul to love, And hidden in her inmost bower Passed with her lord each blissful hour. The royal youths, of spirit high, With whom in valor none could vie, Lived each within his palace bounds Bright as Kuvera’s pleasure-grounds, With riches, troops of faithful friends, And bliss that wedded life attends: Brave princes trained in warlike skill, And duteous to their father’s will. At length the monarch called one morn Prince Bharat, of Kaikeyí born, And cried: “My son, within our gates Lord Yudhájit thine uncle waits. The son of Kekaya’s king is he, And came, my child, to summon thee.”

  Then Bharat for the road prepared, And with Śatrughna forth he fared. First to his sire he bade adieu, Brave Ráma, and his mothers too. Lord Yudhájit with joyful pride Went forth, the brothers by his side, And reached the city where he dwelt: And mighty joy his father felt.

  Ráma and Lakshmaṇ honoured still Their godlike sire with duteous will. Two constant guides for Ráma stood, His father’s wish, the people’s good. Attentive to the general weal He thought and wrought to please and heal. His mothers too he strove to please With love and sonly courtesies. At every time, in every spot, His holy guides he ne’er forgot. So for his virtues kind and true Dearer and dearer Ráma grew To Daśaratha, Bráhmans, all In town and country, great and small. And Ráma by his darling’s side Saw many a blissful season glide, Lodged in her soul, each thought on her, Lover, and friend, and worshipper. He loved her for his father’s voice Had given her and approved the choice: He loved her for each charm she wore And her sweet virtues more and more. So he her lord and second life Dwelt in the bosom of his wife, In double form, that, e’en apart, Each heart could commune free with heart.

  Still grew that child of Janak’s race, More goddess-fair in form and face, The loveliest wife that e’er was seen, In mortal mould sweet Beauty’s Queen. Then shone the son Kauśalyá bore,   With this bright dame allied, Like Vishṇu whom the Gods adore,   With Lakshmi by his side.





BOOK II.




Canto I. The Heir Apparent.


So Bharat to his grandsire went Obedient to the message sent, And for his fond companion chose Śatrughna slayer of his foes.(258) There Bharat for a time remained With love and honour entertained, King Aśvapati’s constant care, Beloved as a son and heir. Yet ever, as they lived at ease, While all around combined to please, The aged sire they left behind Was present to each hero’s mind. Nor could the king’s fond memory stray From his brave children far away, Dear Bharat and Śatrughna dear, Each Varuṇ’s match or Indra’s peer.

  To all the princes, young and brave, His soul with fond affection clave; Around his loving heart they clung Like arms from his own body sprung.(259) But best and noblest of the four, Good as the God whom all adore, Lord of all virtues, undefiled, His darling was his eldest child. For he was beautiful and strong, From envy free, the foe of wrong, With all his father’s virtues blest, And peerless in the world confessed. With placid soul he softly spoke: No harsh reply could taunts provoke. He ever loved the good and sage Revered for virtue and for age, And when his martial tasks were o’er Sate listening to their peaceful lore. Wise, modest, pure, he honoured eld, His lips from lying tales withheld; Due reverence to the Bráhmans gave, And ruled each passion like a slave. Most tender, prompt at duty’s call, Loved by all men he loved them all. Proud of the duties of his race, With spirit meet for Warrior’s place. He strove to win by glorious deed, Throned with the Gods, a priceless meed. With him in speech and quick reply Vrihaspati might hardly vie, But never would his accents flow For evil or for empty show. In art and science duly trained, His student vow he well maintained; He learnt the lore for princes fit, The Vedas and their Holy Writ, And with his well-drawn bow at last His mighty father’s fame surpassed. Of birth exalted, truthful, just, With vigorous hand, with noble trust, Well taught by aged twice-born men Who gain and right could clearly ken, Full well the claims and bounds he knew Of duty, gain, and pleasure too: Of memory keen, of ready tact, In civil business prompt to act. Reserved, his features ne’er disclosed What counsel in his heart reposed. All idle rage and mirth controlled, He knew the times to give and hold, Firm in his faith, of steadfast will, He sought no wrong, he spoke no ill: Not rashly swift, not idly slow, His faults and others’ keen to know. Each merit, by his subtle sense; He matched with proper recompense. He knew the means that wealth provide, And with keen eye expense could guide. Wild elephants could he reclaim, And mettled steeds could mount and tame. No arm like his the bow could wield, Or drive the chariot to the field. Skilled to attack, to deal the blow, Or lead a host against the foe: Yea, e’en infuriate Gods would fear To meet his arm in full career. As the great sun in noontide blaze Is glorious with his world of rays, So Ráma with these virtues shone Which all men loved to gaze upon.

  The aged monarch fain would rest, And said within his weary breast, “Oh that I might, while living yet, My Ráma o’er the kingdom set. And see, before my course be run, The hallowed drops anoint my son; See all this spacious land obey, From side to side, my first-born’s sway, And then, my life and joy complete, Obtain in heaven a blissful seat!” In him the monarch saw combined The fairest form, the noblest mind, And counselled how his son might share, The throne with him as Regent Heir. For fearful signs in earth and sky, And weakness warned him death was nigh: But Ráma to the world endeared By every grace his bosom cheered, The moon of every eye, whose ray Drove all his grief and fear away. So duty urged that hour to seize, Himself, his realm, to bless and please.

  From town and country, far and near, He summoned people, prince, and peer. To each he gave a meet abode, And honoured all and gifts bestowed. Then, splendid in his king’s attire, He viewed them, as the general Sire, In glory of a God arrayed, Looks on the creatures he has made. But Kekaya’s king he called not then For haste, nor Janak, lord of men; For after to each royal friend The joyful tidings he would send. Mid crowds from distant countries met The king upon his throne was set; Then honoured by the people, all The rulers thronged into the hall. On thrones assigned, each king in place Looked silent on the monarch’s face.   Then girt by lords of high renown   And throngs from hamlet and from town   He showed in regal pride, As, honoured by the radiant band Of blessed Gods that round him stand, Lord Indra, Thousand-eyed.




Canto II. The People’s Speech.


Then to the full assembly bowed The monarch, and addressed the crowd With gracious speech, in accents loud As heavenly drum or thunder-cloud:

  “Needs not to you who know declare How ever with paternal care My fathers of Ikshváku’s line Have ruled the realm which now is mine. I too have taught my feet to tread The pathway of the mighty dead, And with fond care that never slept Have, as I could, my people kept. So toiling still, and ne’er remiss For all my people’s weal and bliss, Beneath the white umbrella’s(260) shade. Old age is come and strength decayed. Thousands of years have o’er me flown, And generations round me grown And passed away. I crave at length Repose and ease for broken strength. Feeble and worn I scarce can bear The ruler’s toil, the judge’s care, With royal dignity, a weight That tries the young and temperate. I long to rest, my labour done, And in my place to set my son, If to the twice-born gathered here My counsel wise and good appear. For greater gifts than mine adorn Ráma my son, my eldest-born. Like Indra brave, before him fall The foeman’s cities, tower and wall. Him prince of men for power and might, The best maintainer of the right, Fair as the moon when nothing bars His glory close to Pushya’s stars, Him with to-morrow’s light I fain Would throne the consort of my reign. A worthy lord for you, I ween, Marked as her own by Fortune’s Queen. The triple world itself would be Well ruled by such a king as he. To such high bliss and happy fate Will I the country dedicate, And my sad heart will cease to grieve If he the precious charge receive. Thus is my careful plan matured, Thus for myself is rest secured; Lieges, approve the words I say, Or point ye out some wiser way. Devise your prudent plan. My mind Is fondly to this thought inclined, But men by keen debating move Some middle course which all approve.”

  The monarch ceased. In answer came The joyous princes’ glad acclaim. So peacocks in the rain rejoice And hail the cloud with lifted voice. Murmurs of joy from thousands round Shook the high palace with the sound. Then when the gathered throng had learned His will who right and gain discerned, Peasant and townsman, priest and chief, All met in consultation brief, And soon agreed with one accord Gave answer to their sovereign lord: “King of the land, we know thee old: Thousands of years have o’er thee rolled, Ráma thy son, we pray, anoint, And at thy side his place appoint Our gallant prince, so brave and strong, Riding in royal state along, Our eyes with joyful pride will see Screened by the shade that shelters thee.” Then spake the king again, as though Their hearts’ true wish he sought to know: “These prayers for Ráma’s rule suggest One question to my doubting breast. This thing, I pray, with truth explain: Why would ye, while I justly reign, That he, mine eldest son, should bear His part with me as ruling heir?” Then all the people made reply, Peasant and townsman, low and high: “Each noblest gift of form and mind, O Monarch, in thy son we find. Do thou the godlike virtues hear Which Ráma to our hearts endear. So richly blest with graces, none In all the earth excels thy son: Nay, who to match with him may claim In truth, in justice, and in fame? True to his promise, gentle, kind, Unenvious, of grateful mind, Versed in the law and firm of soul, He keeps each sense with strict control. With duteous care he loves to sit By Bráhmans skilled in Holy Writ. Hence brightest glory, ne’er to end, And matchless fame his youth attend. Skilled in the use of spear and shield, And arms which heavenly warriors wield, Supreme in war, unconquered yet By man, fiend, God in battle met, Whene’er in pomp of war he goes ’Gainst town or city of the foes, He ever comes with Lakshmaṇ back Victorious from the fierce attack. Returning homeward from afar Borne on his elephant or car, He ever to the townsmen bends And greets them as beloved friends, Asks how each son, each servant thrives, How fare our pupils, offerings, wives; And like a father bids us tell, Each for himself, that all is well. If pain or grief the city tries His heart is swift to sympathize. When festive scenes our thoughts employ He like a father shares the joy. High is the fate, O King, that gave Thy Ráma born to bless and save, With filial virtues fair and mild Like Kaśyap old Maríchi’s child. Hence to the kingdom’s distant ends One general prayer for him ascends. Each man in town and country prays For Ráma’s strength, health, length of days. With hearts sincere, their wish the same, The tender girl, the aged dame, Subject and stranger, peasant, hind, One thought impressed on every mind, At evening and at dawning day To all the Gods for Ráma pray. Do thou, O King, of grace comply, And hear the people’s longing cry, And let us on the throne by thee The lotus-tinted Ráma see.   O thou who givest boons, attend;   A gracious ear, O Monarch, lend     And for our weal install, Consenting to our earnest prayer, Thy godlike Ráma Regent Heir,     Who seeks the good of all.”




Canto III. Dasaratha’s Precepts.


The monarch with the prayer complied Of suppliant hands, on every side Uplifted like a lotus-bed: And then these gracious words he said: “Great joy and mighty fame are mine Because your loving hearts incline, In full assembly clearly shown To place my Ráma on the throne.” Then to Vaśishṭha, standing near, And Vámadeva loud and clear The monarch spoke that all might hear: “’Tis pure and lovely Chaitra now When flowers are sweet on every bough; All needful things with haste prepare That Ráma be appointed heir.”

  Then burst the people’s rapture out In loud acclaim and joyful shout; And when the tumult slowly ceased The king addressed the holy priest: “Give order, Saint, with watchful heed For what the coming rite will need. This day let all things ready wait Mine eldest son to consecrate.” Best of all men of second birth Vaśishṭha heard the lord of earth, And gave commandment to the bands Of servitors with lifted hands Who waited on their master’s eye: “Now by to-morrow’s dawn supply Rich gold and herbs and gems of price And offerings for the sacrifice, Wreaths of white flowers and roasted rice, And oil and honey, separate; New garments and a car of state, An elephant with lucky signs, A fourfold host in ordered lines, The white umbrella, and a pair Of chowries,(261) and a banner fair; A hundred vases, row on row, To shine like fire in splendid glow, A tiger’s mighty skin, a bull With gilded horns most beautiful. All these, at dawn of coming day, Around the royal shrine array, Where burns the fire’s undying ray. Each palace door, each city gate With wreaths of sandal decorate. And with the garlands’ fragrant scent Let clouds of incense-smoke be blent. Let food of noble kind and taste Be for a hundred thousand placed; Fresh curds with streams of milk bedewed To feed the Bráhman multitude. With care be all their wants supplied. And mid the twice-born chiefs divide Rich largess, with the early morn, And oil and curds and roasted corn. Soon as the sun has shown his light Pronounce the prayer to bless the rite, And then be all the Bráhmans called And in their ordered seats installed. Let all musicians skilled to play, And dancing-girls in bright array Stand ready in the second ring Within the palace of the king. Each honoured tree, each holy shrine With leaves and flowery wreaths entwine, And here and there beneath the shade Be food prepared and presents laid. Then brightly clad, in warlike guise, With long swords girt upon their thighs, Let soldiers of the nobler sort March to the monarch’s splendid court.”

  Thus gave command the twice-born pair To active servants stationed there. Then hastened to the king and said That all their task was duly sped, The king to wise Sumantra spake: “Now quick, my lord, thy chariot take, And hither with thy swiftest speed My son, my noble Ráma lead.”

  Sumantra, ere the word was given, His chariot from the court had driven, And Ráma, best of all who ride In cars, came sitting by his side. The lords of men had hastened forth From east and west and south and north, Áryan and stranger, those who dwell In the wild wood and on the fell, And as the Gods to Indra, they Showed honour to the king that day.

  Like Vásav, when his glorious form Is circled by the Gods of storm, Girt in his hall by kings he saw His car-borne Ráma near him draw, Like him who rules the minstrel band Of heaven;(262) whose valour filled the land, Of mighty arm and stately pride Like a wild elephant in stride, As fair in face as that fair stone Dear to the moon, of moonbeams grown,(263) With noble gifts and grace that took The hearts of all, and chained each look, World-cheering as the Lord of Rain When floods relieve the parching plain. The father, as the son came nigh, Gazed with an ever-thirstier eye. Sumantra helped the prince alight From the good chariot passing bright, And as to meet his sire he went Followed behind him reverent. Then Ráma clomb, the king to seek That terrace like Kailása’s peak, And reached the presence of the king, Sumantra closely following. Before his father’s face he came, Raised suppliant hands and named his name,(264) And bowing lowly as is meet Paid reverence to the monarch’s feet. But soon as Daśaratha viewed The prince in humble attitude, He raised him by the hand in haste And his beloved son embraced, Then signed him to a glorious throne, Gem-decked and golden, near his own. Then Ráma, best of Raghu’s line, Made the fair seat with lustre shine As when the orient sun upsprings And his pure beam on Meru flings. The glory flashed on roof and wall, And with strange sheen suffused the hall, As when the moon’s pure rays are sent Through autumn’s star-lit firmament. Then swelled his breast with joy and pride As his dear son the father eyed, E’en as himself more fair arrayed In some clear mirror’s face displayed. The aged monarch gazed awhile, Then thus addressed him with a smile, As Kaśyap, whom the worlds revere, Speaks for the Lord of Gods to hear: “O thou of all my sons most dear, In virtue best, thy father’s peer, Child of my consort first in place, Mine equal in her pride of race, Because the people’s hearts are bound To thee by graces in thee found, Be thou in Pushya’s favouring hour Made partner of my royal power. I know that thou by nature’s bent Both modest art and excellent, But though thy gifts no counsel need My love suggests the friendly rede. Mine own dear son, be modest still, And rule each sense with earnest will. Keep thou the evils far away That spring from love and anger’s sway. Thy noble course alike pursue In secret as in open view, And every nerve, the love to gain Of ministers and subjects, strain. The happy prince who sees with pride His thriving people satisfied; Whose arsenals with arms are stored, And treasury with golden hoard,— His friends rejoice as joyed the Blest When Amrit crowned their eager quest. So well, my child, thy course maintain, And from all ill thy soul refrain.”

  The friends of Ráma, gathered nigh, Longing their lord to gratify, Ran to Kauśalyá’s bower to tell The tidings that would please her well. She, host of dames, with many a gem, And gold, and kine rewarded them.

  Then Ráma paid the reverence due, Mounted the chariot, and withdrew, And to his splendid dwelling drove While crowds to show him honour strove.   The people, when the monarch’s speech     Their willing ears had heard,   Were wild with joy as though on each     Great gifts had been conferred.   With meek and low salute each man     Turned to his home away,   And there with happy heart began     To all the Gods to pray.




Canto IV. Ráma Summoned.


The crowd dismissed, to high debate The monarch called his peers of state, And, counsel from their lips obtained, Firm in his will his will explained: “To-morrow with auspicious ray The moon in Pushya’s sign will stay; Be that the time with happy fate Mine eldest son to consecrate, And let my Ráma, lotus-eyed, As Regent o’er the state preside.”

  He sought, within, his charioteer, And cried “Again bring Ráma here.” To Ráma’s home Sumantra hied Again to be the prince’s guide. His coming, told to Ráma’s ear, Suggested anxious doubt and fear. He bade the messenger be led That instant in, and thus he said: “Tell me the cause, omitting naught, Why thou again my house hast sought.”

  The envoy answered: “Prince, thy sire Has sent thy presence to require. My sender known, ’tis thine to say If thou wilt go or answer nay.” Then Ráma, when he heard his speech, Made haste the royal court to reach. Soon as the monarch was aware His dearest son was waiting there, Eager the parley to begin He bade them lead the prince within, Soon as he passed the chamber door The hero bent him to the floor, And at a distance from his seat Raised his joined hands his sire to greet. The monarch raised him from the ground, And loving arms about him wound, Then pointed to a seat that shone With gold for him to rest upon. “Aged am I,” he said, “and worn; In life’s best joys my share have borne; Rites to the Gods, in hundreds, paid, With gifts of corn and largess made. I yearned for sons: my life is blest With them and thee of sons the best. No debt to saints or Bráhmans, no, Nor spirits, Gods, or self I owe. One duty now remains alone, To set thee on thy father’s throne. Now therefore, Ráma, hear my rede, And mark my words with duteous heed: This day the peoples’ general voice, Elects thee king of love and choice, And I, consenting to the prayer, Will make thee, darling, Regent Heir. Dread visions, each returning night, With evil omens scare my sight. Red meteors with a fearful sound Shoot wildly downward to the ground, While tempests lash the troubled air; And they who read the stars declare That, leagued against my natal sign, Ráhu,(265) the Sun,(266) and Mars combine. When portents dire as these appear, A monarch’s death or woe is near. Then while my senses yet are spared, And thought and will are unimpaired, Be thou, my son, anointed king: Men’s fancy is a fickle thing. To-day the moon, in order due, Entered the sign Punarvasu,(267) To-morrow, as the wise foretell, In Pushya’s favouring stars will dwell: Then on the throne shalt thou be placed. My soul, prophetic, counsels haste: Thee, O my son, to-morrow I As Regent Heir will sanctify. So till the coming night be passed Do thou and Sítá strictly fast: From worldly thoughts thy soul refrain, And couched on holy grass remain. And let thy trusted lords attend In careful watch upon their friend, For, unexpected, check and bar Our weightiest counsels often mar. While Bharat too is far away Making with royal kin his stay, I deem the fittest time of all Thee, chosen Regent, to install. It may be Bharat still has stood True to the counsels of the good, Faithful to thee with tender trust, With governed senses, pure and just. But human minds, too well I know, Will sudden changes undergo, And by their constant deeds alone The virtue of the good is shown. Now, Ráma, go. My son, good night! Fixt is to-morrow for the rite.”

  Then Ráma paid the reverence due, And quickly to his home withdrew. He passed within, nor lingered there, But sought his mother’s mansion, where The dame in linen robes arrayed Devoutly in the chapel prayed To Fortune’s Queen, with utterance checked, That she her Ráma would protect. There was Sumitrá too, and there Was Lakshmaṇ led by loving care: And when the royal choice they knew Sítá in haste was summoned too. Absorbed, with half-shut eyes, the queen Attended by the three was seen. She knew that Pushya’s lucky hour Would raise her son to royal power, So fixed with bated breath each thought On God supreme, by all men sought. To her, as thus she knelt and prayed, Ráma drew near, due reverence paid, And then to swell his mother’s joy, Thus spoke her own beloved boy; “O mother dear, my sire’s decree Entrusts the people’s weal to me. To-morrow I, for so his will, Anointed king, the throne shall fill. The few last hours till night shall end Sítá with me must fasting spend, For so my father has decreed, And holy priests with him agreed. What vows soever thou mayst deem My consecration’s eve beseem, Do thou, sweet mother, for my sake And for beloved Sítá’s make.”

  When the glad news Kauśalyá heard, So long desired, so long deferred, While tears of joy her utterance broke, In answer to her son she spoke: “Long be thy life, my darling: now Thy prostrate foes before thee bow. Live long and with thy bright success My friends and dear Sumitrá’s bless. Surely the stars were wondrous fair When thee, sweet son, thy mother bare, That thy good gifts such love inspire And win the favour of thy sire. With thee I travailed not in vain; Those lotus eyes reward my pain, And all the glory of the line Of old Ikshváku will be thine.”

  He smiled, and on his brother gazed Who sate with reverent hands upraised, And said: “My brother, thou must be Joint-ruler of this land with me. My second self thou, Lakshmaṇ, art, And in my fortune bearest part. Be thine, Sumitrá’s son, to know The joys from regal power that flow. My life itself, the monarch’s seat, For thy dear sake to me are sweet.”

  Thus Ráma to his brother said, To both his mothers(268) bowed his head, And then with Sítá by his side To his own house the hero hied.




Canto V. Ráma’s Fast.


Then Saint Vaśishṭha to the king Came ready at his summoning. “Now go,” exclaimed the monarch, “thou Enriched by fervent rite and vow, For Ráma and his wife ordain The fast, that joy may bless his reign.”

  The best of those who Scripture know Said to the king, “My lord, I go.” To Ráma’s house Vaśishṭha hied, The hero’s fast by rule to guide, And skilled in sacred texts to tell Each step to him instructed well. Straight to Prince Ráma’s high abode, That like a cloud pale-tinted showed, Borne in his priestly car he rode. Two courts he passed, and in the third He stayed his car. Then Ráma heard The holy sage was come, and flew To honour him with honour due. He hastened to the car and lent His hand to aid the priest’s descent. Then spoke Vaśishṭha words like these, Pleased with his reverent courtesies, With pleasant things his heart to cheer Who best deserved glad news to hear: “Prince, thou hast won thy father’s grace, And thine will be the Regent’s place: Now with thy Sítá, as is right, In strictest fasting spend the night, For when the morrow’s dawn is fair The king will consecrate his heir: So Nahush,(269) as the wise relate, Yayáti joyed to consecrate.”

  Thus having said, Vaśishṭha next Ordained the fast by rule and text, For Ráma faithful to his vows And the Videhan dame his spouse. Then from the prince’s house he hied With courteous honours gratified. Round Ráma gathered every friend In pleasant talk a while to spend. He bade good night to all at last, And to his inner chamber passed. Then Ráma’s house shone bright and gay With men and maids in glad array, As in the morning some fair lake When all her lotuses awake, And every bird that loves the flood Flits joyous round each opening bud.

  Forth from the house Vaśishṭha drove, That with the king’s in splendour strove, And all the royal street he viewed Filled with a mighty multitude The eager concourse blocked each square, Each road and lane and thoroughfare, And joyous shouts on every side Rose like the roar of Ocean’s tide, As streams of men together came With loud huzza and glad acclaim. The ways were watered, swept and clean, And decked with flowers and garlands green And all Ayodhyá shone arrayed With banners on the roofs that played. Men, women, boys with eager eyes, Expecting when the sun should rise, Stood longing for the herald ray Of Ráma’s consecration day, To see, a source of joy to all, The people-honoured festival.

  The priest advancing slowly through The mighty crowd he cleft in two, Near to the monarch’s palace drew. He sought the terrace, by the stair, Like a white cloud-peak high in air, The reverend king of men to meet Who sate upon his splendid seat: Thus will Vṛihaspati arise To meet the monarch of the skies. But when the king his coming knew, He left his throne and near him drew Questioned by him Vaśishṭha said That all his task was duly sped. Then all who sate there, honouring Vaśishṭha, rose as rose the king. Vaśishṭha bade his lord adieu, And all the peers, dismissed, withdrew. Then as a royal lion seeks His cave beneath the rocky peaks, So to the chambers where abode His consorts Daśaratha strode.   Full-thronged were those delightful bowers     With women richly dressed,   And splendid as the radiant towers     Where Indra loves to rest.   Then brighter flashed a thousand eyes     With the light his presence lent,   As, when the moon begins to rise     The star thronged firmament.




Canto VI. The City Decorated.


Then Ráma bathed in order due, His mind from worldly thoughts withdrew, And with his large-eyed wife besought Náráyaṇ, as a votary ought. Upon his head the brimming cup Of holy oil he lifted up, Then placed within the kindled fire The offering to that heavenly Sire, And as he sipped the remnant prayed To Him for blessing and for aid. Then with still lips and tranquil mind With his Videhan he reclined, In Vishṇu’s chapel, on a bed Where holy grass was duly spread, While still the prince’s every thought The God supreme, Náráyaṇ, sought. One watch remained the night to close When Ráma from his couch arose, And bade the men and maids adorn His palace for the solemn morn. He heard the bards and heralds raise Auspicious strains of joy and praise; And breathed devout, with voice restrained, The hymn for morning rites ordained; Then, with his head in reverence bowed, Praised Madhu’s conquering foe aloud, And, in pure linen robes arrayed, The priests to raise their voices prayed. Obedient to the summons they Proclaimed to all the festal day. The Bráhmans’ voices, deep and sweet, Resounded through the crowded street, And echoed through Ayodhyá went By many a loud-toned instrument. Then all the people joyed to hear That Ráma with his consort dear Had fasted till the morning light In preparation for the rite. Swiftly the joyful tidings through Ayodhyá’s crowded city flew, And soon as dawn appeared, each man To decorate the town began. In all the temples bright and fair As white clouds towering in the air, In streets, and where the cross-ways met, Where holy fig-trees had been set, In open square, in sacred shade, Where merchants’ shops their wealth displayed, On all the mansions of the great, And householders of wealth and state, Where’er the people loved to meet, Where’er a tree adorned the street, Gay banners floated to the wind, And ribands round the staves were twined. Then clear the singers’ voices rang, As, charming mind and ear, they sang. Here players shone in bright attire, There dancing women swelled the quire. Each with his friend had much to say Of Ráma’s consecration-day: Yea, even children, as they played At cottage doors beneath the shade. The royal street with flowers was strown Which loving hands in heaps had thrown, And here and there rich incense lent Its fragrance to the garland’s scent; And all was fresh and fair and bright In honour of the coming rite. With careful foresight to illume With borrowed blaze the midnight gloom, The crowds erected here and there Trees in each street gay lamps to bear. The city thus from side to side In festal guise was beautified. The people of the town who longed To view the rite together thronged, And filling every court and square Praised the good king in converse there: “Our high-souled king! He throws a grace On old Ikshváku’s royal race. He feels his years’ increasing weight, And makes his son associate. Great joy to us the choice will bring Of Ráma for our lord and king. The good and bad to him are known, And long will he protect his own. No pride his prudent breast may swell, Most just, he loves his brothers well, And to us all that love extends, Cherished as brothers and as friends. Long may our lord in life remain, Good Daśaratha, free from stain, By whose most gracious favour we Ráma anointed king shall see.”

  Such were the words the townsmen spoke Heard by the gathering countryfolk, Who from the south, north, east, and west, Stirred by the joyful tidings, pressed. For by their eager longing led To Ráma’s consecration sped The villagers from every side, And filled Ayodhyá’s city wide. This way and that way strayed the crowd, While rose a murmur long and loud, As when the full moon floods the skies And Ocean’s waves with thunder rise.   That town, like Indra’s city fair,     While peasants thronged her ways,   Tumultuous roared like Ocean, where     Each flood-born monster plays.




Canto VII. Manthará’s Lament.


It chanced a slave-born handmaid, bred With Queen Kaikeyí, fancy-led, Mounted the stair and stood upon The terrace like the moon that shone. Thence Manthará at ease surveyed Ayodhyá to her eyes displayed, Where water cooled the royal street, Where heaps of flowers were fresh and sweet, And costly flags and pennons hung On roof and tower their shadow flung; With covered ways prepared in haste, And many an awning newly placed; With sandal-scented streams bedewed, Thronged by a new bathed multitude: Whose streets were full of Bráhman bands With wreaths and sweetmeats in their hands. Loud instruments their music raised, And through the town, where’er she gazed, The doors of temples glittered white, And the maid marvelled at the sight.

  Of Ráma’s nurse who, standing by, Gazed with a joy-expanded eye, In robes of purest white attired, The wondering damsel thus inquired:

  “Does Ráma’s mother give away Rich largess to the crowds to-day, On some dear object fondly bent, Or blest with measureless content? What mean these signs of rare delight On every side that meet my sight? Say, will the king with joy elate Some happy triumph celebrate?”

  The nurse, with transport uncontrolled, Her glad tale to the hump-back told: “Our lord the king to-morrow morn Will consecrate his eldest-born, And raise, in Pushya’s favouring hour, Prince Ráma to the royal power.” As thus the nurse her tidings spoke, Rage in the hump-back’s breast awoke. Down from the terrace, like the head Of high Kailása’s hill, she sped. Sin in her thoughts, her soul aflame, Where Queen Kaikeyí slept, she came: “Why sleepest thou?” she cried, “arise, Peril is near, unclose thine eyes. Ah, heedless Queen, too blind to know What floods of sin above thee flow! Thy boasts of love and grace are o’er: Thine is the show and nothing more. His favour is an empty cheat, A torrent dried by summer’s heat.”

  Thus by the artful maid addressed In cruel words from raging breast, The queen, sore troubled, spoke in turn; “What evil news have I to learn? That mournful eye, that altered cheek Of sudden woe or danger speak.”

  Such were the words Kaikeyí said: Then Manthará, her eyeballs red With fury, skilled with treacherous art To grieve yet more her lady’s heart, From Ráma, in her wicked hate, Kaikeyí’s love to alienate, Upon her evil purpose bent Began again most eloquent: “Peril awaits thee swift and sure, And utter woe defying cure; King Daśaratha will create Prince Ráma Heir Associate. Plunged in the depths of wild despair, My soul a prey to pain and care, As though the flames consumed me, zeal Has brought me for my lady’s weal, Thy grief, my Queen, is grief to me: Thy gain my greatest gain would be. Proud daughter of a princely line, The rights of consort queen are thine. How art thou, born of royal race, Blind to the crimes that kings debase? Thy lord is gracious, to deceive, And flatters, but thy soul to grieve, While thy pure heart that thinks no sin Knows not the snares that hem thee in. Thy husband’s lips on thee bestow Soft soothing word, an empty show: The wealth, the substance, and the power This day will be Kauśalyá’s dower. With crafty soul thy child he sends To dwell among thy distant friends, And, every rival far from sight, To Ráma gives the power and might. Ah me! for thou, unhappy dame, Deluded by a husband’s name, With more than mother’s love hast pressed A serpent to thy heedless breast, And cherished him who works thee woe, No husband but a deadly foe. For like a snake, unconscious Queen, Or enemy who stabs unseen, King Daśaratha all untrue Has dealt with thee and Bharat too. Ah, simple lady, long beguiled By his soft words who falsely smiled! Poor victim of the guileless breast, A happier fate thou meritest. For thee and thine destruction waits When he Prince Ráma consecrates. Up, lady, while there yet is time; Preserve thyself, prevent the crime. Up, from thy careless ease, and free Thyself, O Queen, thy son, and me!”

  Delighted at the words she said, Kaikeyí lifted from the bed, Like autumn’s moon, her radiant head, And joyous at the tidings gave A jewel to the hump-back slave; And as she gave the precious toy She cried in her exceeding joy: “Take this, dear maiden, for thy news Most grateful to mine ear, and choose What grace beside most fitly may The welcome messenger repay. I joy that Ráma gains the throne: Kauśalyá’s son is as mine own.”




Canto VIII. Manthará’s Speech.


The damsel’s breast with fury burned: She answered, as the gift she spurned: “What time, O simple Queen, is this For idle dreams of fancied bliss? Hast thou not sense thy state to know, Engulfed in seas of whelming woe; Sick as I am with grief and pain My lips can scarce a laugh restrain To see thee hail with ill-timed joy A peril mighty to destroy. I mourn for one so fondly blind: What woman of a prudent mind Would welcome, e’en as thou hast done, The lordship of a rival’s son, Rejoiced to find her secret foe Empowered, like death, to launch the blow; I see that Ráma still must fear Thy Bharat, to his throne too near. Hence is my heart disquieted, For those who fear are those we dread. Lakshmaṇ, the mighty bow who draws, With all his soul serves Ráma’s cause; And chains as strong to Bharat bind Śatrughna, with his heart and mind, Now next to Ráma, lady fair, Thy Bharat is the lawful heir: And far remote, I ween, the chance That might the younger two advance. Yes, Queen, ’tis Ráma that I dread, Wise, prompt, in warlike science bred; And oh, I tremble when I think Of thy dear child on ruin’s brink. Blest with a lofty fate is she, Kauśalyá; for her son will be Placed, when the moon and Pushya meet, By Bráhmans on the royal seat, Thou as a slave in suppliant guise Must wait upon Kauśalyá’s eyes, With all her wealth and bliss secured And glorious from her foes assured. Her slave with us who serve thee, thou Wilt see thy son to Ráma bow, And Sítá’s friends exult o’er all, While Bharat’s wife shares Bharat’s fall.”

  As thus the maid in wrath complained, Kaikeyí saw her heart was pained, And answered eager in defence Of Ráma’s worth and excellence: “Nay, Ráma, born the monarch’s heir, By holy fathers trained with care, Virtuous, grateful, pure, and true, Claims royal sway as rightly due. He, like a sire, will long defend Each brother, minister, and friend. Then why, O hump-back, art thou pained To hear that he the throne has gained? Be sure when Ráma’s empire ends, The kingdom to my son descends, Who, when a hundred years are flown, Shall sit upon his fathers’ throne. Why is thine heart thus sad to see The joy that is and long shall be, This fortune by possession sure And hopes which we may count secure? Dear as the darling son I bore Is Ráma, yea, or even more. Most duteous to Kauśalyá, he Is yet more dutiful to me. What though he rule, we need not fear: His brethren to his soul are dear. And if the throne Prince Ráma fill Bharat will share the empire still.”

  She ceased. The troubled damsel sighed Sighs long and hot, and thus replied: “What madness has possessed thy mind, To warnings deaf, to dangers blind? Canst thou not see the floods of woe That threaten o’er thine head to flow: First Ráma will the throne acquire, Then Ráma’s son succeed his sire, While Bharat will neglected pine Excluded from the royal line. Not all his sons, O lady fair, The kingdom of a monarch share: All ruling when a sovereign dies Wild tumult in the state would rise. The eldest, be he good or ill, Is ruler by the father’s will. Know, tender mother, that thy son Without a friend and all undone, Far from the joyous ease of home An alien from his race will roam. I sped to thee for whom I feel, But thy fond heart mistakes my zeal, Thy hand a present would bestow Because thy rival triumphs so. When Ráma once begins his sway Without a foe his will to stay, Thy darling Bharat he will drive To distant lands if left alive. By thee the child was sent away Beneath his grandsire’s roof to stay. Even in stocks and stones perforce Will friendship spring from intercourse. The young Śatrughna too would go With Bharat, for he loved him so. As Lakshmaṇ still to Ráma cleaves, He his dear Bharat never leaves. There is an ancient tale they tell: A tree the foresters would fell Was saved by reeds that round it stood, For love that sprang of neighbourhood. So Lakshmaṇ Ráma will defend, And each on each for aid depend. Such fame on earth their friendship wins As that which binds the Heavenly Twins. And Ráma ne’er will purpose wrong To Lakshmaṇ, for their love is strong. But Bharat, Oh, of this be sure, Must evil at his hands endure. Come, Ráma from his home expel An exile in the woods to dwell. The plan, O Queen, which I advise Secures thy weal if thou be wise. So we and all thy kith and kin Advantage from thy gain shall win. Shall Bharat, meet for happier fate, Born to endure his rival’s hate, With all his fortune ruined cower And dread his brother’s mightier power! Up, Queen, to save thy son, arise; Prostrate at Ráma’s feet he lies. So the proud elephant who leads His trooping consorts through the reeds Falls in the forest shade beneath The lion’s spring and murderous teeth. Scorned by thee in thy bliss and pride Kauśalyá was of old defied, And will she now forbear to show The vengeful rancour of a foe?   O Queen, thy darling is undone   When Ráma’s hand has once begun     Ayodhyá’s realm to sway,   Come, win the kingdom for thy child   And drive the alien to the wild     In banishment to-day.”




Canto IX. The Plot.


As fury lit Kaikeyí’s eyes She spoke with long and burning sighs: “This day my son enthroned shall see, And Ráma to the woods shall flee. But tell me, damsel, if thou can, A certain way, a skilful plan That Bharat may the empire gain, And Ráma’s hopes be nursed in vain.”

  The lady ceased. The wicked maid The mandate of her queen obeyed, And darkly plotting Ráma’s fall Responded to Kaikeyí’s call.

  “I will declare, do thou attend, How Bharat may his throne ascend. Dost thou forget what things befell? Or dost thou feign, remembering well? Or wouldst thou hear my tongue repeat A story for thy need so meet? Gay lady, if thy will be so, Now hear the tale of long ago, And when my tongue has done its part Ponder the story in thine heart. When Gods and demons fought of old, Thy lord, with royal saints enrolled, Sped to the war with thee to bring His might to aid the Immortals’ King. Far to the southern land he sped Where Daṇḍak’s mighty wilds are spread, To Vaijayanta’s city swayed By Śambara, whose flag displayd The hugest monster of the sea. Lord of a hundred wiles was be; With might which Gods could never blame Against the King of Heaven he came. Then raged the battle wild and dread, And mortal warriors fought and bled; The fiends by night with strength renewed Charged, slew the sleeping multitude. Thy lord, King Daśaratha, long Stood fighting with the demon throng, But long of arm, unmatched in strength, Fell wounded by their darts at length. Thy husband, senseless, by thine aid Was from the battle field conveyed, And wounded nigh to death thy lord Was by thy care to health restored. Well pleased the grateful monarch sware To grant thy first and second prayer. Thou for no favour then wouldst sue, The gifts reserved for season due; And he, thy high-souled lord, agreed To give the boons when thou shouldst need. Myself I knew not what befell, But oft the tale have heard thee tell, And close to thee in friendship knit Deep in my heart have treasured it. Remind thy husband of his oath, Recall the boons and claim them both, That Bharat on the throne be placed With rites of consecration graced, And Ráma to the woods be sent For twice seven years of banishment. Go, Queen, the mourner’s chamber(270) seek, With angry eye and burning cheek; And with disordered robes and hair On the cold earth lie prostrate there. When the king comes still mournful lie, Speak not a word nor meet his eye, But let thy tears in torrent flow, And lie enamoured of thy woe. Well do I know thou long hast been, And ever art, his darling queen. For thy dear sake, O well-loved dame, The mighty king would brave the flame, But ne’er would anger thee, or brook To meet his favourite’s wrathful look. Thy loving lord would even die Thy fancy, Queen, to gratify, And never could he arm his breast To answer nay to thy request. Listen and learn, O dull of sense, Thine all-resistless influence. Gems he will offer, pearls and gold: Refuse his gifts, be stern and cold. Those proffered boons at length recall, And claim them till he grants thee all. And O my lady, high in bliss, With heedful thought forget not this. When from the ground his queen he lifts And grants again the promised gifts, Bind him with oaths he cannot break And thy demands unflnching, make. That Ráma travel to the wild Five years and nine from home exiled, And Bharat, best of all who reign, The empire of the land obtain. For when this term of years has fled Over the banished Ráma’s head, Thy royal son to vigour grown And rooted firm will stand alone. The king, I know, is well inclined, And this the hour to move his mind. Be bold: the threatened rite prevent, And force the king from his intent.”

  She ceased. So counselled to her bane Disguised beneath a show of gain, Kaikeyí in her joy and pride To Manthará again replied: “Thy sense I envy, prudent maid; With sagest lore thy lids persuade. No hump-back maid in all the earth, For wise resolve, can match thy worth. Thou art alone with constant zeal Devoted to thy lady’s weal. Dear girl, without thy faithful aid I had not marked the plot he laid. Full of all guile and sin and spite Misshapen hump-backs shock the sight: But thou art fair and formed to please, Bent like a lily by the breeze. I look thee o’er with watchful eye, And in thy frame no fault can spy; The chest so deep, the waist so trim, So round the lines of breast and limb.(271) Thy cheeks with moonlike beauty shine, And the warm wealth of youth is thine. Thy legs, my girl, are long and neat, And somewhat long thy dainty feet, While stepping out before my face Thou seemest like a crane to pace. The thousand wiles are in thy breast Which Śambara the fiend possessed, And countless others all thine own, O damsel sage, to thee are known. Thy very hump becomes thee too, O thou whose face is fair to view, For there reside in endless store Plots, wizard wiles, and warrior lore. A golden chain I’ll round it fling When Ráma’s flight makes Bharat king: Yea, polished links of finest gold, When once the wished for prize I hold With naught to fear and none to hate, Thy hump, dear maid, shall decorate. A golden frontlet wrought with care, And precious jewels shalt thou wear: Two lovely robes around thee fold, And walk a Goddess to behold, Bidding the moon himself compare His beauty with a face so fair. With scent of precious sandal sweet Down to the nails upon thy feet, First of the household thou shalt go And pay with scorn each battled foe.”

  Kaikeyí’s praise the damsel heard, And thus again her lady stirred, Who lay upon her beauteous bed Like fire upon the altar fed: “Dear Queen, they build the bridge in vain When swollen streams are dry again. Arise, thy glorious task complete, And draw the king to thy retreat.”

  The large-eyed lady left her bower Exulting in her pride of power, And with the hump-back sought the gloom And silence of the mourner’s room. The string of priceless pearls that hung Around her neck to earth she flung, With all the wealth and lustre lent By precious gem and ornament. Then, listening to her slave’s advice, Lay, like a nymph from Paradise. As on the ground her limbs she laid Once more she cried unto the maid: “Soon must thou to the monarch say Kaikeyí’s soul has past away, Or, Ráma banished as we planned, My son made king shall rule the land. No more for gold and gems I care, For brave attire or dainty fare. If Ráma should the throne ascend, That very hour my life will end.”

  The royal lady wounded through The bosom with the darts that flew   Launched from the hump-back’s tongue Pressed both her hands upon her side, And o’er and o’er again she cried   With wildering fury stung: “Yes, it shall be thy task to tell That I have hurried hence to dwell   In Yáma’s realms of woe, Or happy Bharat shall be king, And doomed to years of wandering   Kauśalyá’s son shall go. I heed not dainty viands now Fair wreaths of flowers to twine my brow,   Soft balm or precious scent: My very life I count as naught, Nothing on earth can claim my thought   But Ráma’s banishment.”   She spoke these words of cruel ire; Then stripping off her gay attire,   The cold bare floor she pressed. So, falling from her home on high, Some lovely daughter of the sky   Upon the ground might rest. With darkened brow and furious mien, Stripped of her gems and wreath, the queen   In spotless beauty lay, Like heaven obscured with gathering cloud, When shades of midnight darkness shroud   Each star’s expiring ray.




Canto X. Dasaratha’s Speech.


As Queen Kaikeyí thus obeyed The sinful counsel of her maid She sank upon the chamber floor, As sinks in anguish, wounded sore, An elephant beneath the smart Of the wild hunter’s venomed dart. The lovely lady in her mind Revolved the plot her maid designed, And prompt the gain and risk to scan She step by step approved the plan. Misguided by the hump-back’s guile She pondered her resolve awhile, As the fair path that bliss secured The miserable lady lured, Devoted to her queen, and swayed By hopes of gain and bliss, the maid Rejoiced, her lady’s purpose known, And deemed the prize she sought her own. Then bent upon her purpose dire, Kaikeyí with her soul on fire, Upon the floor lay, languid, down, Her brows contracted in a frown. The bright-hued wreath that bound her hair, Chains, necklets, jewels rich and rare, Stripped off by her own fingers lay Spread on the ground in disarray, And to the floor a lustre lent As stars light up the firmament. Thus prostrate in the mourner’s cell, In garb of woe the lady fell, Her long hair in a single braid, Like some fair nymph of heaven dismayed.(272)

  The monarch, Ráma to install, With thoughtful care had ordered all, And now within his home withdrew, Dismissing first his retinue. Now all the town has heard, thought he, What joyful rite the morn will see. So turned he to her bower to cheer With the glad news his darling’s ear. Majestic, as the Lord of Night, When threatened by the Dragon’s might, Bursts radiant on the evening sky Pale with the clouds that wander by, So Daśaratha, great in fame, To Queen Kaikeyí’s palace came. There parrots flew from tree to tree, And gorgeous peacocks wandered free, While ever and anon was heard The note of some glad water-bird. Here loitered dwarf and hump-backed maid, There lute and lyre sweet music played. Here, rich in blossom, creepers twined O’er grots with wondrous art designed, There Champac and Aśoka flowers Hung glorious o’er the summer bowers, And mid the waving verdure rose Gold, silver, ivory porticoes. Through all the months in ceaseless store The trees both fruit and blossom bore. With many a lake the grounds were graced; Seats gold and silver, here were placed; Here every viand wooed the taste, It was a garden meet to vie E’en with the home of Gods on high. Within the mansion rich and vast The mighty Daśaratha passed: Not there was his beloved queen On her fair couch reclining seen. With love his eager pulses beat For the dear wife he came to meet, And in his blissful hopes deceived, He sought his absent love and grieved. For never had she missed the hour Of meeting in her sumptuous bower, And never had the king of men Entered the empty room till then. Still urged by love and anxious thought News of his favourite queen he sought, For never had his loving eyes Found her or selfish or unwise. Then spoke at length the warder maid, With hands upraised and sore afraid: “My Lord and King, the queen has sought The mourner’s cell with rage distraught.”

  The words the warder maiden said He heard with soul disquieted, And thus as fiercer grief assailed, His troubled senses wellnigh failed. Consumed by torturing fires of grief The king, the world’s imperial chief, His lady lying on the ground In most unqueenly posture, found. The aged king, all pure within, Saw the young queen resolved on sin, Low on the ground, his own sweet wife, To him far dearer than his life, Like some fair creeping plant uptorn, Or like a maid of heaven forlorn, A nymph of air or Goddess sent From Swarga down in banishment.

  As some wild elephant who tries To soothe his consort as she lies Struck by the hunter’s venomed dart, So the great king disturbed in heart, Strove with soft hand and fond caress To soothe his darling queen’s distress, And in his love addressed with sighs The lady of the lotus eyes: “I know not, Queen, why thou shouldst be Thus angered to the heart with me. Say, who has slighted thee, or whence Has come the cause of such offence That in the dust thou liest low, And rendest my fond heart with woe, As if some goblin of the night Had struck thee with a deadly blight, And cast foul influence on her Whose spells my loving bosom stir? I have Physicians famed for skill, Each trained to cure some special ill: My sweetest lady, tell thy pain, And they shall make thee well again. Whom, darling, wouldst thou punished see? Or whom enriched with lordly fee? Weep not, my lovely Queen, and stay This grief that wears thy frame away; Speak, and the guilty shall be freed. The guiltless be condemned to bleed, The poor enriched, the rich abased, The low set high, the proud disgraced. My lords and I thy will obey, All slaves who own thy sovereign sway; And I can ne’er my heart incline To check in aught one wish of thine. Now by my life I pray thee tell The thoughts that in thy bosom dwell. The power and might thou knowest well, Should from thy breast all doubt expel. I swear by all my merit won, Speak, and thy pleasure shall be done. Far as the world’s wide bounds extend My glorious empire knows no end. Mine are the tribes in eastern lands, And those who dwell on Sindhu’s sands: Mine is Suráshṭra, far away, Suvíra’s realm admits my sway. My best the southern nations fear, The Angas and the Vangas hear. And as lord paramount I reign O’er Magadh and the Matsyas’ plain, Kośal, and Káśi’s wide domain:(273) All rich in treasures of the mine, In golden corn, sheep, goats, and kine. Choose what thou wilt. Kaikeyí, thence: But tell me, O my darling, whence Arose thy grief, and it shall fly Like hoar-frost when the sun is high.”

  She, by his loving words consoled, Longed her dire purpose to unfold, And sought with sharper pangs to wring The bosom of her lord the king.




Canto XI. The Queen’s Demand.


To him enthralled by love, and blind, Pierced by his darts who shakes the mind,(274) Kaikeyí with remorseless breast Her grand purpose thus expressed: “O King, no insult or neglect Have I endured, or disrespect. One wish I have, and faith would see That longing granted, lord, by thee. Now pledge thy word if thou incline To listen to this prayer of mine, Then I with confidence will speak, And thou shalt hear the boon I seek.”

  Ere she had ceased, the monarch fell, A victim to the lady’s spell, And to the deadly snare she set Sprang, like a roebuck to the net. Her lover raised her drooping head, Smiled, playing with her hair, and said: “Hast thou not learnt, wild dame, till now That there is none so dear as thou To me thy loving husband, save My Ráma bravest of the brave? By him my race’s high-souled heir, By him whom none can match, I swear, Now speak the wish that on thee weighs: By him whose right is length of days, Whom if my fond paternal eye Saw not one hour I needs must die,— I swear by Ráma my dear son, Speak, and thy bidding shall be done. Speak, darling; if thou choose, request To have the heart from out my breast; Regard my words, sweet love, and name The wish thy mind thinks fit to frame. Nor let thy soul give way to doubt: My power should drive suspicion out. Yea, by my merits won I swear, Speak, darling, I will grant thy prayer.”

  The queen, ambitious, overjoyed To see him by her plot decoyed, More eager still her aims to reach, Spoke her abominable speech: “A boon thou grantest, nothing loth, And swearest with repeated oath. Now let the thirty Gods and three My witnesses, with Indra, be. Let sun and moon and planets hear, Heaven, quarters, day and night, give ear. The mighty world, the earth outspread, With bards of heaven and demons dread; The ghosts that walk in midnight shade, And household Gods, our present aid, A every being great and small To hear and mark the oath I call.”

  When thus the archer king was bound, With treacherous arts and oaths enwound, She to her bounteous lord subdued By blinding love, her speech renewed: “Remember, King, that long-past day Of Gods’ and demons’ battle fray. And how thy foe in doubtful strife Had nigh bereft thee of thy life. Remember, it was only I Preserved thee when about to die, And thou for watchful love and care Wouldst grant my first and second prayer. Those offered boons, pledged with thee then, I now demand, O King of men, Of thee, O Monarch, good and just, Whose righteous soul observes each trust. If thou refuse thy promise sworn, I die, despised, before the morn. These rites in Ráma’s name begun— Transfer them, and enthrone my son. The time is come to claim at last The double boon of days long-past, When Gods and demons met in fight, And thou wouldst fain my care requite. Now forth to Daṇḍak’s forest drive Thy Ráma for nine years and five, And let him dwell a hermit there With deerskin coat and matted hair. Without a rival let my boy The empire of the land enjoy, And let mine eyes ere morning see Thy Ráma to the forest flee.”




Canto XII. Dasaratha’s Lament.


The monarch, as Kaikeyí pressed With cruel words her dire request, Stood for a time absorbed in thought While anguish in his bosom wrought. “Does some wild dream my heart assail? Or do my troubled senses fail? Does some dire portent scare my view? Or frenzy’s stroke my soul subdue?” Thus as he thought, his troubled mind In doubt and dread no rest could find, Distressed and trembling like a deer Who sees the dreaded tigress near. On the bare ground his limbs he threw, And many a long deep sigh he drew, Like a wild snake, with fury blind, By charms within a ring confined. Once as the monarch’s fury woke, “Shame on thee!” from his bosom broke, And then in sense-bewildering pain He fainted on the ground again. At length, when slowly strength returned, He answered as his eyeballs burned With the wild fury of his ire Consuming her, as ’twere, with fire: “Fell traitress, thou whose thoughts design The utter ruin of my line, What wrong have I or Ráma done? Speak murderess, speak thou wicked one, Seeks he not evermore to please Thee with all sonlike courtesies? By what persuasion art thou led To bring this ruin on his head? Ah me, that fondly unaware I brought thee home my life to share, Called daughter of a king, in truth A serpent with a venomed tooth! What fault can I pretend to find In Ráma praised by all mankind, That I my darling should forsake? No, take my life, my glory take: Let either queen be from me torn, But not my well-loved eldest-born. Him but to see is highest bliss, And death itself his face to miss. The world may sunless stand, the grain May thrive without the genial rain, But if my Ráma be not nigh My spirit from its frame will fly. Enough, thine impious plan forgo, O thou who plottest sin and woe. My head before thy feet, I kneel, And pray thee some compassion feel. O wicked dame, what can have led Thy heart to dare a plot so dread? Perchance thy purpose is to sound The grace thy son with me has found; Perchance the words that, all these days, Thou still hast said in Ráma’s praise, Were only feigned, designed to cheer With flatteries a father’s ear. Soon as thy grief, my Queen, I knew, My bosom felt the anguish too. In empty halls art thou possessed, And subject to anothers’ hest? Now on Ikshváku’s ancient race Falls foul disorder and disgrace, If thou, O Queen, whose heart so long Has loved the good should choose the wrong. Not once, O large-eyed dame, hast thou Been guilty of offence till now, Nor said a word to make me grieve, Now will I now thy sin believe. With thee my Ráma used to hold Like place with Bharat lofty-souled. As thou so often, when the pair Were children yet, wouldst fain declare. And can thy righteous soul endure That Ráma glorious, pious, pure, Should to the distant wilds be sent For fourteen years of banishment? Yea, Ráma Bharat’s self exceeds In love to thee and sonlike deeds, And, for deserving love of thee, As Bharat, even so is he. Who better than that chieftain may Obedience, love, and honour pay, Thy dignity with care protect, Thy slightest word and wish respect? Of all his countless followers none Can breathe a word against my son; Of many thousands not a dame Can hint reproach or whisper blame. All creatures feel the sweet control Of Ráma’s pure and gentle soul. The pride of Manu’s race he binds To him the people’s grateful minds. He wins the subjects with his truth, The poor with gifts and gentle ruth, His teachers with his docile will, The foemen with his archer skill. Truth, purity, religious zeal, The hand to give, the heart to feel, The love that ne’er betrays a friend, The rectitude that naught can bend, Knowledge, and meek obedience grace My Ráma pride of Raghu’s race. Canst thou thine impious plot design ’Gainst him in whom these virtues shine, Whose glory with the sages vies, Peer of the Gods who rule the skies! From him no harsh or bitter word To pain one creature have I heard, And how can I my son address, For thee, with words of bitterness? Have mercy, Queen: some pity show To see my tears of anguish flow, And listen to my mournful cry, A poor old man who soon must die. Whate’er this sea-girt land can boast Of rich and rare from coast to coast, To thee, my Queen, I give it all: But O, thy deadly words recall: O see, my suppliant hands entreat, Again my lips are on thy feet: Save Ráma, save my darling child, Nor kill me with this sin defiled.” He grovelled on the ground, and lay To burning grief a senseless prey, And ever and anon, assailed By floods of woe he wept and wailed, Striving with eager speed to gain The margent of his sea of pain.

  With fiercer words she fiercer yet The hapless father’s pleading met: “O Monarch, if thy soul repent The promise and thy free consent, How wilt thou in the world maintain Thy fame for truth unsmirched with stain? When gathered kings with thee converse, And bid thee all the tale rehearse, What wilt thou say, O truthful King, In answer to their questioning? “She to whose love my life I owe, Who saved me smitten by the foe, Kaikeyí, for her tender care, Was cheated of the oath I sware.” Thus wilt thou answer, and forsworn Wilt draw on thee the princes’ scorn. Learn from that tale, the Hawk and Dove,(275) How strong for truth was Saivya’s love. Pledged by his word the monarch gave His flesh the suppliant bird to save. So King Alarka gave his eyes, And gained a mansion in the skies. The Sea himself his promise keeps, And ne’er beyond his limit sweeps. My deeds of old again recall, Nor let thy bond dishonoured fall. The rights of truth thou wouldst forget, Thy Ráma on the throne to set, And let thy days in pleasure glide, Fond King, Kauśalyá by thy side. Now call it by what name thou wilt, Justice, injustice, virtue, guilt, Thy word and oath remain the same, And thou must yield what thus I claim. If Ráma be anointed, I This very day will surely die, Before thy face will poison drink, And lifeless at thy feet will sink. Yea, better far to die than stay Alive to see one single day The crowds before Kauśalyá stand And hail her queen with reverent hand. Now by my son, myself, I swear, No gift, no promise whatsoe’er My steadfast soul shall now content, But only Ráma’s banishment.”

  So far she spake by rage impelled, And then the queen deep silence held. He heard her speech full fraught with ill, But spoke no word bewildered still, Gazed on his love once held so dear Who spoke unlovely rede to hear; Then as he slowly pondered o’er The queen’s resolve and oath she swore. Once sighing forth, Ah Ráma! he Fell prone as falls a smitten tree. His senses lost like one insane, Faint as a sick man weak with pain, Or like a wounded snake dismayed, So lay the king whom earth obeyed. Long burning sighs he slowly heaved, As, conquered by his woe, he grieved, And thus with tears and sobs between His sad faint words addressed the queen:

  “By whom, Kaikeyí, wast thou taught This flattering hope with ruin fraught? Have goblins seized thy soul, O dame, Who thus canst speak and feel no shame? Thy mind with sin is sicklied o’er, From thy first youth ne’er seen before. A good and loving wife wast thou, But all, alas! is altered now. What terror can have seized thy breast To make thee frame this dire request, That Bharat o’er the land may reign, And Ráma in the woods remain? Turn from thine evil ways, O turn, And thy perfidious counsel spurn, If thou would fain a favour do To people, lord, and Bharat too. O wicked traitress, fierce and vile, Who lovest deeds of sin and guile, What crime or grievance dost thou see, What fault in Ráma or in me? Thy son will ne’er the throne accept If Ráma from his rights be kept, For Bharat’s heart more firmly yet Than Ráma’s is on justice set. How shall I say, Go forth, and brook Upon my Ráma’s face to look, See his pale cheek and ashy lips Dimmed like the moon in sad eclipse? How see the plan so well prepared When prudent friends my counsels shared, All ruined, like a host laid low Beneath some foeman’s murderous blow. What will these gathered princes say, From regions near and far away? “O’erlong endures the monarch’s reign, or now he is a child again.” When many a good and holy sage In Scripture versed, revered for age, Shall ask for Ráma, what shall I Unhappy, what shall I reply? “By Queen Kaikeyí long distressed I drove him forth and dispossessed.” Although herein the truth I speak, They all will hold me false and weak. What will Kauśalyá say when she Demands her son exiled by me? Alas! what answer shall I frame, Or how console the injured dame? She like a slave on me attends, And with a sister’s care she blends A mother’s love, a wife’s, a friend’s. In spite of all her tender care, Her noble son, her face most fair, Another queen I could prefer And for thy sake neglected her, But now, O Queen, my heart is grieved For love and care by thee received, E’en as the sickening wretch repents His dainty meal and condiments. And how will Queen Sumitrá trust The husband whom she finds unjust, Seeing my Ráma driven hence Dishonoured, and for no offence? Ah! the Videhan bride will hear A double woe, a double fear, Two whelming sorrows at one breath, Her lord’s disgrace, his father’s death. Mine aged bosom she will wring And kill me with her sorrowing, Sad as a fair nymph left to weep Deserted on Himálaya’s steep. For short will be my days, I ween, When I with mournful eyes have seen My Ráma wandering forth alone And heard dear Sítá sob and moan. Ah me! my fond belief I rue. Vile traitress, loved as good and true, As one who in his thirst has quaffed, Deceived by looks, a deadly draught. Ah! thou hast slain me, murderess, while Soothing my soul with words of guile, As the wild hunter kills the deer Lured from the brake his song to hear. Soon every honest tongue will fling Reproach on the dishonest king; The people’s scorn in every street The seller of his child will meet, And such dishonour will be mine As whelms a Bráhman drunk with wine. Ah me, for my unhappy fate, Compelled thy words to tolerate! Such woe is sent to scourge a crime Committed in some distant time. For many a day with sinful care I cherished thee, thou sin and snare, Kept thee, unwitting, like a cord Destined to bind its hapless lord. Mine hours of ease I spent with thee, Nor deemed my love my death would be, While like a heedless child I played, On a black snake my hand I laid. A cry from every mouth will burst And all the world will hold me curst, Because I saw my high-souled son Unkinged, unfathered, and undone; “The king by power of love beguiled Is weaker than a foolish child, His own beloved son to make An exile for a woman’s sake. By chaste and holy vows restrained, By reverend teachers duly trained. When he his virtue’s fruit should taste He falls by sin and woe disgraced.” Two words will all his answer be When I pronounce the stern decree, “Hence, Ráma, to the woods away,” All he will say is, I obey. O, if he would my will withstand When banished from his home and land, This were a comfort in my woe; But he will ne’er do this, I know. My Ráma to the forest fled, And curses thick upon my head, Grim Death will bear me hence away, His world-abominated prey. When I am gone and Ráma too. How wilt thou those I love pursue? What vengeful sin will be designed Against the queens I leave behind? When thou hast slain her son and me Kauśalyá soon will follow: she Will sink beneath her sorrows’ weight, And die like me disconsolate. Exist, Kaikeyí, in thy pride, And let thy heart be gratified, When thou my queens and me hast hurled, And children, to the under world. Soon wilt thou rule as empress o’er My noble house unvext before. But then to wild confusion left, Of Ráma and of me bereft. If Bharat to thy plan consent And long for Ráma’s banishment, Ne’er let his hands presume to pay The funeral honours to my clay. Vile foe, thou cause of all mine ill, Obtain at last thy cursed will. A widow soon shalt thou enjoy The sweets of empire with thy boy. O Princess, sure some evil fate First brought thee here to devastate, In whom the night of ruin lies Veiled in a consort’s fair disguise. The scorn of all and deepest shame Will long pursue my hated name, And dire disgrace on me will press, Misled by thee to wickedness. How shall my Ráma, whom, before, His elephant or chariot bore, Now with his feet, a wanderer, tread The forest wilds around him spread? How shall my son, to please whose taste, The deftest cooks, with earrings graced, With rivalry and jealous care The dainty meal and cates prepare— How shall he now his life sustain With acid fruit and woodland grain? He spends his time unvext by cares, And robes of precious texture wears: How shall he, with one garment round His limbs recline upon the ground? Whose was this plan, this cruel thought Unheard till now, with ruin fraught, To make thy son Ayodhyá’s king, And send my Ráma wandering? Shame, shame on women! Vile, untrue, Their selfish ends they still pursue. Not all of womankind I mean. But more than all this wicked queen.   O worthless, cruel, selfish dame,     I brought thee home, my plague and woe.   What fault in me hast thou to blame,     Or in my son who loves thee so?   Fond wives may from their husbands flee,     And fathers may their sons desert,   But all the world would rave to see     My Ráma touched with deadly hurt.   I joy his very step to hear,     As though his godlike form I viewed;   And when I see my Ráma near     I feel my youth again renewed.   There might be life without the sun,     Yea, e’en if Indra sent no rain,   But, were my Ráma banished, none     Would, so I think, alive remain.   A foe that longs my life to take,     I brought thee here my death to be,   Caressed thee long, a venomed snake,     And through my folly die. Ah me!   Ráma and me and Lakshmaṇ slay,     And then with Bharat rule the state;   So bring the kingdom to decay,     And fawn on those thy lord who hate,   Plotter of woe, for evil bred,     For such a speech why do not all   Thy teeth from out thy wicked head     Split in a thousand pieces fall?   My Ráma’s words are ever kind,     He knows not how to speak in ire:   Then how canst thou presume to find     A fault in him whom all admire?   Yield to despair, go mad, or die,     Or sink within the rifted earth;   Thy fell request will I deny,     Thou shamer of thy royal birth.   Thy longer life I scarce can bear,     Thou ruin of my home and race,   Who wouldst my heart and heartstrings tear,     Keen as a razor, false and base.   My life is gone, why speak of joy?     For what, without my son, were sweet?   Spare, lady, him thou canst destroy;     I pray thee as I touch thy feet.”   He fell and wept with wild complaint,     Heart-struck by her presumptuous speech,   But could not touch, so weak and faint,     The cruel feet he strove to reach.




Canto XIII. Dasaratha’s Distress.


Unworthy of his mournful fate, The mighty king, unfortunate, Lay prostrate in unseemly guise, As, banished from the blissful skies, Yayáti, in his evil day. His merit all exhausted, lay.(276) The queen, triumphant in the power Won by her beauty’s fatal dower, Still terrible and unsubdued, Her dire demand again renewed: “Great Monarch, ’twas thy boast till now To love the truth and keep the vow; Then wherefore would thy lips refuse The promised boon ’tis mine to choose?”

  King Daśaratha, thus addressed, With anger raging in his breast, Sank for a while beneath the pain, Then to Kaikeyí spoke again: “Childless so long, at length I won, With mighty toil, from Heaven a son, Ráma, the mighty-armed; and how Shall I desert my darling now? A scholar wise, a hero bold, Of patient mood, with wrath controlled, How can I bid my Ráma fly, My darling of the lotus eye? In heaven itself I scarce could bear, When asking of my Ráma there, To hear the Gods his griefs declare, And O, that death would take me hence Before I wrong his innocence!”

  As thus the monarch wept and wailed, And maddening grief his heart assailed, The sun had sought his resting-place, And night was closing round apace. But yet the moon-crowned night could bring No comfort to the wretched king. As still he mourned with burning sighs And fixed his gaze upon the skies: “O Night whom starry fires adorn, I long not for the coming morn. Be kind and show some mercy: see, My suppliant hands are raised to thee. Nay, rather fly with swifter pace; No longer would I see the face Of Queen Kaikeyí, cruel, dread, Who brings this woe upon mine head.” Again with suppliant hands he tried To move the queen, and wept and sighed: “To me, unhappy me, inclined To good, sweet dame, thou shouldst be kind; Whose life is well-nigh fled, who cling To thee for succour, me thy king. This, only this, is all my claim: Have mercy, O my lovely dame. None else have I to take my part, Have mercy: thou art good at heart. Hear, lady of the soft black eye, And win a name that ne’er shall die: Let Ráma rule this glorious land, The gift of thine imperial hand. O lady of the dainty waist, With eyes and lips of beauty graced, Please Ráma, me, each saintly priest, Bharat, and all from chief to least.”   She heard his wild and mournful cry,     She saw the tears his speech that broke, Saw her good husband’s reddened eye,   But, cruel still, no word she spoke. His eyes upon her face he bent,   And sought for mercy, but in vain: She claimed his darling’s banishment,   He swooned upon the ground again.




Canto XIV. Ráma Summoned.


The wicked queen her speech renewed, When rolling on the earth she viewed Ikshváku’s son, Ayodhyá’s king, For his dear Ráma sorrowing: “Why, by a simple promise bound, Liest thou prostrate on the ground, As though a grievous sin dismayed Thy spirit! Why so sore afraid? Keep still thy word. The righteous deem That truth, mid duties, is supreme: And now in truth and honour’s name I bid thee own the binding claim. Śaivya, a king whom earth obeyed, Once to a hawk a promise made, Gave to the bird his flesh and bone, And by his truth made heaven his own.(277) Alarka, when a Bráhman famed For Scripture lore his promise claimed, Tore from his head his bleeding eyes And unreluctant gave the prize. His narrow bounds prescribed restrain The Rivers’ Lord, the mighty main, Who, though his waters boil and rave, Keeps faithful to the word he gave. Truth all religion comprehends, Through all the world its might extends: In truth alone is justice placed, On truth the words of God are based: A life in truth unchanging past Will bring the highest bliss at last. If thou the right would still pursue, Be constant to thy word and true: Let me thy promise fruitful see, For boons, O King, proceed from thee. Now to preserve thy righteous fame, And yielding to my earnest claim— Thrice I repeat it—send thy child, Thy Ráma, to the forest wild. But if the boon thou still deny, Before thy face, forlorn, I die.”

  Thus was the helpless monarch stung By Queen Kaikeyí’s fearless tongue, As Bali strove in vain to loose His limbs from Indra’s fatal noose. Dismayed in soul and pale with fear, The monarch, like a trembling steer Between the chariot’s wheel and yoke, Again to Queen Kaikeyí spoke, With sad eyes fixt in vacant stare, Gathering courage from despair: “That hand I took, thou sinful dame, With texts, before the sacred flame, Thee and thy son, I scorn and hate, And all at once repudiate. The night is fled: the dawn is near: Soon will the holy priests be here To bid me for the rite prepare That with my son the throne will share, The preparation made to grace My Ráma in his royal place— With this, e’en this, my darling for My death the funeral flood shall pour. Thou and thy son at least forbear In offerings to my shade to share, For by the plot thy guile has laid His consecration will be stayed. This very day how shall I brook To meet each subject’s altered look? To mark each gloomy joyless brow That was so bright and glad but now?”

  While thus the high-souled monarch spoke To the stern queen, the Morning broke, And holy night had slowly fled, With moon and stars engarlanded. Yet once again the cruel queen Spoke words in answer fierce and keen, Still on her evil purpose bent, Wild with her rage and eloquent: “What speech is this? Such words as these Seem sprung from poison-sown disease. Quick to thy noble Ráma send And bid him on his sire attend. When to my son the rule is given; When Ráma to the woods is driven; When not a rival copes with me, From chains of duty thou art free.”

  Thus goaded, like a generous steed Urged by sharp spurs to double speed, “My senses are astray,” he cried, “And duty’s bonds my hands have tied. I long to see mine eldest son, My virtuous, my beloved one.”

  And now the night had past away; Out shone the Maker of the Day, Bringing the planetary hour And moment of auspicious power. Vaśishṭha, virtuous, far renowned, Whose young disciples girt him round, With sacred things without delay Through the fair city took his way. He traversed, where the people thronged, And all for Ráma’s coming longed, The town as fair in festive show As his who lays proud cities low.(278) He reached the palace where he heard The mingled notes of many a bird, Where crowded thick high-honoured bands Of guards with truncheons in their hands. Begirt by many a sage, elate, Vaśishṭha reached the royal gate, And standing by the door he found Sumantra, for his form renowned, The king’s illustrious charioteer And noble counsellor and peer. To him well skilled in every part Of his hereditary art Vaśishṭha said: “O charioteer, Inform the king that I am here, Here ready by my side behold These sacred vessels made of gold, Which water for the rite contain From Gangá and each distant main. Here for installing I have brought The seat prescribed of fig-wood wrought, All kinds of seed and precious scent And many a gem and ornament; Grain, sacred grass, the garden’s spoil, Honey and curds and milk and oil; Eight radiant maids, the best of all War elephants that feed in stall; A four-horse car, a bow and sword. A litter, men to bear their lord; A white umbrella bright and fair That with the moon may well compare; Two chouries of the whitest hair; A golden beaker rich and rare; A bull high-humped and fair to view, Girt with gold bands and white of hue; A four-toothed steed with flowing mane, A throne which lions carved sustain; A tiger’s skin, the sacred fire, Fresh kindled, which the rites require; The best musicians skilled to play, And dancing-girls in raiment gay; Kine, Bráhmans, teachers fill the court, And bird and beast of purest sort. From town and village, far and near, The noblest men are gathered here; Here merchants with their followers crowd, And men in joyful converse loud, And kings from many a distant land To view the consecration stand. The dawn is come, the lucky day; Go bid the monarch haste away, That now Prince Ráma may obtain The empire, and begin his reign.”

  Soon as he heard the high behest The driver of the chariot pressed Within the chambers of the king, His lord with praises honouring.