[ADA-ramayana  —  part 11 of 12, continuation of part 10]
============================================================

high, Gazing with love on Sítá’s melting eye: With anxious care he saw her pallid cheek, And fondly bade her all her wishes speak. “Once more I fain would see,” the lady cried, “The sacred groves that rise on Gangá’s side, Where holy grass is ever fresh and green, And cattle feeding on the rice are seen: There would I rest awhile, where once I strayed Linked in sweet friendship to each hermit maid.” And Ráma smiled upon his wife, and sware, With many a tender oath, to grant her prayer. It chanced, one evening, from a lofty seat He viewed Ayodhyá stretched before his feet: He looked with pride upon the royal road Lined with gay shops their glittering stores that showed, He looked on Sarjú’s silver waves, that bore The light barks flying with the sail and oar; He saw the gardens near the town that lay, Filled with glad citizens and boys at play. Then swelled the monarch’s bosom with delight, And his heart triumphed at the happy sight. He turned to Bhadra, standing by his side,— Upon whose secret news the king relied.— And bade him say what people said and thought Of all the exploits that his arm had wrought. The spy was silent, but, when questioned still, Thus spake, obedient to his master’s will: “For all thy deeds in peace and battle done The people praise thee, King, except for one: This only act of all thy life they blame,— Thy welcome home of her, thy ravished dame.” Like iron yielding to the iron’s blow, Sank Ráma, smitten by those words of woe. His breast, where love and fear for empire vied, Swayed, like a rapid swing, from side to side. Shall he this rumour scorn, which blots his life, Or banish her, his dear and spotless wife? But rigid Duty left no choice between His perilled honour and his darling queen. Called to his side, his brothers wept to trace The marks of anguish in his altered face. No longer bright and glorious as of old, He thus addressed them when the tale was told: “Alas! my brothers, that my life should blot The fame of those the Sun himself begot: As from the labouring cloud the driven rain Leaves on the mirror’s polished face a stain. E’en as an elephant who loathes the stake And the strong chain he has no power to break, I cannot brook this cry on every side, That spreads like oil upon the moving tide. I leave the daughter of Videha’s King, And the fair blossom soon from her to spring, As erst, obedient to my sire’s command, I left the empire of the sea-girt land. Good is my queen, and spotless; but the blame Is hard to bear, the mockery and the shame. Men blame the pure Moon for the darkened ray, When the black shadow takes the light away. And, O my brothers, if ye wish to see Ráma live long from this reproach set free, Let not your pity labour to control The firm sad purpose of his changeless soul.”

  Thus Ráma spake. The sorrowing brothers heard His stern resolve, without an answering word; For none among them dared his voice to raise, That will to question:—and they could not praise. “Beloved brother,” thus the monarch cried To his dear Lakshmaṇ, whom he called aside.— Lakshmaṇ, who knew no will save his alone Whose hero deeds through all the world were known:— “My queen has told me that she longs to rove Beneath the shade of Saint Válmíki’s grove: Now mount thy car, away my lady bear; Tell all, and leave her in the forest there.”

  The car was brought, the gentle lady smiled, As the glad news her trusting heart beguiled. She mounted up: Sumantra held the reins; And forth the coursers bounded o’er the plains. She saw green fields in all their beauty dressed, And thanked her husband in her loving breast. Alas! deluded queen! she little knew How changed was he whom she believed so true; How one she worshipped like the Heavenly Tree Could, in a moment’s time, so deadly be. Her right eye throbbed,—ill-omened sign, to tell The endless loss of him she loved so well, And to the lady’s saddening heart revealed The woe that Lakshmaṇ, in his love, concealed. Pale grew the bloom of her sweet face,—as fade The lotus blossoms,—by that sign dismayed. “Oh, may this omen,”—was her silent prayer,— “No grief to Ráma or his brothers bear!”

  When Lakshmaṇ, faithful to his brother, stood Prepared to leave her in the distant wood, The holy Gangá, flowing by the way, Raised all her hands of waves to bid him stay. At length with sobs and burning tears that rolled Down his sad face, the king’s command he told; As when a monstrous cloud, in evil hour, Rains from its labouring womb a stony shower. She heard, she swooned, she fell upon the earth, Fell on that bosom whence she sprang to birth. As, when the tempest in its fury flies, Low in the dust the prostrate creeper lies, So, struck with terror sank she on the ground, And all her gems, like flowers, lay scattered round. But Earth, her mother, closed her stony breast, And, filled with doubt, denied her daughter rest. She would not think the Chief of Raghu’s race Would thus his own dear guiltless wife disgrace. Stunned and unconscious, long the lady lay, And felt no grief, her senses all astray. But gentle Lakshmaṇ, with a brother’s care, Brought back her sense, and with her sense, despair. But not her wrongs, her shame, her grief, could wring One angry word against her lord the King: Upon herself alone the blame she laid, For tears and sighs that would not yet be stayed. To soothe her anguish Lakshmaṇ gently strove; He showed the path to Saint Válmíki’s grove; And craved her pardon for the share of ill He wrought, obedient to his brother’s will. “O, long and happy, dearest brother, live! I have to praise,” she cried, “and not forgive: To do his will should be thy noblest praise; As Vishṇu ever Indra’s will obeys. Return, dear brother: on each royal dame Bestow a blessing in poor Sítá’s name, And bid them, in their love, kind pity take Upon her offspring, for the father’s sake. And speak my message in the monarch’s ear, The last last words of mine that he shall hear: “Say, was it worthy of thy noble race Thy guiltless queen thus lightly to disgrace? For idle tales to spurn thy faithful bride, Whose constant truth the searching fire had tried? Or may I hope thy soul refused consent, And but thy voice decreed my banishment? Hope that no care could turn, no love could stay The lightning stroke that falls on me to-day? That sins committed in the life that’s fled Have brought this evil on my guilty head? Think not I value now my widowed life, Worthless to her who once was Ráma’s wife. I only live because I hope to see The dear dear babe that will resemble thee. And then my task of penance shall be done, With eyes uplifted to the scorching sun; So shall the life that is to come restore Mine own dear husband, to be lost no more.” And Lakshmaṇ swore her every word to tell, Then turned to go, and bade the queen farewell. Alone with all her woes, her piteous cries Rose like a butchered lamb’s that struggling dies. The reverend sage who from his dwelling came For sacred grass and wood to feed the flame, Heard her loud shrieks that rent the echoing wood, And, quickly following, by the mourner stood. Before the sage the lady bent her low, Dried her poor eyes, and strove to calm her woe. With blessings on her hopes the blameless man In silver tones his soothing speech began: “First of all faithful wives, O Queen, art thou; And can I fail to mourn thy sorrows now? Rest in this holy grove, nor harbour fear Where dwell in safety e’en the timid deer. Here shall thine offspring safely see the light, And be partaker of each holy rite. Here, near the hermits’ dwellings, shall thou lave Thy limbs in Tonse’s sin-destroying wave, And on her isles, by prayer and worship, gain Sweet peace of mind, and rest from care and pain. Each hermit maiden with her sweet soft voice, Shall soothe thy woe, and bid thy heart rejoice: With fruit and early flowers thy lap shall fill, And offer grain that springs for us at will. And here, with labour light, thy task shall be To water carefully each tender tree, And learn how sweet a nursing mother’s joy Ere on thy bosom rest thy darling boy.…”

That very night the banished Sítá bare Two royal children, most divinely fair.…

The saint Válmíki, with a friend’s delight, Graced Sítá’s offspring with each holy rite. Kuśa and Lava—such the names they bore— Learnt, e’en in childhood, all the Vedas’ lore; And then the bard, their minstrel souls to train, Taught them to sing his own immortal strain. And Ráma’s deeds her boys so sweetly sang, That Sítá’s breast forgot her bitterest pang.…

Then Sítá’s children, by the saint’s command, Sang the Rámáyan, wandering through the land. How could the glorious poem fail to gain Each heart, each ear that listened to the strain! So sweet each minstrel’s voice who sang the praise Of Ráma deathless in Válmíki’s lays. Ráma himself amid the wondering throng Marked their fair forms, and loved the noble song, While, still and weeping, round the nobles stood, As, on a windless morn, a dewy wood. On the two minstrels all the people gazed, Praised their fair looks and marvelled as they praised; For every eye amid the throng could trace Ráma’s own image in each youthful face. Then spoke the king himself and bade them say Who was their teacher, whose the wondrous lay. Soon as Válmíki, mighty saint, he saw, He bowed his head in reverential awe. “These are thy children” cried the saint, “recall Thine own dear Sítá, pure and true through all.” “O holy father,” thus the king replied, “The faithful lady by the fire was tried; But the foul demon’s too successful arts Raised light suspicions in my people’s hearts. Grant that their breasts may doubt her faith no more, And thus my Sítá and her sons restore.”

_Raghuvaṇśa Cantos XIV, XV._




Parasuráma, Page 87.


“He cleared the earth thrice seven times of the Kshatriya caste, and filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta, from which he offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. Offering a solemn sacrifice to the King of the Gods Paraśuráma presented the earth to the ministering priests. Having given the earth to Kaśyapa, the hero of immeasurable prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides; and in this manner was there enmity between him and the race of the Kshatriyas, and thus was the whole earth conquered by Paraśuráma.” The destruction of the Kshatriyas by Paraśuráma had been provoked by the cruelty of the Kshatriyas. _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol._ II. p. 334.

The scene in which he appears is probably interpolated for the sake of making him declare Ráma to be Vishṇu. “Herr von Schlegel has often remarked to me,” says Lassen, “that without injuring the connexion of the story all the chapters [of the Rámáyan] might be omitted in which Ráma is regarded as an incarnation of Vishṇu. In fact, where the incarnation of Vishṇu as the four sons of Daśaratha is described, the great sacrifice is already ended, and all the priests remunerated at the termination, when the new sacrifice begins at which the Gods appear, then withdraw, and then first propose the incarnation to Vishṇu. If it had been an original circumstance of the story, the Gods would certainly have deliberated on the matter earlier, and the celebration of the sacrifice would have continued without interruption.” LASSEN, _Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol. I._ p. 489.




Yáma, Page 68.


Son of Vivasvat=Jima son of Vivanghvat, the Jamshíd of the later Persians.




Fate, Page 68.


“The idea of fate was different in India from that which prevailed in Greece. In Greece fate was a mysterious, inexorable power which governed men and human events, and from which it was impossible to escape. In India Fate was rather an inevitable consequence of actions done in births antecedent to one’s present state of existence, and was therefore connected with the doctrine of metempsychosis. A misfortune was for the most part a punishment, an expiation of ancient faults not yet entirely cancelled.” GORRESIO.




Visvámitra, Page 76.


“Though of royal extraction, Viśvámitra conquered for himself and his family the privileges of a Brahman. He became a Brahman, and thus broke through all the rules of caste. The Brahmans cannot deny the fact, because it forms one of the principal subjects of their legendary poems. But they have spared no pains to represent the exertions of Viśvámitra, in his struggle for Brahmanhood, as so superhuman that no one would easily be tempted to follow his example. No mention is made of these monstrous penances in the Veda, where the struggle between Viśvámitra, the leader of the Kuśikas or Bharatas, and the Brahman Vaśishtha, the leader of the white-robed Tritsus, is represented as the struggle of two rivals for the place of Purohita or chief priest and minister at the court of King Sudás, the son of Pijavana.” _Chips from a German Workshop_, _Vol. II._ p. 336.




Household Gods, Page 102.


“No house is supposed to be without its tutelary divinity, but the notion attached to this character is now very far from precise. The deity who is the object of hereditary and family worship, the _Kuladevatá_, is always one of the leading personages of the Hindu mythology, as Śiva, Vishṇu or Durgá, but the _Grihadevatá_ rarely bears any distinct appellation. In Bengal, the domestic god is sometimes the _Sálagrám_ stone, sometimes the _tulasi_ plant, sometimes a basket with a little rice in it, and sometimes a water-jar—to either of which a brief adoration is daily addressed, most usually by the females of the family. Occasionally small images of Lakshmi or Chaṇdi fulfil the office, or should a snake appear, he is venerated as the guardian of the dwelling. In general, however, in former times, the household deities were regarded as the unseen spirits of ill, the ghosts and goblins who hovered about every spot, and claimed some particular sites as their own. Offerings were made to them in the open air, by scattering a little rice with a short formula at the close of all ceremonies to keep them in good humour.

“The household gods correspond better with the genii locorum than with the lares or penates of autiquity.”

H. H. WILSON.




Page 107.


_Śaivya, a king whom earth obeyed,_ _Once to a hawk a promise made._

The following is a free version of this very ancient story which occurs more than once in the _Mahábhárat_:

THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

Chased by a hawk there came a dove   With worn and weary wing, And took her stand upon the hand   Of Káśí’s mighty king. The monarch smoothed her ruffled plumes   And laid her on his breast, And cried, “No fear shall vex thee here,   Rest, pretty egg-born, rest! Fair Káśí’s realm is rich and wide,   With golden harvests gay, But all that’s mine will I resign   Ere I my guest betray.” But panting for his half won spoil   The hawk was close behind. And with wild cry and eager eye   Came swooping down the wind: “This bird,” he cried, “my destined prize,   ’Tis not for thee to shield: ’Tis mine by right and toilsome flight   O’er hill and dale and field. Hunger and thirst oppress me sore,   And I am faint with toil: Thou shouldst not stay a bird of prey   Who claims his rightful spoil. They say thou art a glorious king,   And justice is thy care: Then justly reign in thy domain,   Nor rob the birds of air.” Then cried the king: “A cow or deer   For thee shall straightway bleed, Or let a ram or tender lamb   Be slain, for thee to feed. Mine oath forbids me to betray   My little twice-born guest: See how she clings with trembling wings   To her protector’s breast.” “No flesh of lambs,” the hawk replied,   “No blood of deer for me; The falcon loves to feed on doves   And such is Heaven’s decree. But if affection for the dove   Thy pitying heart has stirred, Let thine own flesh my maw refresh,   Weighed down against the bird.” He carved the flesh from off his side,   And threw it in the scale, While women’s cries smote on the skies   With loud lament and wail. He hacked the flesh from side and arm,   From chest and back and thigh, But still above the little dove   The monarch’s scale stood high. He heaped the scale with piles of flesh,   With sinews, blood and skin, And when alone was left him bone   He threw himself therein. Then thundered voices through the air;   The sky grew black as night; And fever took the earth that shook   To see that wondrous sight. The blessed Gods, from every sphere,   By Indra led, came nigh: While drum and flute and shell and lute   Made music in the sky. They rained immortal chaplets down,   Which hands celestial twine, And softly shed upon his head   Pure Amrit, drink divine. Then God and Seraph, Bard and Nymph   Their heavenly voices raised, And a glad throng with dance and song   The glorious monarch praised. They set him on a golden car   That blazed with many a gem; Then swiftly through the air they flew,   And bore him home with them. Thus Káśí’s lord, by noble deed,   Won heaven and deathless fame: And when the weak protection seek   From thee, do thou the same.

_Scenes from the Rámáyan, &c._




Page 108.


The ceremonies that attended the consecration of a king (_Abhikshepa lit. Sprinkling over_) are fully described in Goldstücker’s Dictionary, from which the following extract is made: “The type of the inauguration ceremony as practised at the Epic period may probably be recognized in the history of the inauguration of _Ráma_, as told in the _Rámáyana_, and in that of the inauguration of _Yudhishṭhira_, as told in the _Mahábháratha_. Neither ceremony is described in these poems with the full detail which is given of the vaidik rite in the _Aitareya-Bráhmaṇam_; but the allusion that Ráma was inaugurated by _Vaśishṭha_ and the other Bráhmanas in the same manner as Indra by the Vasus … and the observation which is made in some passages that a certain rite of the inauguration was performed ‘according to the sacred rule’ … admit of the conclusion that the ceremony was supposed to have taken place in conformity with the vaidik injunction.… As the inauguration of _Ráma_ was intended and the necessary preparations for it were made when his father Daśaratha was still alive, but as the ceremony itself, through the intrigues of his step-mother _Kaikeyí_, did not take place then, but fourteen years later, after the death of _Daśaratha_, an account of the preparatory ceremonies is given in the _Ayodhyákáṇḍa_ (Book II) as well as in the _Yuddha-Káṇḍa_ (Book VI.) of the Rámáyaṇa, but an account of the complete ceremony in the latter book alone. According to the _Ayodhyákáṇḍa_, on the day preceding the intended inauguration _Ráma_ and his wife _Sítá_ held a fast, and in the night they performed this preliminary rite: _Ráma_ having made his ablutions, approached the idol of _Náráyaṇa_, took a cup of clarified butter, as the religious law prescribes, made a libation of it into the kindled fire, and drank the remainder while wishing what was agreeable to his heart. Then, with his mind fixed on the divinity he lay, silent and composed, together with _Sítá_, on a bed of Kuśa-grass, which was spread before the altar of Vishṇu, until the last watch of the night, when he awoke and ordered the palace to be prepared for the solemnity. At day-break reminded of the time by the voices of the bards, he performed the usual morning devotion and praised the divinity. In the meantime the town Ayodhyá had assumed a festive appearance and the inauguration implements had been arranged … golden water-jars, an ornamented throne-seat, a chariot covered with a splendid tiger-skin, water taken from the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna, as well as from other sacred rivers, tanks, wells, lakes, and from all oceans, honey, curd, clarified butter, fried grain, Kuśa-grass, flowers, milk; besides, eight beautiful damsels, and a splendid furious elephant, golden and silver jars, filled with water, covered with _Udumbara_ branches and various lotus flowers, besides a white jewelled _chourie_, a white splendid parasol, a white bull, a white horse, all manner of musical instruments and bards.… In the preceding chapter … there are mentioned _two_ white _chouries_ instead of one, and all kinds of seeds, perfumes and jewels, a scimitar, a bow, a litter, a golden vase, and a blazing fire, and amongst the living implements of the pageant, instead of the bards, gaudy courtesans, and besides the eight damsels, professors of divinity, Bráhmaṇas, cows and pure kinds of wild beasts and birds, the chiefs of town and country-people and the citizens with their train.”




Page 109.


_Then with the royal chaplains they_ _Took each his place in long array._

_The twice born chiefs, with zealous heed,_ _Made ready what the rite would need._

“Now about the office of a Purohita (house priest). The gods do not eat the food offered by a king, who has no house-priest (Purohita). Thence the king even when (not) intending to bring a sacrifice, should appoint a Bráhman to the office of house-priest.” HAUG’S _Autareya Bráhmanam. Vol. II. p. 528_.




Page 110.


_There by the gate the Sáras screamed._

The Sáras or Indian Crane is a magnificent bird easily domesticated and speedily constituting himself the watchman of his master’s house and garden. Unfortunately he soon becomes a troublesome and even dangerous dependent, attacking strangers with his long bill and powerful wings, and warring especially upon “small infantry” with unrelenting ferocity.




Page 120.


_My mothers or my sire the king._

All the wives of the king his father are regarded and spoken of by Ráma as his mothers.




Page 125.


_Such blessings as the Gods o’erjoyed_ _Poured forth when Vritra was destroyed._

“Mythology regards Vritra as a demon or Asur, the implacable enemy of Indra, but this is not the primitive idea contained in the name of Vritra. In the hymns of the Veda Vritra appears to be the thick dark cloud which Indra the God of the firmament attacks and disperses with his thunderbolt.” GORRESIO.

“In that class of Rig-veda hymns which there is reason to look upon as the oldest portion of Vedic poetry, the character of Indra is that of a mighty ruler of the firmament, and his principal feat is that of conquering the demon _Vritra_, a symbolical personification of the cloud which obstructs the clearness of the sky, and withholds the fructifying rain from the earth. In his battles with Vritra he is therefore described as ‘opening the receptacles of the waters,’ as ‘cleaving the cloud’ with his ‘far-whirling thunderbolt,’ as ‘casting the waters down to earth,’ and ‘restoring the sun to the sky.’ He is in consequence ‘the upholder of heaven, earth, and firmament,’ and the god ‘who has engendered the sun and the dawn.’ ” CHAMBERS’S CYCLOPÆDIA, _Indra_.

“Throughout these hymns two images stand out before us with overpowering distinctness. On one side is the bright god of the heaven, as beneficent as he is irresistible: on the other the demon of night and of darkness, as false and treachorous as he is malignant.… The latter (as his name Vritra, from var, to veil, indicates) is pre-eminently the thief who hides away the rain-clouds.… But the myth is yet in too early a state to allow of the definite designations which are brought before us in the conflicts of Zeus with Typhôn and his monstrous progeny, of Apollôn with the Pythôn, of Bellerophôn with Chimaira of Oidipous with the Sphinx, of Hercules with Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir; and thus not only is Vritra known by many names, but he is opposed sometimes by Indra, sometimes by Agni the fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspati, or other deities; or rather these are all names of one and the same god.” COX’S _Mythology of the Aryan Nations. Vol. II. p. 326_.




Page 125.


_And that prized herb whose sovereign power_ _Preserves from dark misfortune’s hour._ “And yet more medicinal is it than that Moly, That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave; He called it Hæmony, and gave it me, And bade me keep it as of sovereign use ’Gainst all enchantment, mildew, blast, or damp, Or ghastly furies’ apparition.” _Comus._

The _Moly_ of Homer, which Dierbach considers to have been the _Mandrake_, is probably a corruption of the Sanskrit _Múla_ a root.




Page 136.


_True is the ancient saw: the Neem_ _Can ne’er distil a honeyed stream._

The Neem tree, especially in the Rains, emits a strong unpleasant smell like that of onions. Its leaves however make an excellent cooling poultice, and the Extract of Neem is an admirable remedy for cutaneous disorders.




Page 152.


_Who of Nisháda lineage came._

The following account of the origin of the Nishádas is taken from Wilson’s _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Book I. Chap. 15. “Afterwards the Munis beheld a great dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh: ‘What is this?’ And the people answered and said: ‘Now that the kingdom is without a king, the dishonest men have begun to seize the property of their neighbours. The great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is raised by troops of clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their prey.’ The sages, hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh of the king (Vena), who had left no offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh, thus rubbed, came forth a being of the complexion of a charred stake, with flattened features like a negro, and of dwarfish stature. ‘What am I to do,’ cried he eagerly to the Munis. ‘Sit down (nishída),’ said they. And thence his name was Nisháda. His descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhyá mountain, great Muni, are still called Nishádas and are characterized by the exterior tokens of depravity.” Professor Wilson adds, in his note on the passage: “The Matsya says that there were born outcast or barbarous races, Mlechchhas, as black as collyrium. The Bhágavata describes an individual of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a complexion as black as a crow, with projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair, whose descendants were mountaineers and foresters. The Padma (Bhúmi Khaṇḍa) has a similar deccription; adding to the dwarfish stature and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly. It also particularizes his posterity as Nishádas, Kirátas, Bhillas, and other barbarians and Mlechchhas, living in woods and on mountains. These passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of the Gonds, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along the forests and mountains of Central India from Behar to Khandesh, and who are, not improbably, the predecessors of the present occupants of the cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African character.”

Manu gives a different origin of the Nishádas as the offspring of a Bráhman father and a Súdra mother. See Muir’s _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p. 481.




Page 157.


_Beneath a fig-tree’s mighty shade,_ _With countless pendent shoots displayed._ “So counselled he, and both together went Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose The fig-tree: not that kind for fruit renowned, But such as at this day, to Indians known, In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms Branching so broad and long, that in the ground The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow About the mother tree, a pillared shade High overarched, and echoing walks between.”

_Paradise Lost_, Book IX.




Page 161.


_Now, Lakshmaṇ, as our cot is made,_ _Must sacrifice be duly paid._

The rites performed in India on the completion of a house are represented in modern Europe by the familiar “house-warming.”




Page 169.


_I longed with all my lawless will_ _Some elephant by night to kill._

One of the regal or military caste was forbidden to kill an elephant except in battle.

_Thy hand has made no Bráhman bleed._

“The punishment which the Code of Manu awards to the slayer of a Brahman was to be branded in the forehead with the mark of a headless corpse, and entirely banished from society; this being apparently commutable for a fine. The poem is therefore in accordance with the Code regarding the peculiar guilt of killing Brahmans; but in allowing a hermit who was not a _Divija_ (twice-born) to go to heaven, the poem is far in advance of the Code. The youth in the poem is allowed to read the Veda, and to accumulate merit by his own as well as his father’s pious acts; whereas the exclusive Code reserves all such privileges to _Divijas_ invested with the sacred cord.” Mrs. SPEIR’S _Life in Ancient India_, p. 107.




Page 174. The Praise Of Kings


“Compare this magnificent eulogium of kings and kingly government with what Samuel says of the king and his authority: And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.

And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run before his chariots.

And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties, and will set them to work his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instrument of war, and instruments of his chariots.

And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.

And he will take your fields, and your vineyards and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.

And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you. I. _Samuel_, VIII.

In India kingly government was ancient and consecrated by tradition: whence to change it seemed disorderly and revolutionary: in Judæa theocracy was ancient and consecrated by tradition, and therefore the innovation which would substitute a king was represented as full of dangers.” GORRESIO.




Page 176. Sálmalí.


According to the Bengal recension Śálmalí appears to have been another name of the Vipáśá. Śálmalí may be an epithet signifying rich in Bombax heptaphyllon. The commentator makes another river out of the word.




Page 178. Bharat’s Return.


“Two routes from Ayodhyá to Rájagriha or Girivraja are described. That taken by the envoys appears to have been the shorter one, and we are not told why Bharat returned by a different road. The capital of the Kekayas lay to the west of the Vipáśá. Between it and the Śatadru stretched the country of the Báhíkas. Upon the remaining portion of the road the two recensions differ. According to that of Bengal there follow towards the east the river Indamatí, then the town Ajakála belonging to the Bodhi, then Bhulingá, then the river Śaradaṇḍá. According to the other instead of the first river comes the Ikshumatí … instead of the first town Abhikála, instead of the second Kulingá, then the second river. According to the direction of the route both the above-mentioned rivers must be tributaries of the Śatadrú.… The road then crossed the Yamuná (Jumna), led beyond that river through the country of the Panchálas, and reached the Ganges at Hástinapura, where the ferry was. Thence it led over the Rámagangá and its eastern tributaries, then over the Gomati, and then in a southern direction along the Málini, beyond which it reached Ayodhyá. In Bharat’s journey the following rivers are passed from west to east: _Kutikoshṭiká_, _Uttániká_, _Kuṭiká_, _Kapívatí_, _Gomatí_ according to Schlegel, and _Hiraṇyavatí_, _Uttáriká_, _Kuṭilá_, _Kapívatí_, _Gomatí_ according to Gorresio. As these rivers are to be looked for on the east of the Ganges, the first must be the modern _Koh_, a small affluent of the Rámagangá, over which the highway cannot have gone as it bends too far to the north. The Uttániká or Uttáriká must be the Rámagangá, the Kuṭiká or Kuṭilá its eastern tributary, Kośilá, the Kapívatí the next tributary which on the maps has different names, _Gurra_ or above Kailas, lower down _Bhaigu_. The Gomatí (Goomtee) retains its old name. The Máliní, mentioned only in the envoys’ journey, must have been the western tributary of the Sarayú now called Chuká.” LASSEN’S _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. II. P. 524.




Page 183.


_What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?_

“Indian belief divided the universe into several worlds (_lokáh_). The three principal worlds were heaven, earth, and hell. But according to another division there were seven: Bhúrloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or the space between the earth and the sun, the seat of the Munis, Siddhas, &c., Svarloka or the heaven of Indra between the sun and the polar star, and the seventh Brahmaloka or the world of Brahma. Spirits which reached the last were exempt from being born again.” GORRESIO.




Page 203.


_When from a million herbs a blaze_ _Of their own luminous glory plays._

This mention of lambent flames emitted by herbs at night may be compared with Lucan’s description of a similar phenomenon in the Druidical forest near Marseilles, (_Pharsalia_, III. 420.).

_Non ardentis_ fulgere incendia silvae.

Seneca, speaking of Argolis, (Thyestes, Act IV), says:—

Tota solet

Micare flamma silva, et excelsae trabes _Ardent sine igni_.

Thus also the bush at Horeb (Exod. II.) flamed, but was not consumed.

The Indian explanation of the phenomenon is, that the sun before he sets deposits his rays for the night with the deciduous plants. See _Journal of R. As. S. Bengal_, Vol. II. p. 339.




Page 219.


_We rank the Buddhist with the thief._

Schlegel says in his Preface: “Lubrico vestigio insistit V. Cl. _Heerenius, prof. Gottingensis_, in libro suo de commerciis veterum populorum (OPP. Vol. HIST. XII, pag. 129,) dum putat, ex mentione sectatorum Buddhae secundo libro Rameidos iniecta de tempore, quo totum carmen sit conditum, quicquam legitime concludi posse.… Sunt versus spurii, reiecti a Bengalis in sola commentatorum recensione leguntur. Buddhas quidem mille fere annis ante Christum natun vixit: sed post multa demumsecula, odiointernecivo inter Brachmanos et Buddhae sectatores orto, his denique ex India pulsis, fingi potuit iniquissima criminatio, eos animi immortalitatem poenasque et praemia in vita futura negare. Praeterea metrum, quo concinnati sunt hi versus, de quo metro mox disseram, recentiorem aetatem arguit.… Poenitet me nunc mei consilii, quod non statim ab initio, … eiecerim cuncta disticha diversis a sloco vulgari metris composita. Metra sunt duo: pariter ambo constant quatuor hemistichiis inter se aequalibus, alterum undenarum syllabarum, alterum duodenarum, hunc in modum:

[-)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [-)] [)] [-] [)] [-] | [-] [)] [)] [-] | [)] [-] [)] [-)]

Cuius generis versus in primo et secundo Rameidos libro nusquam nisi ad finem capitum apposita inveniuntur, et huic loco unice sunt accommodata, quasi peroratio, lyricis numeris assurgens, quo magis canorae cadant clausulae: sicut musici in concentibus extremis omnium vocum instrumentorumque ictu fortiore aures percellere amant. Igitur disticha illa non ante divisionem per capita illatam addi potuerunt: hanc autem grammaticis deberi argumento est ipse recensionum dissensus, manifesto inde ortus, quod singuli editores in ea constituenda suo quisque iudicio usi sunt; praeterquam quod non credibile est, poetam artis suae peritum narrationem continuam in membra tam minuta dissecuisse. Porro discolor est dictio: magniloquentia affectatur, sed nimis turgida illa atque effusa, nec sententiarum pondere satis suffulta. Denique nihil fere novi affertur: ampli ficantur prius dicta, rarius aliquid ex capite sequente anticipatur. Si quis appendices hosce legendo transiliat, sentiet slocum ultimum cum primo capitis proximi apte coagmentatum, nec sine vi quadam inde avulsum. Eiusmodi versus exhibet utraque recensio, sed modo haec modo illa plures paucioresve numero, et lectio interdum magnopere variat.”

“The narrative of Ráma’s exile in the jungle is one of the most obscure portions of the Rámáyana, inasmuch as it is difficult to discover any trace of the original tradition, or any illustration of actual life and manners, beyond the artificial life of self-mortification and selfdenial said to have been led by the Brahman sages of olden time. At the same time, however, the story throws some light upon the significance of the poem, and upon the character in which the Brahmanical author desired to represent Ráma; and consequently it deserves more serious consideration than the nature of the subject-matter would otherwise seem to imply.

“According to the Rámáyana, the hero Ráma spent more than thirteen years of his exile in wandering amongst the different Brahmanical settlements, which appear to have been scattered over the country between the Ganges and the Godáveri; his wanderings extending from the hill of Chitra-kúṭa in Bundelkund, to the modern town of Nasik on the western side of India, near the source of the Godáveri river, and about seventy-five miles to the north-west of Bombay. The appearance of these Brahmanical hermitages in the country far away to the south of the Raj of Kasala, seems to call for critical inquiry. Each hermitage is said to have belonged to some particular sage, who is famous in Brahmanical tradition. But whether the sages named were really contemporaries of Ráma, or whether they could possibly have flourished at one and the same period, is open to serious question. It is of course impossible to fix with any degree of certainty the relative chronology of the several sages, who are said to have been visited by Ráma; but still it seems tolerably clear that some belonged to an age far anterior to that in which the Rámáyana was composed, and probably to an age anterior to that in which Ráma existed as a real and living personage; whilst, at least, one sage is to be found who could only have existed in the age during which the Rámáyana was produced in its present form. The main proofs of these inferences are as follows. An interval of many centuries seems to have elapsed between the composition of the Rig-Veda and that of the Rámáyana: a conclusion which has long been proved by the evidence of language, and is generally accepted by Sanskrit scholars. But three of the sages, said to have been contemporary with Ráma, namely, Viśvámitra, Atri and Agastya, are frequently mentioned in the hymns of the Rig-Veda; whilst Válmíki, the sage dwelling at Chitra-kúṭa, is said to have been himself the composer of the Rámáyana. Again, the sage Atri, whom Ráma visited immediately after his departure from Chitra-kúṭa, appears in the genealogical list preserved in the Mahá Bhárata, as the progenitor of the Moon, and consequently as the first ancestor of the Lunar race: whilst his grandson Buddha [Budha] is said to have married Ilá, the daughter of Ikhsváku who was himself the remote ancestor of the Solar race of Ayodhyá, from whom Ráma was removed by many generations. These conclusions are not perhaps based upon absolute proof, because they are drawn from untrustworthy authorities; but still the chronological difficulties have been fully apprehended by the Pundits, and an attempt has been made to reconcile all contradictions by representing the sages to have lived thousands of years, and to have often re-appeared upon earth in different ages widely removed from each other. Modern science refuses to accept such explanations; and consequently it is impossible to escape the conclusion that if Válmíki composed the Rámáyana in the form of Sanskrit in which it has been preserved, he could not have flourished in the same age as the sages who are named in the Rig-Veda.” WHEELER’S _History of India, Vol._ II, 229.




Page 249.


_And King Himálaya’s Child._

Umá or Párvatí, was the daughter of Himálaya and Mená. She is the heroine of Kálidása’s _Kumára-Sambhava_ or _Birth of the War-God_.




Page 250.


_Strong Kumbhakarṇa slumbering deep_ _In chains of never-ending sleep._

“Kumbhakarṇa, the gigantic brother of the titanic Rávaṇ,—named from the size of his ears which could contain a _Kumbha_ or large water-jar—had such an appetite that he used to consume six months’ provisions in a single day. Brahmá, to relieve the alarm of the world, which had begun to entertain serious apprehensions of being eaten up, decreed that the giant should sleep six months at a time and wake for only one day during which he might consume his six months’ allowance without trespassing unduly on the reproductive capabilities of the ” _Scenes front the Rámáyan_, p. 153, 2nd Edit.




Page 257.


_Like Śiva when his angry might_ _Stayed Daksha’s sacrificial rite._

The following spirited version of this old story is from the pen of Mr. W. Waterfield:

“This is a favorite subject of Hindú sculpture, especially on the temples of Shiva, such as the caves of Elephanta and Ellora. It, no doubt, is an allegory of the contest between the followers of Shiva and the worshippers of the Elements, who observed the old ritual of the Vedas; in which the name of Shiva is never mentioned.

Daksha for devotion   Made a mighty feast: Milk and curds and butter,   Flesh of bird and beast, Rice and spice and honey,   Sweetmeats ghí and gur,(1038) Gifts for all the Bráhmans,   Food for all the poor. At the gates of Gangá(1039)   Daksha held his feast; Called the gods unto it,   Greatest as the least. All the gods were gathered   Round with one accord; All the gods but Umá,   All but Umá’s lord. Umá sat with Shiva   On Kailása hill: Round them stood the Rudras   Watching for their will. Who is this that cometh   Lilting to his lute? All the birds of heaven   Heard his music, mute. Round his head a garland   Rich of hue was wreathed: Every sweetest odour   From its blossoms breathed. ’Tis the Muni Nárad;   ’Mong the gods he fares, Ever making mischief   By the tales he bears. “Hail to lovely Umá!   Hail to Umá’s lord! Wherefore are they absent   For her father’s board? Multiplied his merits   Would be truly thrice, Could he gain your favour   For his sacrifice.” Worth of heart was Umá;   To her lord she spake:— “Why dost thou, the mighty,   Of no rite partake? Straight I speed to Daksha   Such a sight to see: If he be my father,   He must welcome thee.” Wondrous was in glory   Daksha’s holy rite; Never had creation   Viewed so brave a sight. Gods, and nymphs, find fathers,   Sages, Bráhmans, sprites,— Every diverge creature   Wrought that rite of rites. Quickly then a quaking   Fell on all from far; Umá stood among them   On her lion car. “Greeting, gods and sages,   Greeting, father mine! Work hath wondrous virtue,   Where such aids combine. Guest-hall never gathered   Goodlier company: Seemeth all are welcome.   All the gods but me.” Spake the Muni Daksha,   Stern and cold his tone:— “Welcome thou, too, daughter,   Since thou com’st alone. But thy frenzied husband   Suits another shrine; He is no partaker   Of this feast of mine. He who walks in darkness   Loves no deeds of light: He who herds with demons   Shuns each kindly sprite. Let him wander naked.—   Wizard weapons wield,— Dance his frantic measure   Round the funeral field. Art thou yet delighted   With the reeking hide, Body smeared with ashes.   Skulls in necklace tied? Thou to love this monster?   Thou to plead his part! Know the moon and Gangá   Share that faithless heart Vainly art thou vying   With thy rivals’ charms. Are not coils of serpents   Softer than thine arms?” Words like these from Daksha   Daksha’s daughter heard: Then a sudden passion   All her bosom stirred. Eyes with fury flashing.   Speechless in her ire, Headlong did she hurl her   ’Mid the holy fire. Then a trembling terror   Overcame each one, And their minds were troubled   Like a darkened sun; And a cruel Vision,   Face of lurid flame, Umá’s Wrath incarnate,   From the altar came. Fiendlike forms by thousands   Started from his side, ’Gainst the sacrificers   All their might they plied: Till the saints availed not   Strength like theirs to stay, And the gods distracted   Turned and fled away. Hushed were hymns and chanting,   Priests were mocked and spurned; Food defiled and scattered;   Altars overturned.— Then, to save the object   Sought at such a price, Like a deer in semblance   Sped the sacrifice. Soaring toward the heavens,   Through the sky it fled? But the Rudras chasing   Smote away its head. Prostrate on the pavement   Daksha fell dismayed:— “Mightiest, thou hast conquered   Thee we ask for aid. Let not our oblations   All be rendered vain; Let our toilsome labour   Full fruition gain.” Bright the broken altars   Shone with Shiva’s form; “Be it so!” His blessing   Soothed that frantic storm. Soon his anger ceases,   Though it soon arise;— But the Deer’s Head ever   Blazes in the skies.”

_Indian Ballads and other Poems._




Page 286. Urvasí.


“The personification of Urvasî herself is as thin as that of Eôs or Selênê. Her name is often found in the Veda as a mere name for the morning, and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns which passing over men bring them to old age and death. Urvasî is the bright flush of light overspreading the heaven before the sun rises, and is but another form of the many mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names take us back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the Vedic hymns is called Urûkî, the far-going (Têlephassa, Têlephos), so is she also Uruasî, the wide-existing or wide-spreading; as are Eurôpê, Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and many more of the sisters of Athênê and Aphroditê. As such she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as Oidipous is the son of Iokastê; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous, has become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of Mitra and Varuṇa, of night and day. Her lover Purûravas is the counterpart of the Hellenic Polydeukês; but the continuance of her union with him depends on the condition that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas, impatient of her long sojourn among mortal men resolved to bring her back to their bright home; and Purûravas is thus led unwitingly to disregard her warning. A ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas stole one of them; Urvasî said, ‘They take away my darling, as if I lived in a land where there is no hero and no man.’ They stole the second, and she upbraided her husband again. Then Purûravas looked and said, ‘How can that be a land without heroes or men where I am?’ And naked he sprang up; he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then the Gandharvas sent a flash of lighting, and Urvasî saw her husband naked as by daylight. Then she vanished. ‘I come back,’ she said, and went. ‘Then he bewailed his vanished love in bitter grief.’ Her promise to return was fulfilled, but for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and Purûravas in vain beseeches her to tarry longer. ‘What shall I do with thy speech?’ is the answer of Urvasî. ‘I am gone like the first of the dawns. Purûravas, go home again. I am hard to be caught like the winds.’ Her lover is in utter despair; but when he lies down to die, the heart of Urvasî was melted, and she bids him come to her on the last night of the year. On that night only he might be with her; but a son should be born to him. On that day he went up to the golden seats, and there Urvasî told him that the Gandharvas would grant him one wish, and that he must make his choice. ‘Choose thou for me,’ he said: and she answered, ‘Say to them, Let me be one of you.’ ”

COX’S _Mythology of the Aryan Nations._ Vol. I. p. 397.




Page 324.


_The sovereign of the Vánar race._

“Vánar is one of the most frequently occurring names by which the poem calls the monkeys of Ráma’s army. Among the two or three derivations of which the word Vánar is susceptible, one is that which deduces it from vana which signifies a wood, and thus Vánar would mean a forester, an inhabitant of the wood. I have said elsewhere that the monkeys, the Vánars, whom Ráma led to the conquest of Ceylon were fierce woodland tribes who occupied the mountainous regions of the south of India, where their descendants may still be seen. I shall hence forth promiscuously employ the word _Vánar_ to denote those monkeys, those fierce combatants of Ráma’s army.” GORRESIO.




Page 326.


_No change of hue, no pose of limb_ _Gave sign that aught was false in him._ _Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,_ _Without a word to pain the ear,_ _From chest to throat, nor high nor low,_ _His accents came in measured flow._

Somewhat similarly in _The Squire’s Tale_:

“He with a manly voice said his message, After the form used in his language, Withouten vice of syllable or of letter. And for his talë shouldë seem the better Accordant to his wordës was his chere, As teacheth art of speech them that it lere.”




Page 329. Ráma’s Alliance With Sugríva.


“The literal interpretation of this portion of the Rámáyana is indeed deeply rooted in the mind of the Hindu. He implicitly believes that Ráma is Vishnu, who became incarnate for the purpose of destroying the demon Rávana: that he permitted his wife to be captured by Rávana for the sake of delivering the gods and Bráhmans from the oppressions of the Rákshasa; and that he ultimately assembled an army of monkeys, who were the progeny of the gods, and led them against the strong-hold of Rávana at Lanká, and delivered the world from the tyrant Rákshasa, whilst obtaining ample revenge for his own personal wrongs.

One other point seems to demand consideration, namely, the possibility of such an alliance as that which Ráma is said to have concluded with the monkeys. This possibility will of course be denied by modern critics, but still it is interesting to trace out the circumstances which seem to have led to the acceptance of such a wild belief by the dreamy and marvel loving Hindi. The south of India swarms with monkeys of curious intelligence and rare physical powers. Their wonderful instinct for organization, their attachment to particular localities, their occasional journeys in large numbers over mountains and across rivers, their obstinate assertion of supposed rights, and the ridiculous caricature which they exhibit of all that is animal and emotional in man, would naturally create a deep impression.… Indeed the habits of monkeys well deserve to be patiently studied; not as they appear in confinement, when much that is revolting in their nature is developed, but as they appear living in freedom amongst the trees of the forest, or in the streets of crowded cities, or precincts of temples. Such a study would not fail to awaken strange ideas; and although the European would not be prepared to regard monkeys as sacred animals he might be led to speculate as to their origin by the light of data, which are at present unknown to the naturalist whose observations have been derived from the menagerie alone.

Whatever, however, may have been the train of ideas which led the Hindú to regard the monkey as a being half human and half divine, there can be little doubt that in the Rámáyana the monkeys of southern India have been confounded with what may be called the aboriginal people of the country. The origin of this confusion may be easily conjectured. Perchance the aborigines of the country may have been regarded as a superior kind of monkeys; and to this day the features of the Marawars, who are supposed to be the aborigines of the southern part of the Carnatic, are not only different from those of their neighbours, but are of a character calculated to confirm the conjecture. Again, it is probable that the army of aborigines may have been accompanied by outlying bands of monkeys impelled by that magpie-like curiosity and love of plunder which are the peculiar characteristics of the monkey race; and this incident may have given rise to the story that the army was composed of Monkeys.”

WHEELER’S _History of India. Vol. II. pp. 316 ff._




Page 342. The Fall Of Báli.


“As regards the narrative, it certainly seems to refer to some real event amongst the aboriginal tribes: namely, the quarrel between an elder and younger brother for the possession of a Ráj; and the subsequent alliance of Ráma with the younger brother. It is somewhat remarkable that Ráma appears to have formed an alliance with the wrong party, for the right of Báli was evidently superior to that of Sugríva; and it is especially worthy of note that Ráma compassed the death of Báli by an act contrary to all the laws of fair fighting. Again, Ráma seems to have tacitly sanctioned the transfer of Tárá from Báli to Sugríva, which was directly opposed to modern rule, although in conformity with the rude customs of a barbarous age; and it is remarkable that to this day the marriage of both widows and divorced women is practised by the Marawars, or aborigines of the southern Carnatic, contrary to the deeply-rooted prejudice which exists against such unions amongst the Hindús at large.”

WHEELER’S _History of India, Vol. II. 324_.




Page 370. The Vánar Host.


“The splendid Marutas form the army of Indras, the red-haired monkeys and bears that of Râmas; and the mythical and solar nature of the monkeys and bears of the Râmâyaṇam manifests itself several times. The king of the monkeys is a sun-god. The ancient king was named Bâlin, and was the son of Indras. His younger brother Sugrívas, he who changes his shape at pleasure (Kâmarúpas), who, helped by Râmas, usurped his throne, is said to be own child of the sun. Here it is evident that the Vedic antagonism between Indras and Vishṇus is reproduced in a zoological and entirely apish form. The old Zeus must give way to the new, the moon to the sun, the evening to the morning sun, the sun of winter to that of spring; the young son betrays and overthrows the old one.… Râmas, who treacherously kills the old king of the monkeys, Bâlin, is the equivalent of Vishṇus, who hurls his predecessor Indras from his throne; and Sugrívas, the new king of the monkeys resembles Indras when he promises to find the ravished Sítá, in the same way as Vishṇus in one of his incarnations finds again the lost vedás. And there are other indications in the Râmâyaṇam of opposition between Indras and the monkeys who assist Râmas. The great monkey Hanumant, of the reddish colour of gold, has his jaw broken, Indras having struck him with his thunderbolt and caused him to fall upon a mountain, because, while yet a child, he threw himself off a mountain into the air in order to arrest the course of the sun, whose rays had no effect upon him. (The cloud rises from the mountain and hides the sun, which is unable of itself to disperse it; the tempest comes, and brings flashes of lightning and thunder-bolts, which tear the cloud in pieces.)

The whole legend of the monkey Hanumant represents the sun entering into the cloud or darkness, and coming out of it. His father is said to be now the wind, now the elephant of the monkeys (Kapikunjaras), now Keśarin, the long-haired sun, the sun with a mane, the lion sun (whence his name of _Keśariṇah putrah_). From this point of view, Hanumant would seem to be the brother of Sugrívas, who is also the offspring of the sun.…

All the epic monkeys of the _Râmâyaṇam_ are described in the twentieth canto of the first book by expressions which very closely resemble those applied in the Vedic hymns to the Marutas, as swift as the tempestuous wind, changing their shape at pleasure, making a noise like clouds, sounding like thunder, battling, hurling mountain-peaks, shaking great uprooted trees, stirring up the deep waters, crushing the earth with their arms, making the clouds fall. Thus Bâlin comes out of the cavern as the sun out of the cloud.…

But the legend of the monkey Hanumant presents another curious resemblance to that of Samson. Hanumant is bound with cords by Indrajit, son of Rávaṇas; he could easily free himself, but does not wish to do so. Rávaṇas to put him to shame, orders his tail to be burned, because the tail is the part most prized by monkeys.…

The tail of Hanumant, which sets fire to the city of the monsters, is probably a personification of the rays of the morning or spring sun, which sets fire to the eastern heavens, and destroys the abode of the nocturnal or winter monsters.”

DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. pp. 100 ff.

“The Jaitwas of Rajputana, a tribe politically reckoned as Rajputs, nevertheless trace their descent from the monkey-god Hanuman, and confirm it by alleging that their princes still bear its evidence in a tail-like prolongation of the spine; a tradition which has probably a real ethnological meaning, pointing out the Jaitwas as of non-Aryan race.”(1040) TYLOR’S _Primitive Culture_, Vol. I. p. 341.




Page 372.


The names of peoples occurring in the following _ślokas_ are omitted in the metrical translation:

“Go to the Brahmamálas,(1041) the Videhas,(1042) the Málavas,(1043) the Káśikośalas,(1044) the Mágadnas,(1045) the Puṇḍras,(1046) and the Angas,(1047) and the land of the weavers of silk, and the land of the mines of silver, and the hills that stretch into the sea, and the towns and the hamlets that are about the top of Mandar, and the Karṇaprávaraṇas,(1048) and the Oshṭhakarṇakas,(1049) and the Ghoralohamukhas,(1050) and the swift Ekapádakas,(1051) and the strong imperishable Eaters of Men, and the Kirátas(1052) with stiff hair-tufts, men like gold and fair to look upon: And the Eaters of Raw Fish, and the Kirátas who dwell in islands, and the fierce Tiger-men(1053) who live amid the waters.”




Page 374.


“Go to the Vidarbhas(1054) and the Rishṭikas(1055) and the Mahishikas,(1056) and the Matsyas(1057) and Kalingas(1058) and the Kauśikas(1059) … and the Andhras(1060) and the Puṇḍras(1061) and the Cholas(1062) and the Paṇḍyas(1063) and the Keralas,(1064) Mlechchhas(1065) and the Pulindas(1066) and the Śúrasenas,(1067) and the Prasthalas and the Bharatas and Madrakas(1068) and the Kámbojas(1069) and the Yavanas(1070) and the towns of the Śakas(1071) and the Varadas.”(1072)




Page 378. Northern Kurus.


Professor Lassen remarks in the Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes, ii. 62: “At the furthest accessible extremity of the earth appears Harivarsha with the northern Kurus. The region of Hari or Vishṇu belongs to the system of mythical geography; but the case is different with the Uttara Kurus. Here there is a real basis of geographical fact; of which fable has only taken advantage, without creating it. The Uttara Kurus were formerly quite independent of the mythical system of _dvípas_, though they were included in it at an early date.” Again the same writer says at p. 65: “That the conception of the Uttara Kurus is based upon an actual country and not on mere invention, is proved (1) by the way in which they are mentioned in the Vedas; (2) by the existence of Uttara Kuru in historical times as a real country; and (3) by the way in which the legend makes mention of that region as the home of primitive customs. To begin with the last point the Mahábhárata speaks as follows of the freer mode of life which women led in the early world, Book I. verses 4719-22: ‘Women were formerly unconfined and roved about at their pleasure, independent. Though in their youthful innocence they abandoned their husbands, they were guilty of no offence; for such was the rule in early times. This ancient custom is even now the law for creatures born as brutes, which are free from lust and anger. This custom is supported by authority and is observed by great rishis, and it is _still practiced among the northern Kurus_.’

“The idea which is here conveyed is that of the continuance in one part of the world of that original blessedness which prevailed in the golden age. To afford a conception of the happy condition of the southern Kurus it is said in another place (M.-Bh, i. 4346.) ‘The southern Kurus vied in happiness with the northern Kurus and with the divine rishis and bards.’

Professor Lassen goes on to say: ‘Ptolemy (vi. 16.) is also acquainted with _Uttara Kuru_. He speaks of a mountain, a people, and a city called _Ottorakorra_. Most of the other ancient authors who elsewhere mention this name, have it from him. It is a part of the country which he calls Serica; according to him the city lies twelve degrees west from the metropolis of Sera, and the mountain extends from thence far to the eastward. As Ptolemy has misplaced the whole of eastern Asia beyond the Ganges, the _relative_ position which he assigns will guide us better that the absolute one, which removes _Ottorakorra_ so far to the east that a correction is inevitable. According to my opinion the _Ottorakorra_ of Ptolemy must be sought for to the east of Kashgar.’ Lassen also thinks that Magasthenes had the Uttara Kurus in view when he referred to the Hyperboreans who were fabled by Indian writers to live a thousand years. In his Indian antiquities, (Ind. Alterthumskunde, i. 511, 512. and note,) the same writer concludes that though the passages above cited relative to the Uttara Kurus indicate a belief in the existence of a really existing country of that name in the far north, yet that the descriptions there given are to be taken as pictures of an ideal paradise, and not as founded on any recollections of the northern origin of the Kurus. It is probable, he thinks, that some such reminiscences originally existed, and still survived in the Vedic era, though there is no trace of their existence in latter times.” MUIR’S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. II. pp. 336, 337.




Page 428.


_Trust to these mighty Vánars._

The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has “these silvans in the forms of monkeys, vánaráh kapirupinah.” “Here it manifestly appears,” says Gorresio, “that these hosts of combatants whom Ráma led to the conquest of Lanká (Ceylon) the kingdom and seat of the Hamitic race, and whom the poem calls monkeys, were in fact as I have elsewhere observed, inhabitants of the mountainous and southern regions of India, who were wild-looking and not altogether unlike monkeys. They were perhaps the remote ancestors of the Malay races.”




Page 431.


_"Art thou not he who slew of old_ _The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold."_

All these exploits of Rávaṇ are detailed in the _Uttarakáṇḍa_, and epitomized in the Appendix.




Page 434.


_Within the consecrated hall_.

The Bráhman householder ought to maintain three sacred fires, the _Gárhapatya_, the _Ahavaniya_ and the _Dakshiṇa_. These three fires were made use of in many Brahmanical solemnities, for example in funeral rites when the three fires were arranged in prescribed order.




Page 436.


_Fair Punjikasthalá I met._

“I have not noticed in the Úttara Káṇda any story about the daughter of Varuṇa, but the commentator on the text (VI 60, 11) explains the allusion to her thus:

“The daughter of Varuṇa was Punjikasthalí. On her account, a curse of Brahmá, involving the penalty of death, [was pronounced] on the rape of women.” MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV. Appendix.




Page 452.


_“__Shall no funereal honours grace_ _The parted lord of Raghu’s race?__”_

“Here are indicated those admirable rites and those funeral prayers which Professor Müller has described in his excellent work, _Die Todtenbestattung bei den Brahmanen_, Sítá laments that the body of Ráma will not be honoured with those rites and prayers, nor will the Bráhman priest while laying the ashes from the pile in the bosom of the earth, pronounce over them those solemn and magnificent words: ‘Go unto the earth, thy mother, the ample, wide, and blessed earth.… And do thou, O Earth, open and receive him as a friend with sweet greeting: enfold him in thy bosom as a mother wraps her child in her robes.’ ” GORRESIO.




Page 462.


                _Each glorious sign_ _That stamps the future queen is mine_.

We read in Josephus that Caesar was so well versed in chiromancy that when one day a _soi-disant_ son of Herod had audience of him, he at once detected the impostor because his hand was destitute of all marks of royalty.




Page 466.


_In battle’s wild Gandharva dance_.

“Here the commentator explains: ‘the battle resembled the dance of the Gandharvas,’ in accordance with the notion of the Gandharvas entertained in his day. They were regarded as celestial musicians enlivening with their melodies Indra’s heaven and the banquets of the Gods. But the Gandharvas before becoming celestial musicians in popular tradition, were in the primitive and true signification of the name heroes, spirited and ardent warriors, followers of Indra, and combined the heroical character with their atmospherical deity. Under this aspect the dance of the Gandharvas may be a very different thing from what the commentator means, and may signify the horrid dance of war.” GORRESIO.

The Homeric expression is similar, “to dance a war-dance before Ares.”




Page 470.


_By Anaraṇya’s lips of old._

“The story of Anaraṇya is told in the Uttara Kaṇḍa of the Rámáyaṇa.… Anaraṇya a descendant of Ixváku and King of Ayodhyá, when called upon to fight with Rávaṇa or acknowledge himself conquered, prefers the former alternative; but his army is overcome, and he himself is thrown from his chariot.

When Rávaṇa triumphs over his prostrate foe, the latter says that he has been vanquished not by him but by fate, and that Rávaṇa is only the instrument of his overthrow; and he predicts that Rávaṇa shall one day be slain by his descendant Ráma.” _Sanskrit Texts_, IV., Appendix.




Page 497.


“With regard to the magic image of Sítá made by Indrajit, we may observe that this thoroughly oriental idea is also found in Greece in Homer’s Iliad, where Apollo forms an image of Æneas to save that hero beloved by the Gods: it occurs too in the Æneid of Virgil where Juno forms a fictitious Æneas to save Turnus:

  Tum dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram In faciem Æneæ (visu mirabile monstrum) Dardaniis ornat telis; clipeumque jubasque Divini assimulat capitis; dat inania verba; Dat sine mente sonum, gressusque effingit euntis.

(_Æneidos_, lib. X.)” GORRESIO.




Page 489.


_"To Raghu’s son my chariot lend."_

“Analogous to this passage of the Rámáyana, where Indra sends to Ráma his own chariot, his own charioteer, and his own arms, is the passage in the Æneid where Venus descending from heaven brings celestial arms to her son Æneas when he is about to enter the battle:

  At Venus æthereos inter dea candida nimbos Dona fereus aderat;… … Arma sub adversa posuit radiantia quercum. Ille, deæ donis et tanto lætus honore, Expleri nequit, atque oculus per singula volvit, Miraturque, interque manus et brachia versat Terribilem cristis galeam flammasque vomentem, Fatiferumque ensem, loricam ex ære rigentem.

(_Æneidos_, lib. VIII)” GORRESIO.




Page 489.


_Agastya came and gently spake._

“The Muni or saint Agastya, author of several Vedic hymns, was celebrated in Indo-Sanskrit tradition for having directed the first brahmanical settlements in the southern regions of India; and the Mahábhárata gives him the credit of having subjected those countries, expelled the Rákshases. and given security to the solitary ascetics, who were settled there. Hence Agastya was regarded in ancient legend as the conqueror and ruler of the southern country. This tradition refers to the earliest migrations made by the Sanskrit Indians towards the south of India. To Agastya are attributed many marvellous mythic deeds which adumbrate and veil ancient events; some of which are alluded to here and there in the Rámáyana.” GORRESIO.

The following is the literal translation of the Canto, text and commentary, from the Calcutta edition:

Having found Ráma weary with fighting and buried in deep thought, and Rávaṇ standing before him ready to engage in battle, the holy Agastya, who had come to see the battle, approached Ráma and spoke to him thus: “O mighty Ráma, listen to the old mystery by which thou wilt conquer all thy foes in the battle. Having daily repeated the Ádityahridaya (the delighter of the mind of the Sun) the holy prayer which destroys all enemies (of him who repeats it) gives victory, removes all sins, sorrows and distress, increases life, and which is the blessing of all blessings, worship the rising and splendid sun who is respected by both the Gods and demons, who gives light to all bodies and who is the rich lord of all the worlds, (To the question why this prayer claims so great reverence; the sage answers) Since yonder(1073) sun is full of glory and all gods reside in him (he being their material cause) and bestows being and the active principle on all creatures by his rays; and since he protects all deities, demons and men with his rays.

He is Brahmá,(1074) Vishṇu,(1075) Śiva,(1076) Skanda,(1077) Prajápati,(1078) Mahendra,(1079) Dhanada,(1080) Kála,(1081) Yáma,(1082) Soma,(1083) Apàm Pati _i.e._ The lord of waters, Pitris,(1084) Vasus,(1085) Sádhyas,(1086) Aśvins,(1087) Maruts,(1088) Manu,(1089) Váyu,(1090) Vahni,(1091) Prajá,(1092) Práṇa,(1093) Ritukartá,(1094) Prabhákara,(1095) (Thou,(1096) art) Aditya,(1097) Savitá,(1098) Súrya,(1099) Khaga,(1100) Púshan,(1101) Gabhastimán,(1102) Śuvarṇasadriśa,(1103) Bhánu,(1104) Hiraṇyaretas,(1105) Divákara,(1106) Haridaśva,(1107) Sahasrárchish,(1108) Saptasapti,(1109) Marichimán,(1110) Timironmathana,(1111) Sambhu,(1112) Twashtá,(1113) Mártanda,(1114) Anśumán,(1115) Hiranyagarbha,(1116) Siśira,(1117) Tapana,(1118) Ahaskara,(1119) Ravi,(1120) Agnigarbha,(1121) Aditiputra,(1122) Sankha,(1123) Siśiranáśana,(1124) Vyomanátha,(1125) Tamobhedí,(1126) Rigyajussámapáraga,(1127) Ghanavríshti,(1128) Apám-Mitra,(1129) Vindhyavíthíplavangama,(1130) Átapí,(1131) Mandalí,(1132) Mrityu (death), Pingala,(1133) Sarvatápana,(1134) Kavi,(1135) Viśva,(1136) Mahátejas,(1137) Rakta,(1138) Sarvabhavodbhava.(1139) The Lord of stars, planets, and other luminous bodies, Viśvabhávana,(1140) Tejasvinám-Tejasvi,(1141) Dwádaśátman:(1142) I salute thee. I salute thee who art the eastern mountain. I salute thee who art the western mountain. I salute thee who art the Lord of all the luminous bodies. I salute thee who art the Lord of days.

I respectfully salute thee who art Jaya,(1143) Jayabhadra,(1144) Haryaśa,(1145) O Thou who hast a thousand rays, I repeatedly salute thee. I repeatedly and respectfully salute thee who art Áditya, I repeatedly salute thee who art Ugra,(1146) Víra,(1147) and Sáranga.(1148) I salute thee who openest the lotuses (or the lotus of the heart). I salute thee who art furious. I salute thee who art the Lord of Brahmá, Śiva and Vishṇu. I salute thee who art the sun, Ádityavarchas,(1149) splendid, Sarvabhaksha,(1150)and Raudravapush.(1151)

I salute thee who destroyest darkness, cold and enemies: whose form is boundless, who art the destroyer of the ungrateful; who art Deva;(1152) who art the Lord of the luminous bodies, and who appearest like the heated gold. I salute thee who art Hari,(1153) Viśvakarman,(1154) the destroyer of darkness, and who art splendid and Lokasákshin.(1155) Yonder sun destroys the whole of the material world and also creates it. Yonder sun dries (all earthly things), destroys them and causes rain with his rays. He wakes when our senses are asleep; and resides within all beings. Yonder sun is Agnihotra(1156) and also the fruit obtained by the performer of Agnihotra. He is identified with the gods, sacrifices, and the fruit of the sacrifices. He is the Lord of all the duties known to the world, if any man, O Rághava, in calamities, miseries, forests and dangers, prays to yonder sun, he is never overwhelmed by distress.

Worship, with close attention Him the God of gods and the Lord of the world; and recite these verses thrice, whereby thou wilt be victorious in the battle. O brave one, thou wilt kill Rávaṇa this very instant.”

Thereupon Agastya having said this went away as he came. The glorious Ráma having heard this became free from sorrow. Rághava whose senses were under control, being pleased, committed the hymn to memory, recited it facing the sun, and obtained great delight. The brave Ráma having sipped water thrice and become pure took his bow, and seeing Rávaṇa, was delighted, and meditated on the sun.




Page 492. Rávan’s Funeral.


“In the funeral ceremonies of India the fire was placed on three sides of the pyre; the _Dakshiṇa_ on the south, the _Gárhapatya_ on the west, and the _Áhavaníya_ on the east. The funeral rites are not described in detail here, and it is therefore difficult to elucidate and explain them. The poem assigns the funeral ceremonies of Aryan Brahmans to the Rákshases, a race different from them in origin and religion, in the same way as Homer sometimes introduces into Troy the rites of the Grecian cult.” GORRESIO.

Mr. Muir translates the description of the funeral from the Calcutta edition, as follows: “They formed, with Vedic rites, a funeral pile of faggots of sandal-wood, with _padmaka_ wood, _uśira_ grass, and sandal, and covered with a quilt of deer’s hair. They then performed an unrivalled obsequial ceremony for the Ráxasa prince, placing the sacrificial ground to the S.E. and the fire in the proper situation. They cast the ladle filled with curds and ghee on the shoulder(1157) of the deceased; he (?) placed the car on the feet, and the mortar between the thighs. Having deposited all the wooden vessels, the [upper] and lower fire-wood, and the other pestle, in their proper places, they departed. The Ráxasas having then slain a victim to their prince in the manner prescribed in the Śástras, and enjoined by great rishis, cast [into the fire] the coverlet of the king saturated with ghee. They then, Vibhíshaṇa included, with afflicted hearts, adorned Rávaṇa with perfumes and garlands, and with various vestments, and besprinkled him with fried grain. Vibhíshaṇa having bathed, and having, with his clothes wet, scattered in proper form _tila_ seeds mixed with _darbha_ grass, and moistened with water, applied the fire [to the pile].”




Page 496.


The following is a literal translation of Brahmá’s address to Ráma according to the Calcutta edition, text and commentary:

“O Ráma, how dost thou, being the creator of all the world, best of all those who have profound knowledge of the Upanishads and all-powerful as thou art, suffer Sítá to fall in the fire? How dost thou not know thyself as the best of the gods? Thou art one of the primeval Vasus,(1158) and also their lord and creator. Thou art thyself the lord and first creator of the three worlds. Thou art the eighth (that is Mahádeva) of the Rudras,(1159) and also the fifth(1160) of the Sádhyas.(1161) (The poet describes Ráma as made of the following gods) The Aśvinikumáras (the twin divine physicians of the gods) are thy ears; the sun and the moon are thy eyes; and thou hast been seen in the beginning and at the end of creation. How dost thou neglect the daughter of Videha (Janaka} like a man whose actions are directed by the dictates of nature?” Thus addressed by Indra, Brahmá and the other gods, Ráma the descendant of Raghu, lord of the world and the best of the virtuous, spoke to the chief of the gods. “As I take myself to be a man of the name of Ráma and son of Daśaratha, therefore, sir, please tell me who I am and whence have I come.” “O thou whose might is never failing,” said Brahmá to Kákutstha the foremost of those who thoroughly know Brahmá, “Thou art Náráyaṇa,(1162) almighty, possessed of fortune, and armed with the discus. Thou art the boar(1163) with one tusk; the conqueror of thy past and future foes. Thou art Brahmá true and eternal or undecaying. Thou art Viśvaksena,(1164) having four arms; Thou art Hrishíkeśa,(1165) whose bow is made of horn; Thou art Purusha,(1166) the best of all beings; Thou art one who is never defeated by any body; Thou art the holder of the sword (named Nandaka). Thou art Vishṇu (the pervader of all); blue in colour: of great might; the commander of armies; and lord of villages. Thou art truth. Thou art embodied intelligence, forgiveness, control over the senses, creation, and destruction. Thou art Upendra(1167) and Madhusúdana.(1168) Thou art the creator of Indra, the ruler over all the world, Padmanábha,(1169) and destroyer of enemies in the battle. The divine Rishis call thee shelter of refugees, as well as the giver of shelter. Thou hast a thousand horns,(1170) a hundred heads.(1171) Thou art respected of the respected; and the lord and first creator of the three worlds. Thou art the forefather and shelter of Siddhas,(1172) and Sádhyas.(1173) Thou art sacrifices; Vashaṭkára,(1174) Omkára.(1175) Thou art beyond those who are beyond our senses. There is none who knows who thou art and who knows thy beginning and end. Thou art seen in all material objects, in Bráhmans, in cows, and also in all the quarters, sky and streams. Thou hast a thousand feet, a hundred heads, and a thousand eyes. Thou hast borne the material objects and the earth with the mountains; and at the bottom of the ocean thou art seen the great serpent. O Ráma, Thou hast borne the three worlds, gods, Gandharvas,(1176) and demons. I am, O Ráma, thy heart; the goddess of learning is thy tongue; the gods are the hairs of thy body; the closing of thy eyelids is called the night: and their opening is called the day. The Vedas are thy Sanskáras.(1177) Nothing can exist without thee. The whole world is thy body; the surface of the earth is thy stability.”

O Śrívatsalakshaṇa, fire is thy anger, and the moon is thy favour. In the time of thy incarnation named Vámana, thou didst pervade the three worlds with thy three steps; and Mahendra was made the king of paradise by thee having confined the fearful Bali.(1178) Sítá (thy wife) is Lakshmí; and thou art the God Vishṇu,(1179) Krishṇa,(1180) and Prajápati. To kill Rávaṇ thou hast assumed the form of a man; therefore, O best of the virtuous, thou hast completed this task imposed by us (gods). O Ráma, Rávaṇa has been killed by thee: now being joyful (i.e. having for some time reigned in the kingdom of Ayodhyá,) go to paradise. O glorious Ráma, thy power and thy valour are never failing. The visit to thee and the prayers made to thee are never fruitless. Thy devotees will never be unsuccessful. Thy devotees who obtain thee (thy favour) who art first and best of mankind, shall obtain their desires in this world as well as in the next. They who recite this prayer, founded on the Vedas (or first uttered by the sages), and the old and divine account of (Ráma) shall never suffer defeat.”




Page 503. The Meeting.


The _Bharat-Miláp_ or meeting with Bharat, is the closing scene of the dramatic representation of Ráma’s great victory and triumphant return which takes place annually in October in many of the cities of Northern India. The Rám-Lalá or Play of Ráma, as the great drama is called, is performed in the open air and lasts with one day’s break through fifteen successive days. At Benares there are three nearly simultaneous performances, one provided by H. H. the Maharajah of Benares near his palace at Ramnaggur, one by H. H. the Maharajah of Vizianagram near the Missionary settlement at Sigra and at other places in the city, and one by the leading gentry of the city at Chowká Ghát near the College. The scene especially on the great day when the brothers meet is most interesting: the procession of elephants with their gorgeous howdahs of silver and gold and their magnificently dressed riders with priceless jewels sparkling in their turbans, the enthusiasm of the thousands of spectators who fill the streets and squares, the balconies and the housetops, the flowers that are rained down upon the advancing car, the wild music, the shouting and the joy, make an impression that is not easily forgotten.

_Still on his head, well trained in lore_ _Of duty, Ráma’s shoes he bore._

Ráma’s shoes are here regarded as the emblems of royalty or possession. We may compare the Hebrew “Over Edom will I cast forth my shoe.” A curiously similar passage occurs in LYSCHANDER’S _Chronicon Greenlandiæ Rhythmicon_:

“Han sendte til Irland sin skiden skoe, Og böd den Konge. Som der monne boe, Han skulde dem hæderlig bære Pan Juuledag i sin kongelig Pragt, Og kjende han havde sit Rige og Magt Af Norges og Quernes Herre.”

He sent to Ireland his dirty shoes, And commanded the king who lived there To wear them with honour On Christmas Day in his royal state, And to own that he had his kingdom and power From the Lord of Norway and the Isles. _Notes & Queries, March 30, 1872._




Final Notes.


I end these notes with an extract which I translate from Signor Gorresio’s Preface to the tenth volume of his Rámáyan, and I take this opportunity of again thankfully acknowledging my great obligations to this eminent Śanskritist from whom I have so frequently borrowed. As Mr. Muir has observed, the Bengal recension which Signor Gorresio has most ably edited is throughout an admirable commentary on the genuine Rámáyan of northern India, and I have made constant reference to the faithful and elegant translation which accompanies the text for assistance and confirmation in difficulties:

“Towards the southern extremity and in the island of Lanká (Ceylon) there existed undoubtedly a black and ferocious race, averse to the Aryans and hostile to their mode of worship: their ramifications extended through the islands of the Archipelago, and some traces of them remain in Java to this day.

The Sanskrit-Indians, applying to this race a name expressive of hatred which occurs in the Vedas as the name of hostile, savage and detested beings, called it the Rákshas race: it is against these Rákshases that the expedition of Ráma which the Rámáyan celebrates is directed. The Sanskrit-Indians certainly altered in their traditions the real character of this race: they attributed to it physical and moral qualities not found in human nature; they transformed it into a race of giants; they represented it as monstrous, hideous, truculent, changing forms at will, blood-thirsty and ravenous, just as the Semites represented the races that opposed them as impious, horrible and of monstrous size. But notwithstanding these mythical exaggerations, which are partly due to the genius of the Aryans so prone to magnify everything without measure, the Rámáyan in the course of its epic narration has still preserved and noted here and there some traits and peculiarities of the race which reveal its true character. It represents the Rákshases as black of hue, and compares them with black clouds and masses of black collyrium; it attributes to them curly woolly hair and thick lips, it depicts them as loaded with chains, collars and girdles of gold, and the other bright ornaments which their race has always loved, and in which the kindred races of the Soudan still delight. It describes them as worshippers of matter and force. They are hostile to the religion of the Aryans whose rites and sacrifices they disturb and ruin … Such is the Rákshas race as represented in the Rámáyan; and the war of the Aryan Ráma forms the subject of the epic, a subject certainly real and historical as far as regards its substance, but greatly exaggerated by the ancient myth. In Sanskrit-Indian tradition are found traces of another struggle of the Aryans with the Rákshas races, which preceded the war of Ráma. According to some pauranic legends, Kárttavírya, a descendant of the royal tribe of the Yádavas, contemporary with Parasurama and a little anterior to Ráma, attacked Lanká and took Rávaṇ prisoner. This well shows how ancient and how deeply rooted in the Aryan race is the thought of this war which the Rámáyan celebrates.

“But,” says an eminent Indianist(1181) whose learning I highly appreciate, “the Rámáyan is an allegorical epic, and no precise and historical value can be assigned to it. Sítá signifies the furrow made by the plough, and under this symbolical aspect has already appeared honoured with worship in the hymns of the Rig-veda; Ráma is the bearer of the plough (this assertion is entirely gratuitous); these two allegorical personages represented agriculture introduced to the southern regions of India by the race of the Kosalas from whom Ráma was descended; the Rákshases on whom he makes war are races of demons and giants who have little or nothing human about them; allegory therefore predominates in the poem, and the exact reality of an historical event must not be looked for in it.” Such is Professor Weber’s opinion. If he means to say that mythical fictions are mingled with real events,

Forsan in alcun vero suo arco percuote,

as Dante says, and I fully concede the point. The interweaving of the myth with the historical truth belongs to the essence, so to speak, of the primitive epopeia. If Sítá is born, as the Rámáyan feigns, from the furrow which King Janak opened when he ploughed the earth, not a whit more real is the origin of Helen and Æneas as related in Homer and Virgil, and if the characters in the Rámáyan exceed human nature, and in a greater degree perhaps than is the case in analogous epics, this springs in part from the nature of the subject and still more from the symbol-loving genius of the orient. Still the characters of the Rámáyan, although they exceed more or less the limits of human nature, act notwithstanding in the course of the poem, speak, feel, rejoice and grieve according to the natural impulse of human passions. But if by saying that the Rámáyan is an allegorical epic, it is meant that its fundamental subject is nothing but allegory, that the war of the Aryan Ráma against the Rákshas race is an allegory, that the conquest of the southern region and of the island of Lanká is an allegory, I do not hesitate to answer that such a presumption cannot be admitted and that the thing is in my opinion impossible. Father Paolíno da S. Bartolommeo,(1182) had already, together with other strange opinions of his own on Indian matters, brought forward a similar idea, that is to say that the exploit of Ráma which is the subject of the Rámáyan was a symbol and represented the course of the sun: thus he imagined that Brahmá was the earth, Vishṇu the water, and that his avatárs were the blessings brought by the fertilizing waters, etc. But such ideas, born at a time when Indo-sanskrit antiquities were enveloped in darkness, have been dissipated by the light of new studies. How could an epic so dear in India to the memory of the people, so deeply rooted for many centuries in the minds of all, so propagated and diffused through all the dialects and languages of those regions, which had become the source of many dramas which are still represented in India, which is itself represented every year with such magnificence and to such crowds of people in the neighbourhood of Ayodhyá, a poem welcomed at its very birth with such favour, as the legend relates, that the recitation of it by the first wandering Rhapsodists has consecrated and made famous all the places celebrated by them, and where Ráma made a shorter or longer stay, how, I ask, could such an epic have been purely allegorical? How, upon a pure invention, upon a simple allegory, could a poem have been composed of about fifty thousand verses, relating with such force and power the events, and giving details with such exactness? On a theme purely allegorical there may easily be composed a short mythical poem, as for example a poem on Proserpine or Psyche: but never an epic so full of traditions and historical memories, so intimately connected with the life of the people, as the Rámáyan.(1183) Excessive readiness to find allegory whenever some traces of symbolism occur, where the myth partly veils the historical reality, may lead and often has led to error. What poetical work of mythical times could stand this mode of trial? could there not be made, or rather has there not been made a work altogether allegorical, out of the Homeric poems? We have all heard of the ingenious idea of the anonymous writer, who in order to prove how easily we may pass beyond the truth in our wish to seek and find allegory everywhere, undertook with keen subtlety to prove that the great personality of Napoleon I. was altogether allegorical and represented the sun. Napoleon was born in an island, his course was from west to east, his twelve marshals were the twelve signs of the zodiac, etc.

I conclude then, that the fundamental theme of the Rámáyan, that is to say the war of the Aryan Ráma against the Rákshases, an Hamitic race settled in the south, ought to be regarded as real and historical as far as regards its substance, although the mythic element intermingled with the true sometimes alters its natural and genuine aspect.

How then did the Indo-Sanskrit epopeia form and complete itself? What elements did it interweave in its progress? How did it embody, how did it clothe the naked and simple primitive datum? We must first of all remember that the Indo-European races possessed the epic genius in the highest degree, and that they alone in the different regions they occupied produced epic poetry … But other causes and particular influences combined to nourish and develop the epic germ of the Sanskrit-Indians. Already in the Rig-veda are found hymns in which the Aryan genius preluded, so to speak, to the future epopeia, in songs that celebrated the heroic deeds of Indra, the combats and the victories of the tutelary Gods of the Aryan races over enemies secret or open, human or superhuman, the exploits and the memories of ancient heroes. More recently, at certain solemn occasions, as the very learned A. Weber remarks, at the solemnity, for example of the Aśvamedha or sacrifice of the horse, the praises of the king who ordained the great rite were sung by bards and minstrels in songs composed for the purpose, the memories of past times were recalled and honourable mention was made of the just and pious kings of old. In the _Bráhmaṇas_, a sort of prose commentaries annexed to the Vedas, are found recorded stories and legends which allude to historical events of the past ages, to ancient memories, and to mythical events. Such popular legends which the _Bráhmaṇas_ undoubtedly gathered from tradition admirably suited the epic tissue with which they were interwoven by successive hands.… Many and various mythico-historical traditions, suitable for epic development, were diffused among the Aryan races, those for example which are related in the four chapters containing the description of the earth, the Descent of the Ganges, etc. The epic genius however sometimes created beings of its own and gave body and life to ideal conceptions. Some of the persons in the Rámáyan must be, in my opinion, either personifications of the forces of nature like those which are described with such vigour in the _Sháhnámah_, or if not exactly created, exaggerated beyond human proportions; others, vedic personages much more ancient than Ráma, were introduced into the epic and woven into its narrations, to bring together men who lived in different and distant ages, as has been the case in times nearer to our own, in the epics, I mean, of the middle ages.

In the introduction I have discussed the antiquity of the Rámáyan; and by means of those critical and inductive proofs which are all that an antiquity without precise historical dates can furnish I have endeavoured to establish with all the certainty that the subject admitted, that the original composition of the Rámáyan is to be assigned to about the twelfth century before the Christian era. Not that I believe that the epic then sprang to life in the form in which we now possess it; I think, and I have elsewhere expressed the opinion, that the poem during the course of its rhapsodical and oral propagation appropriated by way of episodes, traditions, legends and ancient myths.… But as far as regards the epic poem properly so called which celebrates the expedition of Ráma against the Rákshases I think that I have sufficiently shown that its origin and first appearance should be placed about the twelfth century B.C.; nor have I hitherto met with anything to oppose this chronological result, or to oblige me to rectify or reject it.… But an eminent philologist already quoted, deeply versed in these studies, A. Weber, has expressed in some of his writings a totally different opinion; and the authority of his name, if not the number and cogency of his arguments, compels me to say something on the subject. From the fact or rather the assumption that Megasthenes(1184) who lived some time in India has made no mention either of the Mahábhárat or the Rámáyan Professor Weber argues that neither of these poems could have existed at that time; as regards the Rámáyan, the unity of its composition, the chain that binds together its different parts, and its allegorical character, show it, says Professor Weber, to be much more recent than the age to which I have assigned it, near to our own era, and according to him, later than the Mahábhárat. As for Megasthenes it should be observed, that he did not write a history of India, much less a literary history or anything at all resembling one, but a simple description, in great part physical, of India: whence, from his silence on literary matters to draw inferences regarding the history of Sanskrit literature would be the same thing as from the silence of a geologist with respect to the literature of a country whose valleys, mountains, and internal structure he is exploring, to conjecture that such and such a poem or history not mentioned by him did not exist at his time. We have only to look at the fragments of Megasthenes collected and published by Schwanbeck to see what was the nature and scope of his _Indica_.… But only a few fragments of Megasthenes are extant; and to pretend that they should be argument and proof enough to judge the antiquity of a poem is to press the laws of criticism too far. To Professor Weber’s argument as to the more or less recent age of the Rámáyan from the unity of its composition, I will make one sole reply, which is that if unity of composition were really a proof of a more recent age, it would be necessary to reduce by a thousand years at least the age of Homer and bring him down to the age of Augustus and Virgil; for certainly there is much more unity of composition, a greater accord and harmony of parts in the Iliad and the Odyssey than in the Rámáyan. But in the fine arts perfection is no proof of a recent age: while the experience and the continuous labour of successive ages are necessary to extend and perfect the physical or natural sciences, art which is spontaneous in its nature can produce and has produced in remote times works of such perfection as later ages have not been able to equal.”





INDEX OF PRINCIPAL NAMES


Abhijit, 24.

Abhikála, 176.

Abhíra, 444.

Abravanti, 374.

Aditi, 31, 57, 58, 125, 201, 245, 246.

Ádityas, 246, 403.

Agastya, 5, 9, 40, 132, 151, 239, 240, 242, 244, 262, 265, 280, 375, 480, 491, 500.

Ágneya, 178.

Agni, 28, 74, 109, 132, 240, 243, 276.

Agnivarṇa, 82, 220.

Agniketu, 433 note, 459.

Ahalyá, 60, 61, 62.

Ailadhána, 178.

Air, 2, 28, 203.

Airávat, 14, 110, 178, 246, 256, 267, 335, 399, 402, 415, 429, 437, 472.

Aja, 82, 220, 465.

Ájas, 270, 271.

Akampan, 265, 266, 468, 481.

Aksha, 6, 420, 469, 471.

Akurvati, 178.

Alaka, 203 note.

Alambúshá, 59, 198, 199.

Alarka, 104, 107.

Amarávatí, 13, 203 note, 286.

Ambarísha, 72, 73, 74, 82, 220.

Amúrtarajas, 46.

Anala, 455 note.

Analá, 245, 246.

Ananta, 373.

Anaraṇya, 81, 219, 470.

Anasúyá, 9, 226, 227, 228.

Andhak, 264.

Andhras, 549.

Anga, 38.

Angad, 342, 348, 350, 352 ff., 363, 364 note, 367, 374, 379 ff, 391, 402, 425 ff., 439, 442, 445, 448, 456, 458, 459, 475, 479 ff, 505.

Angas, 15, 18, 19, 21, 102.

Angiras, 133, 245.

Anjan, 14, 368, 369.

Anjaná, 392.

Anśudhána, 179.

Anśumán, 50, 53, 56, 82, 220.

Anuhláda, 370.

Aparparyat, 178.

Apartála, 175.

Apsarases, 57, 198, 199, 229, 378.

Aptoryám, 24.

Arishta, 424, 425.

Aríshṭanemi, 49, 245, 392.

Arjun, 86.

Arjuna, 518.

Arthasádhak, 14.

Aruṇ, 246,

Arundhatí, 19, 244, 413.

Aryaman, 124.

Áryan, 92.

Asamanj, 50, 53, 82, 138, 220.

Asit, 81, 219.

Aśok, 14, 175.

Aśoka, 6, 10, 101, 205, 278, 296, 297, 300, 318, 321, 357, 403, 444, 452, 456.

Asta, 377, 379 note.

Asurs, 57, 58, 380, 381, 387, 394, 407, 413, 420.

Aśvagríva, 246.

Aśvamedh, 29, 236 note.

Aśvapati, 89, 131, 178, 183.

Aśvatarí, 346.

Aśvin, 371.

Aśvíní, 343.

Aśvins, 28, 36, 60, 62, 163, 246, 339, 343, 403, 490.

Atikáya, 468, 478 ff.

Atirátra, 24.

Atri, 245, 561.

Aurva, 373 note.

Avantí, 374.

Avindhya, 415.

Ayodhyá, 4, 6, 11, 12, 14, 19, 32, 33, 38, 49, 70, 72, 79, 81, 83, 84, 85, 88, 95, 96, _passim_.

Ayomukh, 374.

Ayomukhi, 310.

Báhíka, 176.

Bahuputra, 245.

Bala, 264.

Bálakhilyas, 63, 235, 270, 271, 374.

Bali, 43, 59, 107, 275, 302, 421.

Báli, 5, 9, 29, 318, 324, 328, 329, 333 ff., 344, 356 ff., 362, 364, 366, 367, 379, 380, 391, 404, 412, 420, 440, 442, 448, 456, 458, 475, 478, 500, 503, 505.

Barbars, 66.

Beauty, 26, 29, 58, 88, 283, 455.

Bhadamadrá, 246.

Bhadra, 52.

Bhaga, 124, 243.

Bhagírath, 53, 54, 55, 82, 220, 372.

Bhágírathí, 56.

Bharadvája, 4, 7, 9, 10, 158, 159, 193, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 501.

Bharat, 4, 9, 10, 32, 81, 83, 84, 88, 89, 94, 97, _passim_.

Bharatas, 550.

Bháruṇḍa, 178.

Bhásí, 246.

Bhásakarṇa, 420.

Bhava, 78.

Bhímá, 198.

Bhogavatí, 12 note, 267, 375.

Bhrigu, 40, 63, 73, 81, 85, 86, 88, 133, 220.

Brahmá, 6, 7, 10, 19, 25, 26, 33, 38, 39, 42, 46, 48, 54, 56, 59, 61, 63, 65, 67, 68, 74, 75, 77, 81, _passim_.

Brahmadatta, 46, 47.

Brahmádikas, 133 note.

Bhrahmamálas, 548.

Budha, 287.

Buddhist, 219.

Cancer, 109.

Ceylon, 375 note.

Chaitra, 91.

Chaitraratha, 41, 178, 199, 267, 279, 315, 493.

Chakraván, 376.

Champá, 30.

Chaṇḍa, 448.

Chaṇḍála, 69, 70.

Chandra, 464.

Chatushṭom, 24.

Chitrá, 111, 250, 283.

Chitrakúṭa, 4, 9, 160, 161, 197, 200, 201, 202, 209, 235, 236, 317, 416, 501.

Chitraratha, 132.

Cholas, 549.

Chúli, 47.

Chyavan, 81, 220.

Dadhimukh, 426.

Dadhivakra, 364 note.

Daitya, 125, 152, 211, 246, 289, 306, 371, 418.

Daksha, 36, 78, 228, 245, 257, 396.

Dánav, 255, 270, 306, 307, 311, 371, 372, 382, 432, 443, 477.

Daṇḍak, 9, 99, 103, 117, 124, 126, 130, 166, 181, 199, 211, 238, 271, 374.

Daṇḍaká, 5.

Danú, 245, 246, 313.

Dapple skin, 64, 65.

Dardar, 110, 198.

Dardur, 448.

Darímukha, 371.

Daśárṇa, 374.

Dasáratha, 3, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18 ff., 25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 34, 41, 61, 62, 77, 79, 80 ff., 91, 92, 95, _passim_.

Dasyus, 444.

Devamíḍha, 82.

Devántak, 479, 480.

Devarát, 77, 82, 86.

Devasakhá, 378.

Devavatí, 515.

Dhanvantari, 57 note.

Dhanyamáliní, 481.

Dharmabhrit, 240.

Dharmapál, 14.

Dharmáraṇya, 46.

Dharmavardhan, 179.

Dhritaráshṭrí, 246.

Dhrishṭaketu, 82.

Dhrishṭi, 14, 202.

Dhruvasandhi, 81, 219.

Dhúmra, 371, 448.

Dhúmráksha, 433 note, 465, 466.

Dhúmráśva, 60, 481.

Dhundhumár, 81, 171, 219.

Dikshá, 44.

Dilípa, 5 note, 53, 54, 56, 82, 171, 190, 220.

Diti, 58, 59, 245, 246, 323.

Dragon, 101.

Driḍhanetra, 68.

Drishṭi, 202.

Droṇa, 464.

Drumakulya, 444.

Dundubhi, 333, 335, 338.

Durdhar, 420.

Durdharsha, 433 note.

Durjaya, 256 note.

Durmukha, 432, 433 note.

Durvásas, 521.

Dúshaṇ, 5, 250, 254, 255, 256, 258, 259, 261, 264, 265, 267-271, 294, 461, 502.

Dwida, 364 note.

Dwijihva, 474.

Dwivid, 371, 428, 430, 449, 451, 475, 483, 484.

Dwivida, 28.

Dyumatsena, 129.

Ekapádakas, 549.

Ekaśála, 179.

Fame, 26, 283.

Fate, 42, 68, 70, 71, 81, 119, 122, 123, 130, 181, 182, 195, 256, 293, 296, 309, 343, 349, 351, 354, 386, 404, 415, 439, 492.

Fire, 2, 30, 45, 49, 218, 374.

Fortune, 2, 58, 90, 94, 124, 146, 160, 188, 242, 244, 283, 449, 453.

Fire-god, 74, 124, 328.

Gádhi, 40, 48, 63, 64, 67, 68.

Gaja, 364 note, 371, 429, 449, 459.

Gálava, 518.

Gandhamádan, 28, 159, 381, 429, 446, 476.

Gandharva, 199, 256, 258, 259, 278, 285, 351, 396, 425, 437, 441, 454, 466, 468, 491.

Gandharvas, 267, 270, 281, 283, 306, 307, 308, 318, 364, 370, 375, 377, 388, 394, 409, 420, 432, 449, 455, 472.

Gandharví, 246, 265.

Gangá, 7, 9, 37, 38, 45, 48, 49, _passim_.

Garga, 133.

Garuḍ, 28, 29, 53, 246, 271, 373, 453, 465, 470, 475.

Gautam, 60, 61, 62, 505.

Gautama, 236.

Gaváksha, 364 note, 429, 449, 468, 475, 476.

Gavaya, 364 note, 371, 429, 448, 468.

Gaya, 482.

Gayá, 216.

Gáyatrí, 243.

Ghoralohamukhas, 548.

Ghritáchí, 46, 198, 367.

Girivraja, 46, 176.

Glory, 301.

Godávarí, 245, 247, 248, 249, 282, 303, 310, 374, 500.

Gokarna, 54.

Golabh, 351.

Gomatí, 151, 179, 448, 502, 503.

Gopa, 199.

Guha, 4, 9, 152-156, 162, 192, 193, 194, 208, 501.

Guhyakas, 378.

Háhá, 198.

Haihayas, 81, 219.

Hanúmán, 5, 9, 10, 28, 324 ff., 328, 332, 337, 340, 350, 355, 359, 360, 363, 364 note, 368, 371, 374, 378 ff., 392 ff., 411 ff., 424 ff., 449, 456.

Hara, 448.

Harí, 246.

Hárítas, 66.

Haryaśva, 82.

Hástinapura, 176.

Hastiprishṭhak, 179.

Havishyand, 68.

Hayagriva, 346, 376.

Hemá, 198, 382.

Hemachandra, 60.

Heti, 515.

Himálaya, 3, 14, 45, 48, 49, 50, 53, 54, 61, 67, 76, 81, 88.

Himaváu, 380.

Hiraṇyakaśipu, 391 note, 407.

Hiraṇyanábha, 500.

Hládini, 55, 178.

Honour, 283.

Hotri, 24.

Hraśvaromá, 82.

Huhú, 198.

Ikshumatí, 80, 176.

Ikshváku, 2, 11, 13, 18, 24, 25, 35, 59, 60, 69, 70, 71, 73, 81, 82, 83, 90, 94, 96, 103, 219, 390.

Ilval, 241.

Indra, 2, 5, 13, 14, 25, 28, 29, 36, 39, 40, 43 ff., 50, 56, _passim_.

Indrajánu, 371 note.

Indrajít, 420, 432, 436, 437, 441, 455, 459 ff., 482, 485.

Indraśatru, 433 note.

Indraśira, 178.

Irávatí, 246.

Jábáli, 505.

Jahnu, 55.

Jáhnaví, 49, 55, 154.

Jamadagni, 85, 86, 87, 119.

Jámbaván, 371, 374, 388, 391, 393, 402, 425, 428, 429, 439, 446, 448, 456, 464, 483, 503.

Jambudvip, 51, 373.

Jambumálí, 418, 419, 420, 459, 460.

Jambuprastha, 179.

Jámbuvatu, 364 note.

Janak, 4, 8, 9, 21, 45, 60, 61, 62, 77-85, 88, 090, _passim_.

Janamejaya, 171.

Janasthán, 225, 251, 254, 255, 264, 265, 271, 281, 282, 294, 295, 298, 308, 404, 439, 454, 463, 474, 493, 500.

Játarúpa, 373.

Jaṭáyu, 5.

Jaṭáyus, 245, 247, 280, 288, 290, 308, 385 ff., 500, 502.

Java, 231.

Jáváli, 20, 80, 174, 217, 218, 219, 222.

Jayá, 36.

Jayanta, 14, 175.

Jumna, 109, 501, 502.

Jupiter, 144.

Justice, 3, 35, 42, 149, 243, 346, 454.

Jyotishṭom, 24.

Kabandha, 5, 9, 310-316, 446, 500.

Kadrú, 246.

Kadrumá, 246.

Kaikasí, 516.

Kaikeyí, 3, 4, 9, 27, 32, 88, 96-103, _passim_.

Kailása, 38, 85, 92, 96, 110, 111, 267, 286, 357, 364, 368, 369, 373, 378, 421, 431.

Kakustha, 35, 37, 82, 109, 110, 123, 137, 142, 147, 149, 151, 153, 192, 208, 211, 220, 311.

Kalá, 378.

Kálak, 246.

Kálaká, 245, 246.

Kálakámuka, 256 note.

Kálamahí, 372.

Kalinda, 178.

Kálindí, 81, 160, 220.

Kalinga, 179.

Kalingas, 549,

Kalmáshapáda, 82, 220.

Káma 37, 38, 42, 283, 286, 296.

Kámboja, 13, 66.

Kámbojas, 66.

Kámpili, 47

Kaṇdu, 118, 380, 440.

Kandarpa, 37, 74, 75, 76, 250, 269.

Kaṇva, 440.

Kanyákubja, 47.

Kapil, 51, 52, 53.

Kapivati, 179.

Kardam, 245.

Karṇaprávaraṇas, 548.

Kártikeya, 243.

Kárttavírya, 518.

Káśi, 21, 102.

Kásíkosalas, 548.

Kaśyap, 15, 16, 20, 30, 57-59, 80, 81, 86, 87, 91, 92, 118, 219, 215, passim.

Kátyáyan, 505.

Kátyáyana, 80, 174.

Kauśalyá, 3, 23, 27, 30, 31, 79, 84, 88, 93, 94, 97, 98, 100, _passim_.

Kauśámbí, 46.

Kauśikas, 549.

Kauśikí, 48, 372.

Káverí, 375.

Kaustubha, 58.

Kávya, 40.

Kekaya, 21, 84, 88, 90, 137, 139, 174, 175.

Kerala, 190.

Keralas, 549.

Kesarí, 371.

Keśini, 49, 50.

Khara, 9, 225, 250 ff., 281, 288, 290, 294, 295, 433, 446, 451, 461, 477, 493.

Kinnars, 270, 306, 308, 318, 321, 373, 425.

Kimpurushas, 28 note.

Kirátas, 66, 549.

Kírtirát, 82.

Kirtirátha, 82.

Kishkindhá, 5, 333, 334, 336, 338, 339, 351, 357, 362, 369, 385, 449, 464, 500.

Kośal, 11, 102, 273, 307, 359, 418.

Kośala, 151, 173.

Krathan, 448.

Kratu, 245.

Krauncha, 310, 378, 476.

Kraunchi, 246.

Kriśáśva, 36, 41, 43.

Krishṇa, 497.

Krishṇagiri, 448.

Krishṇveni, 374.

Krita, 57, 395.

Krodhavaśá, 245, 246.

Kshatriyas, 246, 346.

Kukshi, 81, 219.

Kulingá, 176.

Kumbha, 484.

Kumbhakarṇa, 10, 250, 399, 411, 435 ff., 441, 470 ff.

Kúmuda, 364 note, 448.

Kunjar, 375, 392.

Kuru(s), North, 198, 203, 315.

Kurujángal, 176.

Kuśa, 10, 46, 48, 63, 526.

Kuśadhwaj, 80, 82, 88.

Kuśámba, 46.

Kuśanábha, 46, 47, 48, 63.

Kuśáśva, 60.

Kuśik, 33, 35, 36, 38, 44, 56, 62, 63, 68, 70 ff., 83.

Kuṭíká, 179.

Kuṭikoshṭiká, 179.

Kuvera, 23, 88, 109, 110, 111, 112, 198, 199, 204, 232, 267, 378, 422, 431, 432, 483.

Lakshmaṇ, 4, 8, 11, 32, 36, 38, 40, 41, 44, 45, 56, 61, 79, 80, 82-84, 88, 91, 94, 97, 98, _passim_.

Lakshmí, 88, 116, 146, 227, 400, 453, 462, 497.

Lamba, 397.

Lanká, 5, 10, 265, 267, 284, 286, 293, 295-297, 367, 387, 397, 411, 423 ff., 439, 456 ff.

Lankaṭankaṭá, 515.

Lava, 10, 526.

Lohitya, 179.

Lokapálas, 485.

Lomapád, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 30.

Mádhaví, 520.

Madhu, 26, 51, 57, 87, 95.

Madhúka, 245.

Madhushyand, 68, 74.

Madrakas, 550.

Magadh, 46, 102.

Mágadnas, 548.

Maghá, 83.

Mahábír, 82.

Mahábala, 433 note.

Mahábhárat, 520, 524, 551, 554.

Mahádeva, 61, 515.

Mahákapála, 256 note, 260.

Mahámáli, 256 note.

Mahándhrak, 82.

Mahápadma, 14, 52.

Mahápáráśva, 433, 436, 455, 478, 480, 487.

Mahárath, 68.

Maháromá, 82.

Maháruṇ, 368.

Maháśaila, 368.

Mahendra, 28, 59, 86, 87, 88, 140, 167, 213, 243, 244, 307, 336, 344, 364, 368, 370, 375, 490, 531, 554.

Maheśwar, 369, 498.

Mahí, 372.

Máhishmatí, 518.

Mahishikas, 549.

Mahodar, 433 note, 450, 455, 474, 478 ff.

Mahodaya, 46, 70, 71, 488.

Maináka, 10, 394, 500 note.

Mainda, 28, 364 note, 371, 428, 430, 439, 449, 451, 458, 482, 483.

Makaráksha, 485 note.

Malaja, 39.

Málavas, 548.

Malaya, 198, 324, 328, 375, 379, 430.

Málí, 515, 516.

Máliní, 175, 539.

Malyaván, 454, 455.

Mályavat, 515, 516.

Mánas, 38.

Mandakarṇi, 240.

Mandákiní, 200, 201, 203, 209, 234, 235, 304, 322, 416 note.

Mandalí, 556.

Mandar, 57, 163, 285, 362, 368, 372, 399, 402, 421, 485, 491, 493, 525.

Mandarí, 444.

Mándhátá, 81, 219, 347, 518.

Mándavi, 84.

Máṇḍavya, 226 note.

Mandehas, 373.

Mandodarí, 402, 492, 500, 516.

Mandra, 14.

Maṇibhadra, 441.

Manthará, 40, 96, 97, 99, 187.

Manu, 11, 12, 13, 81, 103, 151, 179, 219, 245, 246, 347, 490, 505, 537, 555.

Marícha, 58.

Márícha, 5, 9, 35, 39, 40, 44, 266, 271-280, 298.

Maríchi, 81, 91, 219, 245.

Maríchipas, 270, 271.

Márkaṇḍeya, 80, 174.

Mars, 93, 144, 339, 404, 445, 467, 489.

Maru, 82, 220.

Maruts, 25, 54, 59, 403, 517, 547, 555.

Máshas, 270, 271.

Mátali, 109, 142, 489, 491, 493.

Matanga, 14, 246, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 336, 337, 380.

Mátangí, 246.

Mátariśva, 389.

Matsya, 102, 523, 537, 549.

Maya, 293, 382, 432, 488.

Máyá, 293, 521.

Máyáví, 333, 334, 379.

Meghamáli, 256 note.

Meghanáda, 10.

Mekhal, 374.

Mená, 49, 394 note.

Menaká, 74.

Mercury, 144, 339, 467.

Meru, 4, 49, 92, 109, 110, 142, 182, 232, 236, 254, 291, 315, 368, 370, 377, 380, 418, 493.

Meruśavarṇi, 382.

Mina, 32.

Miśrakeśí, 199.

Mithi, 82.

Míthilá, 9 note, 21, 45, 60, 61, 78, 81, 83, 84, 85.

Mitraghna, 459.

Mlechchhas, 66, 537, 550.

Modesty, 26.

Moon, 30, 42, 58, 109 ff., 124, 218, 227, 243, 276, 367, 413, 414, 488.

Mriga, 14.

Mrigamandá, 246.

Mrigí, 246.

Mudgalya, 174.

Nábhág, 82, 220.

Nágadantá, 198.

Nágas, 12, 55, 66, 68, 145, 270, 273, 395, 409, 413, 420, 427, 518.

Nahush, 82, 95, 171, 190, 220, 307.

Nairrit, 430.

Nala, 10, 340, 364 note, 428, 444, 445, 448, 449, 468, 475, 483.

Nalá, 246.

Naliní, 55, 203, 204, 267, 436.

Namuchi, 39, 261, 264, 275, 336.

Nandá, 415.

Nandan, 26, 175, 200, 267, 279, 315, 316, 426.

Nandi, 249, 421.

Nandigráma, 4, 6, 9, 224, 502, 503.

Nandíśvara, 471.

Nandivardhan, 82.

Nárad, 1, 2, 8, 9, 124, 199, 543.

Narak, 479.

Narántak, 479.

Náráyaṇ, 25, 26, 95, 393, 474, 497, 516, 517, 522, 535, 559.

Narmadá, 374, 448, 518.

Nikumbha, 432, 433 note, 437, 459, 484.

Níla, 28, 340, 352, 360, 364 note, 371, 374, 428, 429, 430, 446, 448, 449, 456, 458, 459, 469, 472, 475, 482.

Nimi, 77, 82.

Niśakar, 389, 390.

Nishádas, 4, 152, 192, 196, 271, 501, 537.

Ocean, 10, 95, 144, 285, 286, 336, 346, 387.

Oshṭhakarṇakas, 548.

Pahlavas, 66.

Páka, 252, 297, 498.

Pampá, 5, 9, 235, 293, 314-321, 327.

Panas, 371, 428, 448, 464.

Panasa, 455 note.

Panchajan, 376.

Panchála, 176, 539.

Panchápsaras, 240.

Panchavaṭa, 9.

Panchavaṭí, 244, 245, 247.

Páṇḍyas, 375, 549.

Paráśara, 517.

Paraśuráma, 119 note, 523, 531.

Paravíráksha, 256 note.

Páriyátra, 376, 448.

Parjanya, 112, 174, 261, 448.

Párvati, 249 note, 515, 542.

Paulastya, 472.

Paulomí, 29, 370.

Pávaní, 55.

Phálguní, 83.

Pináka, 67.

Pitris, 550.

Prabháva, 363.

Prachetas, 1, 245.

Praghas, 420, 459, 460.

Prágvaṭ, 179.

Prahasta, 399, 418, 419, 421, 422, 432 ff., 441, 451, 452, 455, 456, 471, 481.

Praheti, 515.

Prahláda, 391.

Prajangha, 459, 460.

Prajápati, 133 note, 554, 560.

Pralamba, 175.

Pramátha, 256 note.

Pramathí, 260, 448.

Pramati, 455 note.

Prasenajit, 81, 219.

Praśravaṇ, 304, 357, 380, 383, 415, 426.

Prasthalas, 550.

Praśuśśruka, 82, 220.

Pratindhak, 82.

Pravargya, 22.

Prayág, 158, 159, 196.

Prithu, 81, 219.

Prithuśyáma, 256 note.

Proshṭhapadá, 32.

Pulah, 245.

Pulastya, 35, 245, 254, 268, 288, 408, 515.

Pulindas, 550.

Puloma, 370.

Punarvasu, 93.

Puṇḍaríká, 199.

Puṇḍras, 548, 549.

Punjikasthalá, 436, 552.

Puranda, 522.

Purandara, 384, 522.

Purúravas, 286, 544, 545.

Purusha, 256 note, 559.

Purushádak, 82, 220.

Purushottam, 498, 517.

Púshá, 124.

Pushpak, 10, 80, 286, 499, 519.

Pushya, 32, 90, 92, 94, 96, 98, 109, 126.

Rabhasa, 433 note.

Rághava, 5 note.

Raghu, 5, 9, 22, 32 ff., 50, 56, 61, _passim_.

Raghunandana, 522.

Ráhu, 93, 223, 261, 272, 303, 351, 480.

Rain, Lord of, 92, 222.

Rájagriha, 174, 175.

Ráma, _passim_.

Rámáyana, 8 note, 10, 11, 541, 542.

Rambhá, 75, 232, 448.

Ramaṇá, 199.

Raśmiketu, 433 note, 459.

Rávaṇ, 5, 9, 10, 25, 26, 32, 35, _passim_.

Reṇuká, 63, 119.

Richíka, 48, 73, 86.

Right, 42, 68.

Riksharajas, 386, 442.

Rikshaván, 448.

Rishabh, 373, 375, 429, 446, 476, 483.

Rishṭikas, 549.

Rishyamúka, 9, 314, 315, 316, 318 ff., 332, 335, 339, 340, 353, 380, 500.

Rishyaśring, 15-24, 29, 30.

Rohiṇí, 4, 112, 223, 227, 246, 251, 282, 287, 367, 404, 413, 445.

Rohitas, 376, 558.

Rudhiráśana, 256 note.

Rudra, 49, 57, 67, 77, 78, 162, 249, 257, 264, 283, 296, 378, 413, 483.

Rudras, 246, 558.

Rukmiṇí, 517.

Rumá, 346, 349, 350, 363, 366, 367, 371, 385, 403.

Ruman, 371.

Sachí, 29, 202, 234, 238, 276, 286, 297, 370, 408, 415, 494, 519, 522.

Sádhyas, 490, 555, 558, 559.

Sagar, 11, 50 ff., 82, 119, 137, 171, 441.

Sahadeva, 60.

Sahya, 429, 430.

Śaivya, 104, 107, 171, 533.

Śakas, 66, 550.

Śakra, 75, 234, 307, 313, 336, 344, 448, 464.

Śálmalí, 176, 539.

Śályakartan, 178.

Śáman, 186, 326, 359.

Śambar, 479.

Śambara, 99, 100.

Sampáti, 5, 9, 246, 364 note, 385, 387 ff., 412, 455 note, 459, 460, 464.

Samprakshálas, 235.

Sanatkumár, 15, 16.

Sandhyá, 515.

Sanháras, 36.

Sanhráda, 474.

Śaniśchar, 283.

Śankan, 82.

Śankar, 57, 335.

Sánkáśyá, 80, 81, 82, 83.

Śankha, 555.

Śankhan, 220, 432.

Sanrochan, 448.

Śanśray, 245.

Śántá, 16, 19, 29, 30, 31.

Śarabh, 364 note, 439, 476.

Śarabhanga, 9, 233, 234, 235, 236, 265, 502.

Śaradaṇḍá, 176, 539.

Saramá, 452, 453.

Sáraṇ, 446, 447, 455.

Sarandib, 375 note.

Sáranga, 556.

Sarasvatí, 178, 372, 516, 522.

Śárdúla, 441, 449, 450.

Śárdúlí, 246.

Sarjú, 11, 20, 22, 36, 37, 38, 50, _passim_.

Sárvabhauma, 429.

Sarvartírtha, 179.

Śaśivindhus, 81, 219.

Śatabali, 371, 377, 379, 380.

Śatadrú, 178, 539.

Śatahradá, 231.

Śatánanda, 62, 63, 77, 79, 80, 81, 84.

Śatrughna, 32, 83, 84, 88, 89, 97, _passim_.

Śatrunjay, 504.

Satyaván, 129.

Satyavatí, 48.

Sávitrí, 129, 227.

Śavarí, 315, 316, 317.

Saumanas, 373.

Sávarṇí, 377.

Seven Rishis, 23.

Śesha, 245.

Siddhárth, 14, 137, 138, 175.

Siddhas, 28 note, 540, 559.

Śíghraga, 82, 220.

Śilá, 178.

Śilávahá, 178.

Sindhu, 13, 21, 55, 102, 372, 376, 443.

Sinhiká, 10, 396.

Śiśir(a), 372, 555.

Sítá, 4 ff., 55, 78, 79, 83, 84, 88, 93, _passim_.

Śiva, 4, 36, 42, 54, 55, 57, 67, 78, 82, 85, 86, 109, 110, 205, 523, 524, 543, 554.

Skanda, 554.

Soma, 52, 58, 198, 267, 378, 554.

Somadatta, 60.

Somadá, 47.

Somagiri, 376, 378.

Śoṇa, 45, 48, 372.

Śringavera, 4, 192, 196, 223, 501, 502.

Srinjay, 60.

Srutakírti, 84.

Stháṇu, 25, 37, 245.

Stháṇumatí, 179.

Sthúláksha, 256 note, 260.

Sthúlaśiras, 313.

Subáhu, 364 note.

Suchakshu, 55.

Suchandra, 60.

Śuchi, 238.

Sudámá, 178.

Sudáman, 81, 176.

Sudarśan, 82, 83, 220, 373, 378, 448.

Sudarśandwíp, 374.

Sudhanvá, 82.

Sudhriti, 82.

Śúdras, 6, 13, 246.

Sugríva, 5, 6, 9, 28, 29, 314, 316, 318, 324 ff., 337, 339, 344, 346 ff., 371, 375 ff., 412, 414, 422, 424, 430, 439 ff., 446, 450, 519, 545.

Śuka, 442, 446, 447, 455 ff.

Sukeśa, 515, 516.

Suketu, 39, 82.

Sukí, 246.

Śukra, 124, 210, 279, 384, 429.

Sumáli, 515, 516.

Sumágadhí, 46.

Sumantra, 15, 16, 19, 21, 80, 92, _passim_.

Sumati, 49, 50, 59, 60.

Sumitrá, 27, 30, 32, 88, 94, _passim_.

Sun, 93, 109, 110, 124, 243.

Sunábha, 425.

Śunahśepha, 72, 73, 74

Sunda, 35, 39.

Sunetra, 364 note.

Suparṇa, 53, 125, 231, 343, 349, 388.

Supárśva, 388.

Supátala, 364 note.

Suptaghna, 433 note.

Surá, 58.

Surabhí, 183, 246.

Surapati, 522.

Suras, 58.

Surasá, 246, 395.

Suráshṭra, 21, 102, 376.

Súrasenas, 550.

Śúrpaṇakhá, 5, 9, 249 ff., 267 ff., 288, 502.

Súrya, 555.

Súryáksha, 364 note.

Súryaśatru, 433 note.

Súryaván, 375.

Susandhi, 81, 219.

Susheṇ, 28, 351, 364 note, 376, 379, 380.

Sutanu, 199.

Sutíkshṇa, 9, 234, 236, 237, 240, 241.

Suváhu, 35, 44, 45, 146.

Suvarat, 220.

Suvela, 450, 456, 457.

Suvíra, 21, 102.

Suyajǹa, 20, 132.

Svayambhu, 394.

Svayamprabhá, 382.

Śvetáraṇya, 264.

Swarga, 54, 101, 202, 493.

Swarṇaromá, 82.

Śweta, 448.

Śyáma, 160.

Syandiká, 151.

Śyenagámí, 256 note, 260.

Śyení, 246.

Táḍaká, 38, 39, 40, 41.

Táḍakeya, 266.

Taittiríya, 132.

Takshak, 432.

Takshaka, 267.

Tálajanghas, 81, 219.

Tamasá, 7, 147, 148, 149.

Támrá, 245, 246.

Támraparṇí, 375.

Tapan, 459, 555.

Tára, 364 note, 379 ff.

Tárá, 9, 336, 349 ff., 355, 359, 362, 363, 366, 367, 369, 371, 385, 403, 449, 546.

Tárak, 430.

Tárkshya, 214.

Ten-necked, 250.

Thirty-three Gods, 51.

Thousand-eyed, 41, 59, 60, 74, 75, 76, 86, 90, 112, 252, 297, 504.

Three-eyed God, 86.

Thunderer, 234.

Titan, 58, 67, 72, 79, 109, 114, 124.

Toraṇ, 179.

Town-Destroyer, 59, 60.

Trident, 68.

Trident-wielding, 54, 57.

Trijaṭ, 133.

Trijaṭá, 410, 463.

Trikúṭa, 456, 457, 500, 515.

Triṇavindu, 515.

Trípathagá, 56.

Tripur, 306.

Tripura, 85, 86.

Triśanku, 68-72, 81, 144, 219, 429.

Triśirá, 9.

Triśirás, 256 note, 260, 261, 264, 267, 271, 478, 479, 480, 502.

Tumburu, 198, 199, 232.

Uchchaihśravas, 58, 522.

Udayagiri, 379 note.

Udávasu, 82.

Ujjiháná, 179.

Ukthya, 24.

Umá, 49, 54, 205, 249 note, 471, 542, 543.

Upasad, 22.

Upasunda, 35.

Upendra, 74, 559.

Urmilá, 47, 83, 84, 88, 228.

Urvaśí, 286, 544, 545.

Uśanas, 382.

Utkal, 374.

Uttániká, 179, 539.

Váhli, 13.

Váhlíka, 376.

Vahni, 555.

Vaidyut, 375.

Vaijayanta, 99, 179, 522.

Vaikhánasas, 270, 271, 374.

Vainateya, 388.

Vaiśravaṇ, 265, 285, 378, 414, 515.

Vaiśyas, 246.

Vaitaraṇí, 293.

Vajra, 376.

Vajradanshṭra, 432, 433 note, 466, 467.

Válmíki, 1, 7-11, 161, 519, 542.

Vámadeva, 14, 79, 80, 91, 174, 222, 505.

Vámana, 14, 523.

Váṇa, 81, 219.

Vanáyu, 13.

Vangas, 102.

Varadas, 550.

Varuṇ, 1 note, 28, 42, 67, 88, 109, 124, 228, 243, 272, 293, 338, 377, 383, 448, 471, 518.

Varáśya, 256 note.

Varútha, 179.

Vásav, 92.

Vásava, 236, 522.

Vaśishṭha, 14, 15, 19-22, 25, 32, _passim_.

Vásudeva, 51, 52.

Vásuki, 57, 267, 375, 432, 518, 522.

Vasus, 14, 46, 246, 283, 377, 403, 522, 554.

Vasvaukasárá, 203.

Vátápi, 241, 280.

Váyu, 59, 243, 369, 427, 428, 555.

Vedas, 1 note, 3, 12, 22, 70, 89, 109, 125, 147, 184, 229, 559.

Vedaśrutí, 151.

Vedavatí, 470, 517.

Vegadarśí, 429, 446, 483.

Veṇá, 448, 537.

Vibháṇḍak, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25.

Vibhíshaṇ, 6, 10, 250, 273, 415, 422, 423, 433 ff., 449 ff., 472, 483, 487 ff., 516.

Vibudh, 82.

Vidarbha, 46, 49.

Vidarbhas, 549.

Videha, 79 ff., 129, 130, 142, 166, 195, 227.

Videhan, 9, 79, 95, 104, 119, 125, _passim_.

Videhas, 548.

Vidyádharí, 203 note.

Vidyujjihva, 450.

Vidyunmáli, 364 note.

Vidyutkeśa, 515.

Vihangama, 256 note.

Vijay, 14, 36, 175, 505.

Vikaṭá, 409.

Vikrit, 245.

Vikukshi, 81, 219.

Vinata, 179, 379, 380, 388, 448.

Vinatá, 53, 125, 246.

Vindhya, 14, 51, 242, 364, 370, 374, 380.

Vindu, 55.

Vipáśá, 176, 539.

Vírabáhu, 364 note.

Virádha, 5, 9, 229, 232, 404, 446, 502.

Viráj, 124.

Viramatsya, 178.

Virochan, 40, 43.

Virtue, 223, 272.

Virúpáksha, 52, 420, 433, 459, 460, 487.

Viśákhás, 144, 430.

Viśálá, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62.

Vishṇu, 1 note, 2, 3, 25, 32, 40, _passim_.

Viśravas, 35, 309, 408, 515, 516.

Viśváchi, 198.

Viśvajit, 24.

Viśvakarmá, 28, 42, 198, 376, 387, 444, 445, 448, 499, 500, 515, 556.

Viśvámitra, 9, 32 ff., 39, 41, 44, 45, _passim_.

Viśvarúpa, 353.

Viśvas, 377.

Viśvávasu, 198.

Viśvedevas, 162.

Vitardan, 474.

Vivasvat, 81, 171, 219, 245, 386, 532.

Vraṇa, 444.

Vrihadratha, 82.

Vrihaspati, 28, 31, 95, 124, 210, 307, 464, 517.

Vritra, 125, 264, 288, 387, 487, 491, 536.

Vulture-king, 9.

War-god, 124, 476.

Wind, 30, 218.

Wind-god, 10, 36, 42, 68, 325, 326, 379, 392 ff., 417 ff., 449, 470, 478, 481, 488, 502, 503.

Yavadwípa, 372.

Yajnakopa, 433 note, 459.

Yajush, 326.

Yajnaśatru, 256 note.

Yaksha, 236 note, 306, 318, 363, 375, 394, 420, 422, 425, 431, 454, 458, 468.

Yáma, 68, 71, 112, 117, 124, 140, 166, 171, 241, 248, 262, 275, 287, 313, 343 ff., 432, 437, 449, 472, 475, 496, 518, 554.

Yamuná, 158, 159, 160, 178, 214, 223, 372.

Yámun, 372.

Yavanas, 66, 550.

Yayáti, 82, 95, 107, 119, 163, 186, 307, 344.

Yudhájit, 84, 88, 180, 190.

Yúpáksha, 420, 472.

Yuvanáśva, 81, 219.






FOOTNOTES


    1 The MSS. vary very considerably in these stanzas of invocation: many       lines are generally prefixed in which not only the poet, but those       who play the chief parts in the poem are panegyrized. It is       self-apparent that they are not by the author of the Rámáyan       himself.

    2 “Válmíki was the son of Varuṇa, the regent of the waters, one of       whose names is Prachetas. According to the _Adhyátmá Rámáyaṇa_, the       sage, although a Bráhman by birth, associated with foresters and       robbers. Attacking on one occasion the seven Rishis, they       expostulated with him successfully, and taught him the _mantra_ of       Ráma reversed, or _Mará, Mará_, in the inaudible repetition of which       he remained immovable for thousands of years, so that when the sages       returned to the same spot they found him still there, converted into       a _valmík_ or ant-hill, by the nests of the termites, whence his       name of Válmíki.”

      WILSON. _Specimens of the Hindu Theatre, Vol. I. p. 313_.

      “Válmíki is said to have lived a solitary life in the woods: he is       called both a _muni_ and a _rishi_. The former word properly       signifies an anchorite or hermit; the latter has reference chiefly       to wisdom. The two words are frequently used promiscuously, and may       both be rendered by the Latin _vates_ in its earliest meaning of       _seer_: Válmíki was both poet and seer, as he is said to have sung       the exploits of Ráma by the aid of divining insight rather than of       knowledge naturally acquired.” SCHLEGEL.

    3 Literally, _Kokila_, the Koïl, or Indian Cuckoo. Schlegel translates       “luscinium.”

    4 Comparison with the Ganges is implied, that river being called the       purifier of the world.

    5 “This name may have been given to the father of Válmíki       allegorically. If we look at the derivation of the word (_pra_,       before, and _chetas_, mind) it is as if the poet were called the son       of Prometheus, the Forethinker.” SCHLEGEL.

    6 Called in Sanskrit also _Bála-Káṇḍa_, and in Hindí _Bál-Káṇḍ_,       _i.e._ the Book describing Ráma’s childhood, _bála_ meaning a boy up       to his sixteenth year.

    7 A divine saint, son of Brahmá. He is the eloquent messenger of the       Gods, a musician of exquisite skill, and the inventor of the _víṇá_       or Indian lute. He bears a strong resemblance to Hermes or Mercury.

    8 This mystic syllable, said to typify the supreme Deity, the Gods       collectively, the Vedas, the three spheres of the world, the three       holy fires, the three steps of Vishṇu etc., prefaces the prayers and       most venerated writings of the Hindus.

    9 This colloquy is supposed to have taken place about sixteen years       after Ráma’s return from his wanderings and occupation of his       ancestral throne.

   10 Called also Śrí and Lakshmí, the consort of Vishṇu, the Queen of       Beauty as well as the Dea Fortuna. Her birth “from the full-flushed       wave” is described in Canto XLV of this Book.

   11 One of the most prominent objects of worship in the Rig-veda, Indra       was superseded in later times by the more popular deities Vishṇu and       Śiva. He is the God of the firmament, and answers in many respects       to the Jupiter Pluvius of the Romans. See _Additional Notes_.

   12 The second God of the Trimúrti or Indian Trinity. Derived from the       root _viś_ to penetrate, the meaning of the name appears to be _he       who penetrates or pervades all things_. An embodiment of the       preserving power of nature, he is worshipped as a Saviour who has       nine times been incarnate for the good of the world and will descend       on earth once more. See _Additional Notes_ and Muir’s Sanskrit Texts       _passim_.

   13 In Sanskrit _devarshi_. Rishi is the general appellation of sages,       and another word is frequently prefixed to distinguish the degrees.       A _Brahmarshi_ is a theologian or Bráhmanical sage; a Rájarshi is a       royal sage or sainted king; a _Devarshi_ is a divine or deified sage       or saint.

_   14 Trikálajǹa_. Literally _knower of the three times_. Both Schlegel       and Gorresio quote Homer’s.

      Ὅς ἤδη τ’ ἐόντα, τά τ’ ἐσσόμενα,       πρό τ’ ἐόντα.

      “That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,       The past, the present, and the future knew.”

      The Bombay edition reads _trilokajǹa,_ _who knows the three worlds_       (earth, air and heaven.) “It is by _tapas_ (austere fervour) that       rishis of subdued souls, subsisting on roots, fruits and air, obtain       a vision of the three worlds with all things moving and stationary.”       MANU, XI. 236.

   15 Son of Manu, the first king of Kośala and founder of the solar       dynasty or family of the Children of the Sun, the God of that       luminary being the father of Manu.

   16 The Indians paid great attention to the art of physiognomy and       believed that character and fortune could be foretold not from the       face only but from marks upon the neck and hands. Three lines under       the chin like those at the mouth of a conch (_Śańkha_) were regarded       as a peculiarly auspicious sign indicating, as did also the mark of       Vishṇu’s discus on the hand, one born to be a _chakravartin_ or       universal emperor. In the palmistry of Europe the line of fortune,       as well as the line of life, is in the hand. Cardan says that marks       on the nails and teeth also show what is to happen to us: “Sunt       etiam in nobis vestigia quædam futurorum eventuum in unguibus atque       etiam in dentibus.” Though the palmy days of Indian chiromancy have       passed away, the art is still to some extent studied and believed       in.

   17 Long arms were regarded as a sign of heroic strength.

   18 “Veda means originally knowing or knowledge, and this name is given       by the Bráhmans not to one work, but to the whole body of their most       ancient sacred literature. Veda is the same word which appears in       the Greek οίδα, I know, and in the English wise, wisdom, to wit. The       name of Veda is commonly given to four collections of hymns, which       are respectively known by the names of Rig-veda, Yajur-veda,       Sáma-veda, and Atharva-veda.”

      “As the language of the Veda, the Sanskrit, is the most ancient type       of the English of the present day, (Sanskrit and English are but       varieties of one and the same language,) so its thoughts and       feelings contain in reality the first roots and germs of that       intellectual growth which by an unbroken chain connects our own       generation with the ancestors of the Aryan race,—with those very       people who at the rising and setting of the sun listened with       trembling hearts to the songs of the Veda, that told them of bright       powers above, and of a life to come after the sun of their own lives       had set in the clouds of the evening. These men were the true       ancestors of our race, and the Veda is the oldest book we have in       which to study the first beginnings of our language, and of all that       is embodied in language. We are by nature Aryan, Indo-European, not       Semitic: our spiritual kith and kin are to be found in India,       Persia, Greece, Italy, Germany: not in Mesopotamia, Egypt, or       Palestine.”

      _Chips from a German Workshop_, Vol. I. pp. 8. 4.

   19 As with the ancient Persians and Scythians, Indian princes were       carefully instructed in archery which stands for military science in       general, of which, among Hindu heroes, it was the most important       branch.

   20 Chief of the three queens of Daśaratha and mother of Ráma.

   21 From _hima_ snow, (Greek χειμ-ών, Latin hiems) and _álaya_ abode,       the Mansion of snow.

   22 The moon (_Soma_, _Indu_, _Chandra_ _etc._) is masculine with the       Indians as with the Germans.

   23 Kuvera, the Indian Plutus, or God of Wealth.

   24 The events here briefly mentioned will be related fully in the       course of the poem. The first four cantos are introductory, and are       evidently the work of a later hand than Valmiki’s.

   25 “Chandra, or the Moon, is fabled to have been married to the       twenty-seven daughters of the patriarch Daksha, or Aśviní and the       rest, who are in fact personifications of the Lunar Asterisms. His       favourite amongst them was Rohiṇí to whom he so wholly devoted       himself as to neglect the rest. They complained to their father, and       Daksha repeatedly interposed, till, finding his remonstrances vain,       he denounced a curse upon his son-in-law, in consequence of which he       remained childless and became affected by consumption. The wives of       Chandra having interceded in his behalf with their father, Daksha       modified an imprecation which he could not recall, and pronounced       that the decay should be periodical only, not permanent, and that it       should alternate with periods of recovery. Hence the successive wane       and increase of the Moon. _Padma_, _Puráṇa_, _Swarga-Khaṇḍa,_ Sec.       II. _Rohiṇí_ in Astronomy is the fourth lunar mansion, containing       five stars, the principal of which is Aldebaran.” WILSON, _Specimens       of the Hindu Theatre. Vol. I. p._ 234.

      The Bengal recension has a different reading:

      “Shone with her husband like the light       Attendant on the Lord of Night.”

   26 The garb prescribed for ascetics by Manu.

   27 “Mount Meru, situated like Kailása in the lofty regions to the north       of the Himálayas, is celebrated in the traditions and myths of       India. Meru and Kailása are the two Indian Olympi. Perhaps they were       held in such veneration because the Sanskrit-speaking Indians       remembered the ancient home where they dwelt with the other       primitive peoples of their family before they descended to occupy       the vast plains which extend between the Indus and the Ganges.”       GORRESIO.

   28 The third God of the Indian Triad, the God of destruction and       reproduction. See _Additional Notes_.

   29 The epithet _dwija_, or _twice-born_, is usually appropriate to       Bráhmans, but is applicable to the three higher castes. Investiture       with the sacred thread and initiation of the neophyte into certain       religious mysteries are regarded as his regeneration or second       birth.

   30 His shoes to be a memorial of the absent heir and to maintain his       right. Kálidása (Raghuvaṅśa, XII. 17.) says that they were to be       _adhidevate_ or guardian deities of the kingdom.

   31 Jaṭáyu, a semi-divine bird, the friend of Ráma, who fought in       defence of Sítá.

   32 Raghu was one of the most celebrated ancestors of Ráma whose       commonest appellation is, therefore, Rághava or descendant of Raghu.       Kálidása in the _Raghuraṇśa_ makes him the son of Dilípa and       great-grandfather of Ráma. See _Idylls from the Sanskrit_, “Aja” and       “Dilípa.”

   33 Dundhubi.

   34 Literally _ten yojanas_. The yojana is a measure of uncertain length       variously reckoned as equal to nine miles, five, and a little less.

   35 Ceylon.

   36 The Jonesia Aśoka is a most beautiful tree bearing a profusion of       red blossoms.

_   37 Brahmá_, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first God of the       Indian Trinity, although, as Kálidása says:

      “Of Brahmá, Vishṇu, Śiva, each may be       First, second, third, amid the blessed Three.”

      Brahmá had guaranteed Rávaṇ’s life against all enemies except man.

   38 Ocean personified.

   39 The rocks lying between Ceylon and the mainland are still called       Ráma’s Bridge by the Hindus.

   40 “The Bráhmans, with a system rather cosmogonical than chronological,       divide the present mundane period into four ages or _yugas_ as they       call them: the Krita, the Tretá, the Dwápara, and the Kali. The       Krita, called also the Deva-yuga or that of the Gods, is the age of       truth, the perfect age, the Tretá is the age of the three sacred       fires, domestic and sacrificial; the Dwápara is the age of doubt;       the Kali, the present age, is the age of evil.” GORRESIO.

   41 The ancient kings of India enjoyed lives of more than patriarchal       length as will appear in the course of the poem.

   42 Śúdras, men of the fourth and lowest pure caste, were not allowed to       read the poem, but might hear it recited.

   43 The three _ślokes_ or distichs which these twelve lines represent       are evidently a still later and very awkward addition to the       introduction.

   44 There are several rivers in India of this name, now corrupted into       _Tonse_. The river here spoken of is that which falls into the       Ganges a little below Allahabad.

   45 “In Book II, Canto LIV, we meet with a saint of this name presiding       over a convent of disciples in his hermitage at the confluence of       the Ganges and the Jumna. Thence the later author of these       introductory cantos has borrowed the name and person, inconsistently       indeed, but with the intention of enhancing the dignity of the poet       by ascribing to him so celebrated a disciple.” SCHLEGEL.

   46 The poet plays upon the similarity in sound of the two words:       _śoka_, means grief, _śloka_, the heroic measure in which the poem       is composed. It need scarcely be said that the derivation is       fanciful.

   47 Brahmá, the Creator, is usually regarded as the first person of the       divine triad of India. The four heads with which he is represented       are supposed to have allusion to the four corners of the earth which       he is sometimes considered to personify. As an object of adoration       Brahmá has been entirely superseded by Śiva and Vishṇu. In the whole       of India there is, I believe, but one temple dedicated to his       worship. In this point the first of the Indian triad curiously       resembles the last of the divine fraternity of Greece, Aïdes the       brother of Zeus and Poseidon. “In all Greece, says Pausanias, there       is no single temple of Aïdes, except at a single spot in Elis.” See       Gladstone’s Juventus Mundi, p. 253.

   48 The _argha_ or _arghya_ was a libation or offering to a deity, a       Bráhman, or other venerable personage. According to one authority it       consisted of water, milk, the points of Kúsa-grass, curds, clarified       butter, rice, barley, and white mustard, according to another, of       saffron, bel, unbroken grain, flowers, curds, dúrbá-grass,       kúsa-grass, and sesamum.

   49 Sítá, daughter of Janak king of Míthilá.

   50 “I congratulate myself,” says Schlegel in the preface to his, alas,       unfinished edition of the Rámáyan, “that, by the favour of the       Supreme Deity, I have been allowed to begin so great a work; I glory       and make my boast that I too after so many ages have helped to       confirm that ancient oracle declared to Válmíki by the Father of       Gods and men:

      Dum stabunt montes, campis dum flumina current,       Usque tuum toto carmen celebrabitur orbe.”

   51 “The sipping of water is a requisite introduction of all rites:       without it, says the Sámha Purána, all acts of religion are vain.”       COLEBROOKE.

   52 The _darhha_ or _kuśa_ (Pea cynosuroides), a kind of grass used in       sacrifice by the Hindus as _cerbena_ was by the Romans.

   53 The direction in which the grass should be placed upon the ground as       a seat for the Gods, on occasion of offerings made to them.

   54 Paraśuráma or Ráma with the Axe. See Canto LXXIV.

   55 Sítá. Videha was the country of which Míthilá was the capital.

   56 The twin sons of Ráma and Sítá, born after Ráma had repudiated Sítá,       and brought up in the hermitage of Válmíki. As they were the first       rhapsodists the combined name Kuśílava signifies a reciter of poems,       or an improvisatore, even to the present day.

   57 Perhaps the bass, tenor, and treble, or quick, slow and middle       times. we know but little of the ancient music of the Hindus.

   58 Eight flavours or sentiments are usually enumerated, love, mirth,       tenderness, anger, heroism, terror, disgust, and surprise;       tranquility or content, or paternal tenderness, is sometimes       considered the ninth. WILSON. See the _Sáhitya Darpaṇa_ or _Mirror       of Composition_ translated by Dr. Ballantyne and Bábú Pramadádása       Mittra in the _Bibliotheca Indica._

   59 Saccharum Munja is a plant from whose fibres is twisted the sacred       string which a Bráhman wears over one shoulder after he has been       initiated by a rite which in some respects answers to confirmation.

   60 A description of an Aśvamedha or Horse Sacrifice is given in Canto       XIII. of this Book.

   61 This exploit is related in Canto XL.

   62 The Sarjú or Ghaghra, anciently called Sarayú, rises in the       Himalayas, and after flowing through the province of Oudh, falls       into the Ganges.

   63 The ruins of the ancient capital of Ráma and the Children of the Sun       may still be traced in the present Ajudhyá near Fyzabad. Ajudhyá is       the Jerusalem or Mecca of the Hindus.

   64 A legislator and saint, the son of Brahmá or a personification of       Brahmá himself, the creator of the world, and progenitor of mankind.       Derived from the root _man_ to think, the word means originally       _man_, the thinker, and is found in this sense in the Rig-veda.

      Manu as a legislator is identified with the Cretan Minos, as       progenitor of mankind with the German Mannus: “Celebrant carminibus       antiquis, quod unum apud illos memoriæ et annalium genus est,       Tuisconem deum terra editum, et filium Mannum, originem gentis       conditoresque.” TACITUS, _Germania_, Cap. II.

   65 The Sál (Shorea Robusta) is a valuable timber tree of considerable       height.

   66 The city of Indra is called Amarávatí or Home of the Immortals.

   67 Schlegel thinks that this refers to the marble of different colours       with which the houses were adorned. It seems more natural to       understand it as implying the regularity of the streets and houses.

   68 The _Śataghní_ _i.e. centicide_, or slayer of a hundred, is       generally supposed to be a sort of fire-arms, or the ancient Indian       rocket; but it is also described as a stone set round with iron       spikes.

   69 The Nágas (serpents) are demigods with a human face and serpent       body. They inhabit Pátála or the regions under the earth. Bhogavatí       is the name of their capital city. Serpents are still worshipped in       India. See Fergusson’s _Tree and Serpent Worship_.

   70 The fourth and lowest pure caste whose duty was to serve the three       first classes.

   71 By forbidden marriages between persons of different castes.

   72 Váhlí or Váhlíka is Bactriana; its name is preserved in the modern       Balkh.

   73 The Sanskrit word Sindhu is in the singular the name of the river       Indus, in the plural of the people and territories on its banks. The       name appears as _Hidku_ in the cuneiform inscription of Darius’ son       of Hystaspes, in which the nations tributary to that king are       enumerated.

      The Hebrew form is _Hodda_ (Esther, I. 1.). In Zend it appears as       _Hendu_ in a somewhat wider sense. With the Persians later the       signification of _Hind_ seems to have co-extended with their       increasing acquaintance with the country. The weak Ionic dialect       omitted the Persian _h_, and we find in Hecatæus and Herodotus Ἴνδος       and ἡ Ἰνδική. In this form the Romans received the names and       transmitted them to us. The Arabian geographers in their ignorance       that Hind and Sind are two forms of the same word have made of them       two brothers and traced their decent from Noah. See Lassen’s       Indische Alterthumskunde Vol. I. pp. 2, 3.

   74 The situation of Vanáyu is not exactly determined: it seems to have       lain to the north-west of India.

   75 Kámboja was probably still further to the north-west. Lassen thinks       that the name is etymologically connected with _Cambyses_ which in       the cuneiform inscription of Behistun is written Ka(m)bujia.

   76 The elephants of Indra and other deities who preside over the four       points of the compass.

   77 “There are four kinds of elephants. 1 _Bhaddar_. It is well       proportioned, has an erect head, a broad chest, large ears, a long       tail, and is bold and can bear fatigue. 2 _Mand_. It is black, has       yellow eyes, a uniformly sized body, and is wild and ungovernable. 3       _Mirg_. It has a whitish skin, with black spots. 4 _Mir_. It has a       small head, and obeys readily. It gets frightened when it thunders.”       _Aín-i-Akbarí._. Translated by H. Blochmann, Aín 41, _The Imperial       Elephant Stables_.

   78 Ayodhyá means _not to be fought against_.

   79 Attendants of Indra, eight Gods whose names signify fire, light and       its phenomena.

   80 Kaśyap was a grandson of the God Brahmá. He is supposed to have       given his name to Kashmír = Kaśyapa-míra, Kaśyap’s Lake.

   81 The people of Anga. “Anga is said in the lexicons to be Bengal; but       here certainly another region is intended situated at the confluence       of the Sarjú with the Ganges, and not far distant from Daśaratha’s       dominions.” GORRESIO. It comprised part of Behar and Bhagulpur.

   82 The Koïl or _kokila_ (Cuculus Indicus) as the harbinger of spring       and love is a universal favourite with Indian poets. His voice when       first heard in a glorious spring morning is not unpleasant, but       becomes in the hot season intolerably wearisome to European ears.

   83 “Sons and Paradise are intimately connected in Indian belief. A man       desires above every thing to have a son to perpetuate his race, and       to assist with sacrifices and funeral rites to make him worthy to       obtain a lofty seat in heaven or to preserve that which he has       already obtained.” GORRESIO.

   84 One of the Pleiades and generally regarded as the model of wifely       excellence.

   85 The Hindu year is divided into six seasons of two months each,       spring, summer, rains, autumn, winter, and dews.

   86 It was essential that the horse should wander free for a year before       immolation, as a sign that his master’s paramount sovereignty was       acknowledged by all neighbouring princes.

   87 Called also Vidcha, later Tirabhukti, corrupted into the modern       Tirhut, a province bounded on the west and east by the Gaudakí and       Kauśikí rivers, on the south by the Ganges, and on the north by the       skirts of the Himálayas.

   88 The celebrated city of Benares. See Dr. Hall’s learned and       exhaustive Monograph in the _Sacred City of the Hindus_, by the Rev.       M. A. Sherring.

   89 Kekaya is supposed to have been in the Panjáb. The name of the king       was Aśvapati (Lord of Horses), father of Daśaratha’s wife Kaikeyí.

   90 Surat.

   91 Apparently in the west of India not far from the Indus.

   92 “The Pravargya ceremony lasts for three days, and is always       performed twice a day, in the forenoon and afternoon. It precedes       the animal and Soma sacrifices. For without having undergone it, no       one is allowed to take part in the solemn Soma feast prepared for       the gods.” Haug’s _Aitareya Bráhmaṇam_. Vol. II. p. 41. note _q.v._

_   93 Upasads_. “The Gods said, Let us perform the burnt offerings called       Upasads (_i.e._ besieging). For by means of an _Upasad_, _i.e._       besieging, they conquer a large (fortified) town.”—_Ibid._ p. 32.

   94 The Soma plant, or Asclepias Acida. Its fermented juice was drunk in       sacrifice by the priests and offered to the Gods who enjoyed the       intoxicating draught.

   95 “Tum in cærimoniarum intervallis Brachmanæ facundi, sollertes,       crebros sermones de rerum causis instituebant, alter alterum       vincendi cupidi. This public disputation in the assembly of Bráhmans       on the nature of things, and the almost fraternal connexion between       theology and philosophy deserves some notice; whereas the priests of       some religions are generally but little inclined to show favour to       philosophers, nay, sometimes persecute them with the most rancorous       hatred, as we are taught both by history and experience.… This śloka       is found in the MSS. of different recensions of the Rámáyan, and we       have, therefore, the most trustworthy testimony to the antiquity of       philosophy among the Indians.” SCHLEGEL.

   96 The _Angas_ or appendices of the Vedas, pronunciation, prosody,       grammar, ritual, astronomy, and explanation of obscurities.

   97 In Sanskrit _vilva_, the _Ægle Marmelos_. “He who desires food and       wishes to grow fat, ought to make his Yúpa (sacrificial post) of       Bilva wood.” Haug’s _Aítareya Bráhmanam. Vol. II._ p. 73.

   98 The _Mimosa Catechu_. “He who desires heaven ought to make his Yúpa       of Khádira wood.”—_Ibid._

   99 The _Butea Frondosa_. “He who desires beauty and sacred knowledge       ought to make his Yúpa of Paláśa wood.”—_Ibid._

  100 The _Cardia Latifolia_.

  101 A kind of pine. The word means literally the tree of the Gods.       Compare the Hebrew עצי יהוה “trees of the Lord.”

  102 The Hindus call the constellation of Ursa Major the Seven Rishis or       Saints.

  103 A minute account of these ancient ceremonies would be out of place       here. “Ágnishṭoma is the name of a sacrifice, or rather a series of       offerings to fire for five days. It is the first and principal part       of the Jyotishṭoma, one of the great sacrifices in which especially       the juice of the Soma plant is offered for the purpose of obtaining       Swarga or heaven.” GOLDSTÜCKER’S DICTIONARY. “The _Ágnishṭoma_ is       Agni. It is called so because they (the gods) praised him with this       Stoma. They called it so to hide the proper meaning of the word: for       the gods like to hide the proper meaning of words.”

      “On account of four classes of gods having praised Agni with four       Stomas, the whole was called _Chatushṭoma_ (containing four       Stomas).”

      “It (the Ágnishṭoma) is called _Jyotishṭoma_, for they praised Agni       when he had risen up (to the sky) in the shape of a light       (_jyotis_).”

      “This (Ágnishṭoma) is a sacrificial performance which has no       beginning and no end.” HAUG’S _Aitareya Bráhmaṇam_.

      The Atirátra, literally _lasting through the night_, is a division       of the service of the Jyotishṭoma.

      The Abhijit, _the everywhere victorious_, is the name of a       sub-division of the great sacrifice of the Gavámanaya.

      The Viśvajit, or _the all-conquering_, is a similar sub-division.

      Áyus is the name of a service forming a division of the Abhiplava       sacrifice.

      The _Aptoryám_, is the seventh or last part of the Jyotishṭoma, for       the performance of which it is not essentially necessary, but a       voluntary sacrifice instituted for the attainment of a specific       desire. The literal meaning of the word would be in conformity with       the _Prauḍhamanoramá_, “a sacrifice which procures the attainment of       the desired object.” GOLDSTÜCKER’S DICTIONARY.

      “The _Ukthya_ is a slight modification of the Ágnishṭoma sacrifice.       The noun to be supplied to it is _kratu_. It is a Soma sacrifice       also, and one of the seven Saṇsthas or component parts of the       Jyotishṭoma. Its name indicates its nature. For _Ukthya_ means ‘what       refers to the Uktha,’ which is an older name for Shástra, _i.e._       recitation of one of the Hotri priests at the time of the Soma       libations. Thus this sacrifice is only a kind of supplement to the       Ágnishṭoma.” HAUG. _Ai. B._

  104 “Four classes of priests were required in India at the most solemn       sacrifices. 1. The officiating priests, manual labourers, and       acolytes, who had chiefly to prepare the sacrificial ground, to       dress the altar, slay the victims, and pour out the libations. 2.       The choristers, who chant the sacred hymns. 3. The reciters or       readers, who repeat certain hymns. 4. The overseers or bishops, who       watch and superintend the proceedings of the other priests, and       ought to be familiar with all the Vedas. The formulas and verses to       be muttered by the first class are contained in the       Yajur-veda-sanhitá. The hymns to be sung by the second class are in       the Sama-veda-sanhitá. The Atharva-veda is said to be intended for       the Brahman or overseer, who is to watch the proceedings of the       sacrifice, and to remedy any mistake that may occur. The hymns to be       recited by the third class are contained in the Rigveda,” _Chips       from a German Workshop._

  105 The Maruts are the winds, deified in the religion of the Veda like       other mighty powers and phenomena of nature.

  106 A Titan or fiend whose destruction has given Vishṇu one of his       well-known titles, Mádhava.

  107 The garden of Indra.

  108 One of the most ancient and popular of the numerous names of Vishṇu.       The word has been derived in several ways, and may mean _he who       moved on the (primordial) waters_, or _he who pervades or influences       men or their thoughts_.

  109 The Horse-Sacrifice, just described.

  110 To walk round an object keeping the right side towards it is a mark       of great respect. The Sanskrit word for the observance is       _pradakshiṇá_, from pra pro, and _daksha_ right, Greek δεξίος, Latin       dexter, Gaelic deas-il. A similar ceremony is observed by the Gaels.

      “In the meantime she traced around him, with wavering steps, the       propitiation, which some have thought has been derived from the       Druidical mythology. It consists, as is well known, in the person       who makes the _deasil_ walking three times round the person who is       the object of the ceremony, taking care to move according to the       course of the sun.”

      SCOTT. _The Two Drovers._

  111 The _Amrit_, the nectar of the Indian Gods.

_  112 Gandharvas_ (Southey’s Glendoveers) are celestial musicians       inhabiting Indra’s heaven and forming the orchestra at all the       banquets of the principal deities.

_  113 Yakshas_, demigods attendant especially on Kuvera, and employed by       him in the care of his garden and treasures.

_  114 Kimpurushas_, demigods attached also to the service of Kuvera,       celestial musicians, represented like centaurs reversed with human       figures and horses’ heads.

_  115 Siddhas_, demigods or spirits of undefined attributes, occupying       with the _Vidyádharas_ the middle air or region between the earth       and the sun.

      Schlegel translates: “Divi, Sapientes, Fidicines, Præpetes,       illustres Genii, Præconesque procrearunt natos, masculos,       silvicolas; angues porro, Hippocephali Beati, Aligeri, Serpentesque       frequentes alacriter generavere prolem innumerabilem.”

  116 A mountain in the south of India.

  117 The preceptor of the Gods and regent of the planet Jupiter.

  118 The celestial architect, the Indian Hephæstus, Mulciber, or Vulcan.

  119 The God of Fire.

  120 Twin children of the Sun, the physicians of Swarga or Indra’s       heaven.

  121 The deity of the waters.

  122 Parjanya, sometimes confounded with Indra.

  123 The bird and vehicle of Vishṇu. He is generally represented as a       being something between a man and a bird and considered as the       sovereign of the feathered race. He may be compared with the Simurgh       of the Persians, the ’Anká of the Arabs, the Griffin of chivalry,       the Phœnix of Egypt, and the bird that sits upon the ash Yggdrasil       of the Edda.

  124 This Canto will appear ridiculous to the European reader. But it       should be remembered that the monkeys of an Indian forest, the       “bough-deer” as the poets call them, are very different animals from       the “turpissima bestia” that accompanies the itinerant organ-grinder       or grins in the Zoological Gardens of London. Milton has made his       hero, Satan, assume the forms of a cormorant, a toad, and a serpent,       and I cannot see that this creation of semi-divine Vánars, or       monkeys, is more ridiculous or undignified.

  125 The consort of Indra, called also Śachí and Indráṇí.

  126 The _Michelia champaca_. It bears a scented yellow blossom:

      “The maid of India blest again to hold       In her full lap the Champac’s leaves of gold.”

      _Lallah Rookh._

  127 Vibháṇdak, the father of Rishyaśring

  128 A hemiśloka is wanting in Schlegel’s text, which he thus fills up in       his Latin translation.

  129 Rishyaśring, a Bráhman, had married Śántá who was of the Kshatriya       or Warrior caste and an expiatory ceremony was necessary on account       of this violation of the law.

  130 “The poet no doubt intended to indicate the vernal equinox as the       birthday of Ráma. For the month _Chaitra_ is the first of the two       months assigned to the spring; it corresponds with the latter half       of March and the former half of April in our division of the year.       _Aditi_, the mother of the Gods, is lady of the seventh lunar       mansion which is called _Punarvasu_. The five planets and their       positions in the Zodiac are thus enumerated by both commentators:       the Sun in Aries, Mars in Capricorn, Saturn in Libra, Jupiter in       Cancer, Venus in Pisces.… I leave to astronomers to examine whether       the parts of the description agree with one another, and, if this be       the case, thence to deduce the date. The Indians place the nativity       of Ráma in the confines of the second age (tretá) and the third       (dwápara): but it seems that this should be taken in an allegorical       sense.… We may consider that the poet had an eye to the time in       which, immediately before his own age, the aspects of the heavenly       bodies were such as he has described.” SCHLEGEL.

  131 The regent of the planet Jupiter.

  132 Indra = Jupiter Tonans.

  133 “_Pushya_ is the name of a month; but here it means the eighth       mansion. The ninth is called _Asleshá_, or the snake. It is evident       from this that Bharat, though his birth is mentioned before that of       the twins, was the youngest of the four brothers and Ráma’s junior       by eleven months.” SCHLEGEL.

  134 A fish, the Zodiacal sign _Pisces_.

  135 One of the constellations, containing stars in the wing of Pegasus.

  136 Ráma means the Delight (of the World); Bharat, the Supporter;       Lakshmaṇ, the Auspicious; Śatrughna, the Slayer of Foes.

  137 Schlegel, in the _Indische Bibliothek_, remarks that the proficiency       of the Indians in this art early attracted the attention of       Alexander’s successors, and natives of India were so long       exclusively employed in this service that the name Indian was       applied to any elephant-driver, to whatever country he might belong.

  138 The story of this famous saint is given at sufficient length in       Cantos LI-LV.

      This saint has given his name to the district and city to the east       of Benares. The original name, preserved in a land-grant on copper       now in the Museum of the Benares College, has been Moslemized into       Ghazeepore (the City of the Soldier-martyr).

  139 The son of Kuśik is Viśvámitra.

  140 At the recollection of their former enmity, to be described       hereafter.

  141 The Indian nectar or drink of the Gods.

  142 Great joy, according to the Hindu belief, has this effect, not       causing each particular hair to stand on end, but gently raising all       the down upon the body.

  143 The Rákshasas, giants, or fiends who are represented as disturbing       the sacrifice, signify here, as often elsewhere, merely the savage       tribes which placed themselves in hostile opposition to Bráhmanical       institutions.

  144 Consisting of horse, foot, chariots, and elephants.

  145 “The Gandharvas, or heavenly bards, had originally a warlike       character but were afterwards reduced to the office of celestial       musicians cheering the banquets of the Gods. Dr. Kuhn has shown       their identity with the Centaurs in name, origin and attributes.”       GORRESIO.

  146 These mysterious animated weapons are enumerated in Cantos XXIX and       XXX. Daksha was the son of Brahmá and one of the Prajápatis,       Demiurgi, or secondary authors of creation.

  147 Youths of the Kshatriya class used to leave unshorn the side locks       of their hair. These were called _Káka-paksha_, or raven’s wings.

  148 The Rákshas or giant Rávaṇ, king of Lanká.

  149 “The meaning of Aśvins (from _aśva_ a horse, Persian asp, Greek       ἵππος, Latin _equus_, Welsh ech) is Horsemen. They were twin deities       of whom frequent mention is made in the Vedas and the Indian myths.       The Aśvins have much in common with the Dioscuri of Greece, and       their mythical genealogy seems to indicate that their origin was       astronomical. They were, perhaps, at first the morning star and       evening star. They are said to be the children of the sun and the       nymph Aśviní, who is one of the lunar asterisms personified. In the       popular mythology they are regarded as the physicians of the Gods.”       GORRESIO.

  150 The word Kumára (a young prince, a Childe) is also a proper name of       Skanda or Kártikeya God of War, the son of Śiva and Umá. The babe       was matured in the fire.

  151 “At the rising of the sun as well as at noon certain observances,       invocations, and prayers were prescribed which might under no       circumstances be omitted. One of these observances was the       recitation of the Sávitrí, a Vedic hymn to the Sun of wonderful       beauty.” GORRESIO.

_  152 Tripathaga_, _Three-path-go,_ flowing in heaven, on earth, and       under the earth. See Canto XLV.

  153 Tennyson’s “Indian Cama,” the God of Love, known also by many other       names.

_  154 Umá_, or _Parvatí_, was daughter of Himálaya, Monarch of mountains,       and wife of Śiva. See Kálidasa’s _Kumára Sambhava_, or _Birth of the       War-God_.

_  155 Stháṇu_. The Unmoving one, a name of Śiva.

  156 “The practice of austerities, voluntary tortures, and mortifications       was anciently universal in India, and was held by the Indians to be       of immense efficacy. Hence they mortified themselves to expiate       sins, to acquire merits, and to obtain superhuman gifts and powers;       the Gods themselves sometimes exercised themselves in such       austerities, either to raise themselves to greater power and       grandeur, or to counteract the austerities of man which threatened       to prevail over them and to deprive them of heaven.… Such       austerities were called in India _tapas_ (burning ardour, fervent       devotion) and he who practised them _tapasvin_.” GORRESIO.

_  157 The Bodiless one._

  158 “A celebrated lake regarded in India as sacred. It lies in the lofty       region between the northern highlands of the Himálayas and mount       Kailása, the region of the sacred lakes. The poem, following the       popular Indian belief, makes the river Sarayú (now Sarjú) flow from       the Mánasa lake; the sources of the river are a little to the south       about a day’s journey from the lake. See Lassen, _Indische       Alterthumshunde_, page 34.” GORRESIO. _Manas_ means mind; _mánasa_,       mental, mind-born.

_  159 Sarovar_ means best of lakes. This is another of the poet’s       fanciful etymologies.

  160 The confluence of two or more rivers is often a venerated and holy       place. The most famous is Prayág or Allahabad, where the Sarasvatí       by an underground course is believed to join the Jumna and the       Ganges.

  161 The botanical names of the trees mentioned in the text are Grislea       Tormentosa, Shorea Robusta, Echites Antidysenterica, Bignonia       Suaveolens, Œgle Marmelos, and Diospyrus Glutinosa. I have omitted       the _Kutaja_ (Echites) and the _Tiṇḍuka_ (Diospyrus).

  162 Here we meet with a fresh myth to account for the name of these       regions. _Malaja_ is probably a non-Aryan word signifying a hilly       country: taken as a Sanskrit compound it means _sprung from       defilement_. The word _Karúsha_ appears to have a somewhat similar       meaning.

  163 “This is one of those indefinable mythic personages who are found in       the ancient traditions of many nations, and in whom cosmogonical or       astronomical notions are generally figured. Thus it is related of       Agastya that the Vindhyan mountains prostrated themselves before       him; and yet the same Agastya is believed to be regent of the star       Canopus.” GORRESIO.

      He will appear as the friend and helper of Ráma farther on in the       poem.

  164 The famous pleasure-garden of Kuvera the God of Wealth.

  165 “The whole of this Canto together with the following one, regards       the belief, formerly prevalent in India, that by virtue of certain       spells, to be learnt and muttered, secret knowledge and superhuman       powers might be acquired. To this the poet has already alluded in       Canto xxiii. These incorporeal weapons are partly represented       according to the fashion of those ascribed to the Gods and the       different orders of demi-gods, partly are the mere creations of       fancy; and it would not be easy to say what idea the poet had of       them in his own mind, or what powers he meant to assign to each.”       SCHLEGEL.

  166 “In Sanskrit _Sankára_, a word which has various significations but       the primary meaning of which is _the act of seizing_. A magical       power seems to be implied of employing the weapons when and where       required. The remarks I have made on the preceding Canto apply with       still greater force to this. The MSS. greatly vary in the       enumeration of these _Sankáras_, and it is not surprising that       copyists have incorrectly written the names which they did not well       understand. The commentators throw no light upon the subject.”       SCHLEGEL. I have taken the liberty of omitting four of these which       Schlegel translates “Scleromphalum, Euomphalum, Centiventrem, and       Chrysomphalum.”

  167 I omit, after this line, eight _ślokes_ which, as Schlegel allows,       are quite out of place.

  168 This is the fifth of the _avatárs_, descents or incarnations of       Vishṇu.

  169 This is a solar allegory. Vishṇu is the sun, the three steps being       his rising, culmination, and setting.

  170 Certain ceremonies preliminary to a sacrifice.

  171 A river which rises in Budelcund and falls into the Ganges near       Patna. It is called also _Hiraṇyaráhu_, Golden-armed, and       _Hiraṇyaráha_, Auriferous.

  172 The modern Berar.

  173 According to the Bengal recension the first (Kuśámba) is called       Kuśáśva, and his city Kauśáśví. This name does not occur elsewhere.       The reading of the northern recension is confirmed by Foê Kouê Ki;       p. 385, where the city _Kiaoshangmi_ is mentioned. It lay 500 _lis_       to the south-west of _Prayága_, on the south bank of the Jumna.       _Mahodaya_ is another name of Kanyakubja: _Dharmáraṇya_, the wood to       which the God of Justice is said to have fled through fear of Soma       the Moon-God was in Magadh. Girivraja was in the same neighbourhood.       See Lasson’s I, A. Vol. I. p. 604.

  174 That is, the City of the Bent Virgins, the modern Kanauj or Canouge.

  175 Literally, Given by _Brahma_ or devout contemplation.

  176 Now called Kośí (Cosy) corrupted from Kauśikí, daughter of Kuś]a.

      “This is one of those personifications of rivers so frequent in the       Grecian mythology, but in the similar myths is seen the impress of       the genius of each people, austere and profoundly religious in       India, graceful and devoted to the worship of external beauty in       Greece.” GORRESIO.

  177 One of the names of the Ganges considered as the daughter of Jahnu.       See Canto XLIV.

  178 The Indian Crane.

  179 Or, rather, geese.

  180 A name of the God Śiva.

  181 Garuḍa.

  182 Ikshváku, the name of a king of Ayodhyá who is regarded as the       founder of the Solar race, means also a _gourd_. Hence, perhaps, the       myth.

  183 “The region here spoken of is called in the Laws of Manu       _Madhyadeśa_ or the middle region. ‘The region situated between the       Himálaya and the Vindhya Mountains … is called _Madhyadeśa_, or the       middle region; the space comprised between these two mountains from       the eastern to the western sea is called by sages Áryávartta, _the       seat of honourable men_.’ (MANU, II, 21, 22.) The Sanskrit Indians       called themselves Áryans, which means _honourable_, _noble_, to       distinguish themselves from the surrounding nations of different       origin.” GORRESIO.

  184 Said to be so called from the Jambu, or Rose Apple, abounding in it,       and signifying according to the Puránas the central division of the       world, the known world.

  185 Here used as a name of Vishṇu.

  186 Kings are called the husbands of their kingdoms or of the earth;       “She and his kingdom were his only brides.” _Raghuvaṅśa._

        “Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate       A double marriage, ’twixt my crown and me,       And then between me and my married wife.”

      King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.

  187 The thirty-three Gods are said in the _Aitareya Bráhmaṇa_, Book I.       ch. II. 10. to be the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve       Ádityas, Prajápati, either Brahmá or Daksha, and Vashatkára or       deified oblation. This must have been the actual number at the       beginning of the Vedic religion gradually increased by successive       mythical and religious creations till the Indian Pantheon was       crowded with abstractions of every kind. Through the reverence with       which the words of the Veda were regarded, the immense host of       multiplied divinities, in later times, still bore the name of the       Thirty-three Gods.

  188 “One of the elephants which, according to an ancient belief popular       in India, supported the earth with their enormous backs; when one of       these elephants shook his wearied head the earth trembled with its       woods and hills. An idea, or rather a mythical fancy, similar to       this, but reduced to proportions less grand, is found in Virgil when       he speaks of Enceladus buried under Ætna:”

      “adi semiustum fulmine corpus       Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper Ætnam       Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;       Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intre mere omnem       iam, et cœlum subtexere fumo.”

      Æneid. Lib. III. GORRESIO.

  189 “The Devas and Asuras (Gods and Titans) fought in the east, the       south, the west, and the north, and the Devas were defeated by the       Asuras in all these directions. They then fought in the       north-eastern direction; there the Devas did not sustain defeat.       This direction is _aparájitá_, _i.e._ unconquerable. Thence one       should do work in this direction, and have it done there; for such a       one (alone) is able to clear off his debts.” HAUG’S _Aitareya       Bráhmanam_, Vol. II, p. 33.

      The debts here spoken of are a man’s religious obligations to the       Gods, the Pitaras or Manes, and men.

  190 Vishṇu.

  191 “It appears to me that this mythical story has reference to the       volcanic phenomena of nature. Kapil may very possibly be that hidden       fiery force which suddenly unprisons itself and bursts forth in       volcanic effects. Kapil is, moreover, one of the names of Agni the       God of Fire.” GORRESIO.

  192 Garuḍ was the son of Kaśyap and Vinatá.

  193 Garuḍ.

  194 A famous and venerated region near the Malabar coast.

  195 That is four fires and the sun.

  196 Heaven.

  197 Wind-Gods.

  198 Śiva.

  199 The lake Vindu does not exist. Of the seven rivers here mentioned       two only, the Ganges and the Sindhu or Indus, are known to       geographers. Hládiní means the Gladdener, Pávaní the Purifier,       Naliní the Lotus-Clad, and Suchakshu the Fair-eyed.

  200 The First or Golden Age.

  201 Diti and Aditi were wives of Kaśyap, and mothers respectively of       Titans and Gods.

  202 One of the seven seas surrounding as many worlds in concentric       rings.

  203 Śankar and Rudra are names of Śiva.

  204 “Śárṅgin, literally _carrying a bow of horn_, is a constantly       recurring name of Vishṇu. The Indians also, therefore, knew the art       of making bows out of the hons of antelopes or wild goats, which       Homer ascribes to the Trojans of the heroic age.” SCHLEGEL.

  205 Dhanvantari, the physician of the Gods.

  206 The poet plays upon the word and fancifully derives it from _apsu_,       the locative case plural of _ap_, water, and _rasa_, taste.… The       word is probably derived from _ap_, water, and _sri_, to go, and       seems to signify _inhabitants of the water_, nymphs of the stream;       or, as Goldstücker thinks (Dict. s.v.) these divinities were       originally personifications of the vapours which are attracted by       the sun and form into mist or clouds.

  207 “_Surá_, in the feminine comprehends all sorts of intoxicating       liquors, many kinds of which the Indians from the earliest times       distilled and prepared from rice, sugar-cane, the palm tree, and       various flowers and plants. Nothing is considered more disgraceful       among orthodox Hindus than drunkenness, and the use of wine is       forbidden not only to Bráhmans but the two other orders as well.… So       it clearly appears derogatory to the dignity of the Gods to have       received a nymph so pernicious, who ought rather to have been made       over to the Titans. However the etymological fancy has prevailed.       The word _Sura_, a God, is derived from the indeclinable _Swar_       heaven.” SCHLEGEL.

  208 Literally, high-eared, the horse of Indra. Compare the production of       the horse from the sea by Neptune.

        209 “And Kaustubha the best       Of gems that burns with living light       Upon Lord Vishṇu’s breast.”

      _Churning of the Ocean._

  210 “That this story of the birth of Lakshmí is of considerable       antiquity is evident from one of her names _Kshírábdhi-tanayá_,       daughter of the Milky Sea, which is found in _Amarasinha_ the most       ancient of Indian lexicographers. The similarity to the Greek myth       of Venus being born from the foam of the sea is remarkable.”

      “In this description of Lakshmí one thing only offends me, that she       is said to have four arms. Each of Vishṇu’s arms, single, as far as       the elbow, there branches into two; but Lakshmí in all the brass       seals that I possess or remember to have seen has two arms only. Nor       does this deformity of redundant limbs suit the pattern of perfect       beauty.” SCHLEGEL. I have omitted the offensive epithet.

  211 Purandhar, a common title of Indra.

  212 A few verses are here left untranslated on account of the subject       and language being offensive to modern taste.

  213 “In this myth of Indra destroying the unborn fruit of Diti with his       thunderbolt, from which afterwards came the Maruts or Gods of Wind       and Storm, geological phenomena are, it seems, represented under       mythical images. In the great Mother of the Gods is, perhaps,       figured the dry earth: Indra the God of thunder rends it open, and       there issue from its rent bosom the Maruts or exhalations of the       earth. But such ancient myths are difficult to interpret with       absolute certainty.” GORRESIO.

  214 Wind.

  215 Indra, with _mahá_, great, prefixed.

  216 The Heavenly Twins.

  217 Not banished from heaven as the inferior Gods and demigods sometimes       were.

  218 Kumárila says: “In the same manner, if it is said that Indra was the       seducer of Ahalyá this does not imply that the God Indra committed       such a crime, but Indra means the sun, and Ahalyá (from ahan and lí)       the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined by the sun of the       morning, therefore is Indra called the paramour of Ahalyá.” MAX       MULLER, _History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 530_.

  219 “The preceding sixteen lines have occurred before in Canto XLVIII.       This Homeric custom of repeating a passage of several lines is       strange to our poet. This is the only instance I remember. The       repetition of single lines is common enough.” SCHLEGEL.

  220 Divine personages of minute size produced from the hair of Brahmá,       and probably the origin of

            “That small infantry       Warred on by cranes.”

  221 Sweet, salt, pungent, bitter, acid, and astringent.

  222 “Of old hoards and minerals in the earth, the king is entitled to       half by reason of his general protection, and because he is the lord       paramount of the soil.” MANU, Book VIII. 39.

  223 Ghí or clarified butter, “holy oil,” being one of the essentials of       sacrifice.

  224 “A Bráhman had five principal duties to discharge every day: study       and teaching the Veda, oblations to the manes or spirits of the       departed, sacrifice to the Gods, hospitable offerings to men, and _a       gift of food to all creatures_. The last consisted of rice or other       grain which the Bráhman was to offer every day outside his house in       the open air. MANU, Book III. 70.” GORRESIO.

  225 These were certain sacred words of invocation such a _sváhá_,       _vashaṭ_, etc., pronounced at the time of sacrifice.

  226 “It is well known that the Persians were called Pahlavas by the       Indians. The _Śakas_ are nomad tribes inhabiting Central Asia, the       Scythes of the Greeks, whom the Persians also, as Herodotus tells       us, called Sakæ just as the Indians did. Lib. VII 64 ὁι γὰρ Πέρσαι       πάντας τοὺς Σύθας. καλέουσι Σάκας. The name Yavans seems to be used       rather indefinitely for nations situated beyond Persia to the west.…       After the time of Alexander the Great the Indians as well as the       Persians called the Greeks also Yavans.” SCHLEGEL.

      Lassen thinks that the Pahlavas were the same people as the Πάκτυες       of Herodotus, and that this non-Indian people dwelt on the       north-west confines of India.

  227 See page 13, note 6.

  228 Barbarians, non-Sanskrit-speaking tribes.

  229 A comprehensive term for foreign or outcast races of different faith       and language from the Hindus.

  230 The Kirátas and Hárítas are savage aborigines of India who occupy       hills and jungles and are altogether different in race and character       from the Hindus. Dr. Muir remarks in his Sanskrit Texts, Vol. I. p.       488 (second edition) that it does not appear that it is the object       of this legend to represent this miraculous creation as the origin       of these tribes, and that nothing more may have been intended than       that the cow called into existence large armies, of the same stock       with particular tribes previously existing.

  231 The Great God, Śiva.

  232 Nandi, the snow-white bull, the attendant and favourite vehicle of       Śiva.

  233 “The names of many of these weapons which are mythical and partly       allegorical have occurred in Canto XXIX. The general signification       of the story is clear enough. It is a contest for supremacy between       the regal or military order and Bráhmanical or priestly authority,       like one of those struggles which our own Europe saw in the middle       ages when without employing warlike weapons the priesthood       frequently gained the victory.” SCHLEGEL.

      For a full account of the early contests between the Bráhmans and       the Kshattriyas, see Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts (Second edition)       Vol. I. Ch. IV.

  234 “Triśanku, king of Ayodhyá, was seventh in descent from Ikshváku,       and Daśaratha holds the thirty-fourth place in the same genealogy.       See Canto LXX. We are thrown back, therefore, to very ancient times,       and it occasions some surprise to find Vaśishṭha and Viśvámitra,       actors in these occurences, still alive in Rama’s time.”

  235 “It does not appear how Triśanku, in asking the aid of Vaśishṭha’s       sons after applying in vain to their father, could be charged with       resorting to another _śákhá_ (School) in the ordinary sense of that       word; as it is not conceivable that the sons should have been of       another Śákhá from the father, whose cause they espouse with so much       warmth. The commentator in the Bombay edition explains the word       _Śákhantaram_ as Yájanádiná rakshántaram, ‘one who by sacrificing       for thee, etc., will be another protector.’ Gorresio’s Gauḍa text,       which may often be used as a commentary on the older one, has the       following paraphrase of the words in question, ch. 60, 3. Múlam       utsṛijya kasmát tvam sákhásv ichhasi lambitum. ‘Why, forsaking the       root, dost thou desire to hang upon the branches?’ ” MUIR, Sanskrit       Texts, Vol. I., p. 401.

  236 A Chaṇḍála was a man born of the illegal and impure union of a Śúdra       with a woman of one of the three higher castes.

  237 “The Chaṇḍála was regarded as the vilest and most abject of the men       sprung from wedlock forbidden by the law (Mánavadharmaśástra, Lib.       X. 12.); a kind of social malediction weighed upon his head and       rejected him from human society.” GORRESIO.

  238 This appellation, occuring nowhere else in the poem except as the       name of a city, appears twice in this Canto as a name of Vaśishṭha.

  239 “The seven ancient rishis or saints, as has been said before, were       the seven stars of Ursa Major. The seven other new saints which are       here said to have been created by Viśvámitra should be seven new       southern stars, a sort of new Ursa. Von Schlegel thinks that this       mythical fiction of new stars created by Viśvámitra may signify that       these southern stars, unknown to the Indians as long as they       remained in the neighbourhood of the Ganges, became known to them at       a later date when they colonized the southern regions of India.”       GORRESIO.

  240 “This cannot refer to the events just related: for Viśvámitra was       successful in the sacrifice performed for Triśanku. And yet no other       impediment is mentioned. Still his restless mind would not allow him       to remain longer in the same spot. So the character of Viśvámitra is       ingeniously and skilfully shadowed forth: as he had been formerly a       most warlike king, loving battle and glory, bold, active, sometimes       unjust, and more frequently magnanimous, such also he always shows       himself in his character of anchorite and ascetic.” SCHLEGEL.

  241 Near the modern city of Ajmere. The place is sacred still, and the       name is preserved in the Hindí. Lassen, however, says that this       Pushkala or Pushkara, called by the Grecian writers Πευκελίτις, the       earliest place of pilgrimage mentioned by name, is not to be       confounded with the modern Pushkara in Ajmere.

  242 “Ambarísha is the twenty-ninth in descent from Ikshváku, and is       therefore separated by an immense space of time from Triśanku in       whose story Viśvámitra had played so important a part. Yet Richíka,       who is represented as having young sons while Ambarísha was yet       reigning being himself the son of Bhrigu and to be numbered with the       most ancient sages, is said to have married the younger sister of       Viśvámitra. But I need not again remark that there is a perpetual       anachronism in Indian mythology.” SCHLEGEL..

      “In the mythical story related in this and the following Canto we       may discover, I think, some indication of the epoch at which the       immolation of lower animals was substituted for human sacrifice.… So       when Iphigenia was about to be sacrificed at Aulis, one legend tells       us that a hind was substituted for the virgin.” GORRESIO.

      So the ram caught in the thicket took the place of Isaac, or, as the       Musalmáns say, of Ishmael.

  243 The Indian Cupid.

  244 “The same as she whose praises Viśvámitra has already sung in Canto       XXXV, and whom the poet brings yet alive upon the scene in Canto       LXI. Her proper name was _Satyavatí_ (Truthful); the patronymic,       Kauśikí was preserved by the river into which she is said to have       been changed, and is still recognized in the corrupted forms Kuśa       and Kuśí. The river flows from the heights of the Himálaya towards       the Ganges, bounding on the east the country of Videha (Behar). The       name is no doubt half hidden in the _Cosoagus_ of Pliny and the       _Kossounos_ of Arrian. But each author has fallen into the same       error in his enumeration of these rivers (Condochatem, Erannoboam,       Cosoagum, Sonum). The Erannoboas, (Hiraṇyaváha) and the Sone are not       different streams, but well-known names of the same river. Moreover       the order is disturbed, in which on the right and left they fall       into the Ganges. To be consistent with geography it should be       written: Erannoboam sive Sonum, Condochatem (Gandakí), Cosoagum.”       SCHLEGEL.

  245 “Daksha was one of the ancient Progenitors or Prajápatis created by       Brahmá. The sacrifice which is here spoken of and in which Śankar or       Śiva (called also here Rudra and Bhava) smote the Gods because he       had not been invited to share the sacred oblations with them, seems       to refer to the origin of the worship of Śiva, to its increase and       to the struggle it maintained with other older forms of worship.”       GORRESIO.

  246 Sítá means a furrow.

            “Great Erectheus swayed,       That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,       But from the teeming furrow took his birth,       The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.”

      Iliad, Book II.

  247 “The whole story of Sítá, as will be seen in the course of the poem       has a great analogy with the ancient myth of Proserpine.” GORRESIO.

  248 A different lady from the Goddess of the Jumna who bears the same       name.

  249 This is another fanciful derivation, _Sa_—with, and _gara_—poison.

_  250 Purushádak_ means a cannibal. First called _Kalmáshapáda_ on       account of his spotted feet he is said to have been turned into a       cannibal for killing the son of Vaśishṭha.

  251 “In the setting forth of these royal genealogies the Bengal       recension varies but slightly from the Northern. The first six names       of the genealogy of the Kings of Ayodhyá are partly theogonical and       partly cosmogonical; the other names are no doubt in accordance with       tradition and deserve the same amount of credence as the ancient       traditional genealogies of other nations.” GORRESIO.

  252 The tenth of the lunar asterisms, composed of five stars.

  253 There are two lunar asterisms of this name, one following the other       immediately, forming the eleventh and twelfth of the lunar mansions.

  254 This is another Ráma, son of Jamadagni, called Paraśuráma, or Ráma       with the axe, from the weapon which he carried. He was while he       lived the terror of the Warrior caste, and his name recalls long and       fierce struggles between the sacerdotal and military order in which       the latter suffered severely at the hands of their implacable enemy.

  255 “The author of the _Raghuvaṅśa_ places the mountain Mahendra in the       territory of the king of the Kalingans, whose palace commanded a       view of the ocean. It is well known that the country along the coast       to the south of the mouths of the Ganges was the seat of this       people. Hence it may be suspected that this Mahendra is what Pliny       calls ‘promontorium Calingon.’ The modern name, _Cape Palmyras_,       from the palmyras Borassus flabelliformis, which abound there agrees       remarkably with the description of the poet who speaks of the groves       of these trees. _Raghuvaṅśa_, VI. 51.” SCHLEGEL.

  256 Śiva.

  257 Siva. God of the Azure Neck.

  258 Śatrughna means slayer of foes, and the word is repeated as an       intensive epithet.

  259 Alluding to the images of Vishṇu, which have four arms, the four       princes being portions of the substance of that God.

  260 Chief of the insignia of imperial dignity.

  261 Whisks, usually made of the long tails of the Yak.

  262 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  263 The Chandrakánta or Moonstone, a sort of crystal supposed to be       composed of congealed moonbeams.

  264 A customary mark of respect to a superior.

  265 Ráhu, the ascending node, is in mythology a demon with the tail of a       dragon whose head was severed from his body by Vishṇu, but being       immortal, the head and tail retained their separate existence and       being transferred to the stellar sphere became the authors of       eclipses; the first especially by endeavouring to swallow the sun       and moon.

  266 In eclipse.

  267 The seventh of the lunar asterisms.

  268 Kauśalyá and Sumitrá.

  269 A king of the Lunar race, and father of Yayáti.

  270 Literally _the chamber of wrath,_ a “_growlery_,” a small, dark,       unfurnished room to which it seems, the wives and ladies of the king       betook themselves when offended and sulky.

  271 In these four lines I do not translate faithfully, and I do not       venture to follow Kaikeyí farther in her eulogy of the hump-back’s       charms.

  272 These verses are evidently an interpolation. They contain nothing       that has not been already related: the words only are altered. As       the whole poem could not be recited at once, the rhapsodists at the       beginning of a fresh recitation would naturally remind their hearers       of the events immediately preceding.

  273 The _śloka_ or distich which I have been forced to expand into these       nine lines is evidently spurious, but is found in all the commented       MSS. which Schlegel consulted.

  274 Manmatha, Mind-disturber, a name of Káma or Love.

  275 This story is told in the Mahábhárat. A free version of it may be       found in _Scenes from the Rámáyan, etc._

  276 Only the highest merit obtains a home in heaven for ever. Minor       degrees of merit procure only leases of heavenly mansions terminable       after periods proportioned to the fund which buys them. King Yayáti       went to heaven and when his term expired was unceremoniously       ejected, and thrown down to earth.

  277 See _Additional Notes_, THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.

  278 Indra, called also Purandara, Town-destroyer.

  279 Indra’s charioteer.

  280 The elephant of Indra.

  281 A star in the spike of Virgo: hence the name of the mouth Chaitra or       Chait.

  282 The Rain-God.

  283 In a former life.

  284 One of the lunar asterisms, represented as the favourite wife of the       Moon. See p. 4, note.

  285 The Sea.

  286 The Moon.

  287 The comparison may to a European reader seem a homely one. But       Spenser likens an infuriate woman to a cow “That is berobbed of her       youngling dere.” Shakspeare also makes King Henry VI compare himself       to the calf’s mother that “Runs lowing up and down, Looking the way       her harmless young one went.” “Cows,” says De Quincey, “are amongst       the gentlest of breathing creatures; none show more passionate       tenderness to their young, when deprived of them, and, in short, I       am not ashamed to profess a deep love for these gentle creatures.”

  288 The commentators say that, in a former creation, Ocean grieved his       mother and suffered in consequence the pains of hell.

  289 As described in Book I Canto XL.

  290 Parasúráma.

  291 The Sanskrit word _hasta_ signifies both _hand_, and the trunk of       “The beast that bears between his eyes a serpent for a head.”

  292 See P. 41.

  293 The first progeny of Brahmá or Brahmá himself.

  294 These are three names of the Sun.

  295 See P. 1.

  296 The saints who form the constellation of Ursa Major.

  297 The regent of the planet Venus.

  298 Kuvera.

_  299 Bali_, or the presentation of food to all created beings, is one of       the five great sacraments of the Hindu religion: it consists in       throwing a small parcel of the offering, _Ghee_, or rice, or the       like, into the open air at the back of the house.

  300 In mythology, a demon slain by Indra.

  301 Called also Garuḍ, the King of the birds, offspring of Vinatá. See       p. 53.

  302 See P. 56.

  303 See P. 43.

  304 The story of Sávitrí, told in the Mahábhárat, has been admirably       translated by Rückert, and elegantly epitomized by Mrs. Manning in       _India, Ancient and Mediæval_. There is a free rendering of the       story in _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

  305 Fire for sacrificial purposes is produced by the attrition of two       pieces of wood.

  306 Kaikeyí.

  307 The chapel where the sacred fire used in worship is kept.

  308 The students and teachers of the Taittiríya portion of the Yajur       Veda.

  309 Two of the divine personages called _Prajápatis_ and _Brahmádikas_       who were first created by Brahmá.

  310 It was the custom of the kings of the solar dynasty to resign in       their extreme old age the kingdom to the heir, and spend the       remainder of their days in holy meditation in the forest:

      “For such through ages in their life’s decline       Is the good custom of Ikshváku’s line.”

      _Raghuraṅśa._

  311 See Book I, Canto XXXIX. An Indian prince in more modern times       appears to have diverted himself in a similar way.

      It is still reported in Belgaum that Appay Deasy was wont to amuse       himself “by making several young and beautiful women stand side by       side on a narrow balcony, without a parapet, overhanging the deep       reservoir at the new palace in Nipani. He used then to pass along       the line of trembling creatures, and suddenly thrusting one of them       headlong into the water below, he used to watch her drowning, and       derive pleasure from her dying agonies.”—History of the Belgaum       District. By H. J. Stokes, M. S. C.

  312 Chitraratha, King of the celestial choristers.

  313 It is said that the bamboo dies after flowering.

  314 “Thirty centuries have passed since he began this memorable journey.       Every step of it is known and is annually traversed by thousands:       hero worship is not extinct. What can Faith do! How strong are the       ties of religion when entwined with the legends of a country! How       many a cart creeps creaking and weary along the road from Ayodhyá to       Chitrakúṭ. It is this that gives the Rámáyan a strange interest, the       story still lives.” _Calcutta Review: Vol. XXIII._

  315 See p. 72.

  316 Four stars of the sixteenth lunar asterism.

  317 In the marriage service.

  318 The husks and chaff of the rice offered to the Gods.

  319 An important sacrifice at which seventeen victims were immolated.

  320 The great pilgrimage to the Himálayas, in order to die there.

  321 Known to Europeans as the Goomtee.

  322 A tree, commonly called _Ingua_.

  323 Sacrificial posts to which the victims were tied.

  324 Daughter of Jahnu, a name of the Ganges. See p. 55.

  325 The _Mainá_ or Gracula religiosa, a favourite cage-bird, easily       taught to talk.

  326 The Jumna.

  327 The Hindu name of Allahabad.

  328 The Langúr is a large monkey.

  329 A mountain said to lie to the east of Meru.

  330 Another name of the Jumna, daughter of the Sun.

  331 “We have often looked on that green hill: it is the holiest spot of       that sect of the Hindu faith who devote themselves to this       incarnation of Vishṇu. The whole neighbourhood is Ráma’s country.       Every headland has some legend, every cavern is connected with his       name; some of the wild fruits are still called _Sítáphal_, being the       reputed food of the exile. Thousands and thousands annually visit       the spot, and round the hill is a raised foot-path, on which the       devotee, with naked feet, treads full of pious awe.” _Calcutta       Review_, Vol. XXIII.

  332 Deities of a particular class in which five or ten are enumerated.       They are worshipped particularly at the funeral obsequies in honour       of deceased progenitors.

  333 “So in Homer the horses of Achilles lamented with many bitter tears       the death of Patroclus slain by Hector:”

      “Ἵπποι δ’ Αἰακίδαο, μάχης ἀπάνευθεν ἐότες,       Κλᾶιον, ἐπειδὴ πρῶτα πυθέσθην ἡνιόχοιο       Ἐν κονίνσι πεσόντος ὑφ’ Ἕκτορος ἀνδροφόνοιο”

      ILIAD. XVII. 426.

      “Ancient poesy frequently associated nature with the joys and       sorrows of man.” GORRESIO.

  334 The lines containing this heap of forced metaphors are marked as       spurious by Schlegel.

  335 The southern region is the abode of Yama the Indian Pluto, and of       departed spirits.

  336 The five elements of which the body consists, and to which it       returns.

  337 So dying York cries over the body of Suffolk:

          “Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!       My soul shall thine keep company to heaven:       Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast.”

      _King Henry V, Act IV, 6._

  338 Kauśalyá, daughter of the king of another Kośal.

  339 Rájagriha, or Girivraja was the capital of Aśvapati, Bharat’s       maternal grandfather.

  340 The Kekayas or Kaikayas in the Punjab appear amongst the chief       nations in the war of the Mahábhárata; their king being a kinsman of       Krishṇa.

  341 Hástinapura was the capital of the kingdom of Kuru, near the modern       Delhi.

  342 The Panchálas occupied the upper part of the Doab.

  343 “Kurujángala and its inhabitants are frequently mentioned in the       _Mahábhárata_, as in the _Ádi-parv._ 3789, 4337, _et al._” WILSON’S       _Vishṇu Puráṇa,_ Vol. II. p. 176. DR. HALL’S Note.

  344 “The Ὁξύματις of Arrian. See _As. Res._ Vol. XV. p. 420, 421, also       _Indische Alterthumskunde_, Vol. I. p. 602, first footnote.”       WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. I. p. 421. DR. HALL’S Edition. The       Ikshumatí was a river in Kurukshetra.

  345 “The Báhíkas are described in the Mahábhárata, Karṇa Parvan, with       some detail, and comprehend the different nations of the Punjab from       the Sutlej to the Indus.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. I. p. 167.

  346 The Beas, Hyphasis, or Bibasis.

  347 It would be lost labour to attempt to verify all the towns and       streams mentioned in Cantos LXVIII and LXXII. Professor Wilson       observes (_Vishṇu Puráṇa_, p. 139. Dr. Hall’s Edition) “States, and       tribes, and cities have disappeared, even from recollection; and       some of the natural features of the country, especially the rivers,       have undergone a total alteration.… Notwithstanding these       impediments, however, we should be able to identify at least       mountains and rivers, to a much greater extent than is now       practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their       nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been       oriental scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been       conversant with the spoken language of the country. They have,       consequently, put down names at random, according to their own       inaccurate appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and       corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are crowded with       appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to past or       present denominations. We need not wonder that we cannot discover       Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity of       Calcutta, Barnagore represents Baráhanagar, Dakshineśwar is       metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaría into Willoughbury.… There is       scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of       extreme indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an       incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is, in some degree,       perhaps, a national defect.”

      For further information regarding the road from Ayodhyá to       Rájagriha, see _Additional Notes_.

  348 “The Śatadrú, ‘the hundred-channeled’—the Zaradrus of Ptolemy,       Hesydrus of Pliny—is the Sutlej.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II.       p. 130.

  349 The Sarasvatí or Sursooty is a tributary of the Caggar or Guggur in       Sirhind.

_  350 Súryamcha pratimehatu_, adversus solem mingat. An offence expressly       forbidden by the Laws of Manu.

  351 Bharat does not intend these curses for any particular person: he       merely wishes to prove his own innocence by invoking them on his own       head if he had any share in banishing Ráma.

  352 The Sáma-veda, the hymns of which are chanted aloud.

  353 Walking from right to left.

  354 Birth and death, pleasure and pain, loss and gain.

  355 Erected upon a tree or high staff in honour of Indra.

  356 I follow in this stanza the Bombay edition in preference to      