[ADA-ramayana  —  part 7 of 12, continuation of part 6]
============================================================

On large-eyed Sítá he has fed, And rests him now with wings outspread. But my keen shafts whose flight is true, Shall pierce the ravenous monster through.”

  An arrow on the string he laid, And rushing near the bird surveyed, While earth to ocean’s distant side Trembled beneath his furious stride. With blood and froth on neck and beak The dying bird essayed to speak, And with a piteous voice, distressed, Thus Daśaratha’s son addressed:

  “She whom like some sweet herb of grace Thou seekest in this lonely place, Fair lady, is fierce Rávaṇ’s prey, Who took, beside, my life away. Lakshmaṇ and thou had parted hence And left the dame without defence. I saw her swiftly borne away By Rávaṇ’s might which none could stay. I hurried to the lady’s aid, I crushed his car and royal shade, And putting forth my warlike might Hurled Rávaṇ to the earth in fight. Here, Ráma, lies his broken bow, Here lie the arrows of the foe. There on the ground before thee are The fragments of his battle car. There bleeds the driver whom my wings Beat down with ceaseless buffetings. When toil my aged strength subdued, His sword my weary pinions hewed. Then lifting up the dame he bare His captive through the fields of air. Thy vengeful blows from me restrain, Already by the giant slain.”

  When Ráma heard the vulture tell The tale that proved his love so well, His bow upon the ground he placed, And tenderly the bird embraced: Then to the earth he fell o’erpowered, And burning tears both brothers showered, For double pain and anguish pressed Upon the patient hero’s breast. The solitary bird he eyed Who in the lone wood gasped and sighed, And as again his anguish woke Thus Ráma to his brother spoke:

  “Expelled from power the woods I tread, My spouse is lost, the bird is dead. A fate so sad, I ween, would tame The vigour of the glorious flame. If I to cool my fever tried To cross the deep from side to side, The sea,—so hard my fate,—would dry His waters as my feet came nigh. In all this world there lives not one So cursed as I beneath the sun; So strong a net of misery cast Around me holds the captive fast, Best of all birds that play the wing, Loved, honoured by our sire the king, The vulture, in my fate enwound, Lies bleeding, dying on the ground.”

  Then Ráma and his brother stirred By pity mourned the royal bird, And, as their hands his limbs caressed, Affection for a sire expressed. And Ráma to his bosom strained The bird with mangled wings distained,   With crimson blood-drops dyed. He fell, and shedding many a tear, “Where is my spouse than life more dear?   Where is my love?” he cried.




Canto LXIX. The Death Of Jatáyus.


As Ráma viewed with heart-felt pain The vulture whom the fiend had slain, In words with tender love impressed His brother chief he thus addressed:

  “This royal bird with faithful thought For my advantage strove and fought. Slain by the fiend in mortal strife For me he yields his noble life. See, Lakshmaṇ, how his wounds have bled; His struggling breath will soon have fled. Faint is his voice, and near to die, He scarce can lift his trembling eye. Jaṭáyus, if thou still can speak, Give, give the answer that I seek. The fate of ravished Sítá tell, And how thy mournful chance befell. Say why the giant stole my dame: What have I done that he could blame? What fault in me has Rávaṇ seen That he should rob me of my queen? How looked the lady’s moon-bright cheek? What were the words she found to speak? His strength, his might, his deeds declare: And tell the form he loves to wear. To all my questions make reply: Where does the giant’s dwelling lie?”

  The noble bird his glances bent On Ráma as he made lament, And in low accents faint and weak With anguish thus began to speak: “Fierce Rávaṇ, king of giant race, Stole Sítá from thy dwelling-place. He calls his magic art to aid With wind and cloud and gloomy shade. When in the fight my power was spent My wearied wings he cleft and rent. Then round the dame his arms he threw, And to the southern region flew. O Raghu’s son, I gasp for breath, My swimming sight is dim in death. E’en now before my vision pass Bright trees of gold with hair of grass, The hour the impious robber chose Brings on the thief a flood of woes. The giant in his haste forgot ’Twas Vinda’s hour,(513) or heeded not. Those robbed at such a time obtain Their plundered store and wealth again. He, like a fish that takes the bait, In briefest time shall meet his fate. Now be thy troubled heart controlled And for thy lady’s loss consoled, For thou wilt slay the fiend in fight And with thy dame have new delight.”

  With senses clear, though sorely tried, The royal vulture thus replied, While as he sank beneath his pain Forth rushed the tide of blood again. “Him,(514) brother of the Lord of Gold, Viśravas’ self begot of old.” Thus spoke the bird, and stained with gore Resigned the breath that came no more.

  “Speak, speak again!” thus Ráma cried, With reverent palm to palm applied, But from the frame the spirit fled And to the skiey regions sped. The breath of life had passed away. Stretched on the ground the body lay.

  When Ráma saw the vulture lie, Huge as a hill, with darksome eye, With many a poignant woe distressed His brother chief he thus addressed: “Amid these haunted shades content Full many a year this bird has spent. His life in home of giants passed, In Daṇḍak wood he dies at last. The years in lengthened course have fled Untroubled o’er the vulture’s head, And now he lies in death, for none The stern decrees of Fate may shun. See, Lakshmaṇ, how the vulture fell While for my sake he battled well. And strove to free with onset bold My Sítá from the giant’s hold. Supreme amid the vulture kind His ancient rule the bird resigned, And conquered in the fruitless strife Gave for my sake his noble life. O Lakshmaṇ, many a time we see Great souls who keep the law’s decree, With whom the weak sure refuge find, In creatures of inferior kind. The loss of her, my darling queen, Strikes with a pang less fiercely keen Than now this slaughtered bird to see Who nobly fought and died for me. As Daśaratha, good and great, Was glorious in his high estate, Honoured by all, to all endeared, So was this royal bird revered. Bring fuel for the funeral rite: These hands the solemn fire shall light And on the burning pyre shall lay The bird who died for me to-day. Now on the gathered wood shall lie The lord of all the birds that fly, And I will burn with honours due My champion whom the giant slew. O royal bird of noblest heart, Graced with all funeral rites depart To bright celestial seats above, Rewarded for thy faithful love. Dwell in thy happy home with those Whose constant fires of worship rose. Live blest amid the unyielding brave, And those who land in largess gave.”

  Sore grief upon his bosom weighed As on the pyre the bird he laid, And bade the kindled flame ascend To burn the body of his friend. Then with his brother by his side The hero to the forest hied. There many a stately deer he slew, The flesh around the bird to strew. The venison into balls he made, And on fair grass before him laid. Then that the parted soul might rise And find free passage to the skies, Each solemn word and text he said Which Bráhmans utter o’er the dead. Then hastening went the princely pair To bright Godávarí, and there Libations of the stream they poured In honour of the vulture lord, With solemn ritual to the slain, As scripture’s holy texts ordain. Thus offerings to the bird they gave And bathed their bodies in the wave.

The vulture monarch having wrought   A hard and glorious feat, Honoured by Ráma sage in thought,   Soared to his blissful seat. The brothers, when each rite was paid   To him of birds supreme, Their hearts with new-found comfort stayed,   And turned them from the stream. Like sovereigns of celestial race   Within the wood they came, Each pondering the means to trace,   The captor of the dame.




Canto LXX. Kabandha.


When every rite was duly paid The princely brothers onward strayed, And eager in the lady’s quest They turned their footsteps to the west. Through lonely woods that round them lay Ikshváku’s children made their way, And armed with bow and shaft and brand Pressed onward to the southern land. Thick trees and shrubs and creepers grew In the wild grove they hurried through. ’Twas dark and drear and hard to pass For tangled thorns and matted grass. Still onward with a southern course They made their way with vigorous force, And passing through the mazes stood Beyond that vast and fearful wood. With toil and hardship yet unspent Three leagues from Janasthán they went, And speeding on their way at last Within the wood of Krauncha(515) passed: A fearful forest wild and black As some huge pile of cloudy rack, Filled with all birds and beasts, where grew Bright blooms of every varied hue. On Sítá bending every thought Through all the mighty wood they sought, And at the lady’s loss dismayed Here for a while and there they stayed. Then turning farther eastward they Pursued three leagues their weary way, Passed Krauncha’s wood and reached the grove Where elephants rejoiced to rove. The chiefs that awful wood surveyed Where deer and wild birds filled each glade, Where scarce a step the foot could take For tangled shrub and tree and brake. There in a mountain’s woody side A cave the royal brothers spied, With dread abysses deep as hell, Where darkness never ceased to dwell. When, pressing on, the lords of men Stood near the entrance of the den, They saw within the dark recess A huge misshapen giantess; A thing the timid heart that shook With fearful shape and savage look. Terrific fiend, her voice was fierce, Long were her teeth to rend and pierce. The monster gorged her horrid feast Of flesh of many a savage beast, While her long locks, at random flung, Dishevelled o’er her shoulders hung. Their eyes the royal brothers raised, And on the fearful monster gazed. Forth from her den she came and glanced At Lakshmaṇ as he first advanced, Her eager arms to hold him spread, And “Come and be my love” she said, Then as she held him to her breast, The prince in words like these addressed: “Behold thy treasure fond and fair: Ayomukhi(516) the name I bear. In thickets of each lofty hill, On islets of each brook and rill, With me delighted shalt thou play, And live for many a lengthened day.”

  Enraged he heard the monster woo; His ready sword he swiftly drew, And the sharp steel that quelled his foes Cut through her breast and ear and nose. Thus mangled by his vengeful sword In rage and pain the demon roared, And hideous with her awful face Sped to her secret dwelling place. Soon as the fiend had fled from sight, The brothers, dauntless in their might, Reached a wild forest dark and dread Whose tangled ways were hard to tread. Then bravest Lakshmaṇ, virtuous youth, The friend of purity and truth, With reverent palm to palm applied Thus to his glorious brother cried:

  “My arm presaging throbs amain, My troubled heart is sick with pain, And cheerless omens ill portend Where’er my anxious eyes I bend. Dear brother, hear my words: advance Resolved and armed for every chance, For every sign I mark to-day Foretells a peril in the way. This bird of most ill-omened note, Loud screaming with discordant throat, Announces with a warning cry That strife and victory are nigh.”

  Then as the chiefs their search pursued Throughout the dreary solitude, They heard amazed a mighty sound That broke the very trees around, As though a furious tempest passed Crushing the wood beneath its blast. Then Ráma raised his trusty sword, And both the hidden cause explored. There stood before their wondering eyes A fiend broad-chested, huge of size. A vast misshapen trunk they saw In height surpassing nature’s law. It stood before them dire and dread Without a neck, without a head. Tall as some hill aloft in air, Its limbs were clothed with bristling hair, And deep below the monster’s waist His vast misshapen mouth was placed. His form was huge, his voice was loud As some dark-tinted thunder cloud. Forth from his ample chest there came A brilliance as of gushing flame. Beneath long lashes, dark and keen The monster’s single eye was seen. Deep in his chest, long, fiercely bright, It glittered with terrific light. He swallowed down his savage fare Of lion, bird, and slaughtered bear, And with huge teeth exposed to view O’er his great lips his tongue he drew. His arms unshapely, vast and dread, A league in length, he raised and spread. He seized with monstrous hands a herd Of deer and many a bear and bird. Among them all he picked and chose, Drew forward these, rejected those. Before the princely pair he stood Barring their passage through the wood. A league of shade the chiefs had passed When on the fiend their eyes they cast. A monstrous shape without a head With mighty arms before him spread, They saw that hideous trunk appear That struck the trembling eye with fear. Then, stretching to their full extent His awful arms with fingers bent, Round Raghu’s princely sons he cast Each grasping limb and held them fast. Though strong of arm and fierce in fight, Each armed with bow and sword to smite, The royal brothers, brave and bold, Were helpless in the giant’s hold. Then Raghu’s son, heroic still, Felt not a pang his bosom thrill; But young, with no protection near, His brother’s heart was sad with fear, And thus with trembling tongue he said To Ráma, sore disquieted:

  “Ah me, ah me, my days are told: O see me in the giant’s hold. Fly, son of Raghu, swiftly flee, And thy dear self from danger free. Me to the fiend an offering give; Fly at thine ease thyself and live. Thou, great Kakutstha’s son, I ween, Wilt find ere long thy Maithil queen, And when thou holdest, throned again, Thine old hereditary reign, With servants prompt to do thy will, O think upon thy brother still.” As thus the trembling Lakshmaṇ cried, The dauntless Ráma thus replied: “Brother, from causeless dread forbear. A chief like thee should scorn despair.” He spoke to soothe his wild alarm: Then fierce Kabandha(517) long of arm, Among the Dánavs(518) first and best, The sons of Raghu thus addressed: “What men are you, whose shoulders show Broad as a bull’s, with sword and bow, Who roam this dark and horrid place, Brought by your fate before my face? Declare by what occasion led These solitary wilds you tread, With swords and bows and shafts to pierce, Like bulls whose horns are strong and fierce. Why have you sought this forest land Where wild with hunger’s pangs I stand? Now as your steps my path have crossed Esteem your lives already lost.”

  The royal brothers heard with dread The words which fierce Kabandha said. And Ráma to his brother cried, Whose cheek by blanching fear was dried:

  “Alas, we fall, O valiant chief, From sorrow into direr grief, Still mourning her I hold so dear We see our own destruction near. Mark, brother, mark what power has time O’er all that live, in every clime. Now, lord of men, thyself and me Involved in fatal danger see. ’Tis not, be sure, the might of Fate That crushes all with deadly weight. Ne’er can the brave and strong, who know The use of spear and sword and bow, The force of conquering time withstand, But fall like barriers built of sand.”

Thus in calm strength which naught could shake The son of Daśaratha spake,   With glory yet unstained Upon Sumitrá’s son he bent His eyes, and firm in his intent   His dauntless heart maintained.




Canto LXXI. Kabandha’s Speech.


Kabandha saw each chieftain stand Imprisoned by his mighty hand, Which like a snare around him pressed And thus the royal pair addressed: “Why, warriors, are your glances bent On me whom hungry pangs torment? Why stand with wildered senses? Fate Has brought you now my maw to sate.”

  When Lakshmaṇ heard, a while appalled, His ancient courage he recalled, And to his brother by his side With seasonable counsel cried:

  “This vilest of the giant race Will draw us to his side apace. Come, rouse thee; let the vengeful sword Smite off his arms, my honoured lord. This awful giant, vast of size, On his huge strength of arm relies, And o’er the world victorious, thus With mighty force would slaughter us. But in cold blood to slay, O King, Discredit on the brave would bring, As when some victim in the rite Shuns not the hand upraised to smite.”

  The monstrous fiend, to anger stirred, The converse of the brothers heard. His horrid mouth he opened wide And drew the princes to his side. They, skilled due time and place to note Unsheathed their glittering swords and smote, Till from the giant’s shoulders they Had hewn the mighty arms away. His trenchant falchion Ráma plied And smote him on the better side, While valiant Lakshmaṇ on the left The arm that held him prisoned cleft. Then to the earth dismembered fell The monster with a hideous yell, And like a cloud’s his deep roar went Through earth and air and firmament. Then as the giant’s blood flowed fast, On his cleft limbs his eye he cast, And called upon the princely pair Their names and lineage to declare. Him then the noble Lakshmaṇ, blest With fortune’s favouring marks, addressed, And told the fiend his brother’s name And the high blood of which he came: “Ikshváku’s heir here Ráma stands, Illustrious through a hundred lands. I, younger brother of the heir, O fiend, the name of Lakshmaṇ bear. His mother stole his realm away And drove him forth in woods to stray. Thus through the mighty forest he Roamed with his royal wife and me. While glorious as a God he made His dwelling in the greenwood shade, Some giant stole away his dame, And seeking her we hither came. But tell me who thou art, and why With headless trunk that towered so high, With flaming face beneath thy chest, Thou liest crushed in wild unrest.”

  He heard the words that Lakshmaṇ spoke, And memory in his breast awoke, Recalling Indra’s words to mind He spoke in gentle tones and kind: “O welcome best of men, are ye Whom, blest by fate, this day I see. A blessing on each trenchant blade That low on earth these arms has laid! Thou, lord of men, incline thine ear The story of my woe to hear, While I the rebel pride declare Which doomed me to the form I wear.”




Canto LXXII. Kabandha’s Tale.


“Lord of the mighty arm, of yore A shape transcending thought I wore, And through the triple world’s extent My fame for might and valour went. Scarce might the sun and moon on high, Scarce Śakra, with my beauty vie. Then for a time this form I took, And the great world with trembling shook. The saints in forest shades who dwelt The terror of my presence felt. But once I stirred to furious rage Great Sthúlaśiras, glorious sage. Culling in woods his hermit food My hideous shape with fear he viewed. Then forth his words of anger burst That bade me live a thing accursed: “Thou, whose delight is others’ pain, This grisly form shalt still retain.”

  Then when I prayed him to relent And fix some term of punishment,— Prayed that the curse at length might cease, He bade me thus expect release: “Let Ráma cleave thine arms away And on the pyre thy body lay, And then shalt thou, set free from doom, Thine own fair shape once more assume.” O Lakshmaṇ, hear my words: in me The world-illustrious Danu see. By Indra’s curse, subdued in fight, I wear this form which scares the sight. By sternest penance long maintained The mighty Father’s grace I gained. When length of days the God bestowed, With foolish pride my bosom glowed. My life, of lengthened years assured, I deemed from Śakra’s might secured. Let by my senseless pride astray I challenged Indra to the fray. A flaming bolt with many a knot With his terrific arm he shot, And straight my head and thighs compressed Were buried in my bulky chest. Deaf to each prayer and piteous call He sent me not to Yáma’s hall. “Thy prayers and cries,” he said “are vain: The Father’s word must true remain.” “But how may lengthened life be spent By one the bolt has torn and rent? How can I live,” I cried, “unfed, With shattered face and thighs and head?” As thus I spoke his grace to crave, Arms each a league in length he gave, And opened in my chest beneath This mouth supplied with fearful teeth. So my huge arms I used to cast Round woodland creatures as they passed, And fed within the forest here On lion, tiger, pard, and deer. Then Indra spake to soothe my grief: “When Ráma and his brother chief From thy huge bulk those arms shall cleave, Then shall the skies thy soul receive.” Disguised in this terrific shape I let no woodland thing escape, And still my longing soul was pleased Whene’er my arms a victim seized, For in these arms I fondly thought Would Ráma’s self at last be caught. Thus hoping, toiling many a day I yearned to cast my life away, And here, my lord, thou standest now: Blessings be thine! for none but thou Could cleave my arms with trenchant stroke: True are the words the hermit spoke. Now let me, best of warriors, lend My counsel, and thy plans befriend, And aid thee with advice in turn If thou with fire my corse wilt burn.”

  As thus the mighty Danu prayed With offer of his friendly aid, While Lakshmaṇ gazed with anxious eye, The virtuous Ráma made reply: “Lakshmaṇ and I through forest shade From Janasthán a while had strayed. When none was near her, Rávaṇ came And bore away my glorious dame, The giant’s form and size unknown, I learn as yet his name alone. Not yet the power and might we know Or dwelling of the monstrous foe. With none our helpless feet to guide We wander here by sorrow tried. Let pity move thee to requite Our service in the funeral rite. Our hands shall bring the boughs that, dry Where elephants have rent them, lie, Then dig a pit, and light the fire To burn thee as the laws require. Do thou as meed of this declare Who stole my spouse, his dwelling where. O, if thou can, I pray thee say, And let this grace our deeds repay.”

  Danu had lent attentive ear The words which Ráma spoke to hear, And thus, a speaker skilled and tried, To that great orator replied: “No heavenly lore my soul endows, Naught know I of thy Maithil spouse. Yet will I, when my shape I wear, Him who will tell thee all declare. Then, Ráma, will my lips disclose His name who well that giant knows. But till the flames my corse devour This hidden knowledge mocks my power. For through that curse’s withering taint My knowledge now is small and faint. Unknown the giant’s very name Who bore away the Maithil dame. Cursed for my evil deeds I wore A shape which all the worlds abhor. Now ere with wearied steeds the sun Through western skies his course have run, Deep in a pit my body lay And burn it in the wonted way. When in the grave my corse is placed, With fire and funeral honours graced, Then I, great chief, his name will tell Who knows the giant robber well. With him, who guides his life aright, In league of trusting love unite, And he, O valiant prince, will be A faithful friend and aid to thee. For, Ráma, to his searching eyes The triple world uncovered lies. For some dark cause of old, I ween, Through all the spheres his ways have been.”




Canto LXXIII. Kabandha’s Counsel.


The monster ceased: the princely pair Heard great Kabandha’s eager prayer. Within a mountain cave they sped, Where kindled fire with care they fed. Then Lakshmaṇ in his mighty hands Brought ample store of lighted brands, And to a pile of logs applied The flame that ran from side to side. The spreading glow with gentle force Consumed Kabandha’s mighty corse, Till the unresting flames had drunk The marrow of the monstrous trunk, As balls of butter melt away Amid the fires that o’er them play. Then from the pyre, like flame that glows Undimmed by cloudy smoke, he rose, In garments pure of spot or speck, A heavenly wreath about his neck. Resplendent in his bright attire He sprang exultant from the pyre. While from neck, arm, and foot was sent The flash of gold and ornament. High on a chariot, bright of hue, Which swans of fairest pinion drew, He filled each region of the air With splendid glow reflected there. Then in the sky he stayed his car And called to Ráma from afar: “Hear, chieftain, while my lips explain The means to win thy spouse again. Six plans, O prince, the wise pursue To reach the aims we hold in view.(519) When evils ripening sorely press They load the wretch with new distress, So thou and Lakshmaṇ, tried by woe, Have felt at last a fiercer blow, And plunged in bitterest grief to-day Lament thy consort torn away. There is no course but this: attend; Make, best of friends, that chief thy friend. Unless his prospering help thou gain Thy plans and hopes must all be vain. O Ráma, hear my words, and seek, Sugríva, for of him I speak. His brother Báli, Indra’s son, Expelled him when the fight was won. With four great chieftains, faithful still, He dwells on Rishyamúka’s hill.— Fair mountain, lovely with the flow Of Pampá’s waves that glide below,— Lord of the Vánars(520) just and true, Strong, very glorious, bright to view, Unmatched in counsel, firm and meek, Bound by each word his lips may speak, Good, splendid, mighty, bold and brave, Wise in each plan to guide and save. His brother, fired by lust of sway, Drove forth the prince in woods to stray. In all thy search for Sítá he Thy ready friend and help will be. With him to aid thee in thy quest Dismiss all sorrow from thy breast. Time is a mighty power, and none His fixed decree can change or shun. So rich reward thy toil shall bless, And naught can stay thy sure success. Speed hence, O chief, without delay, To strong Sugríva take thy way. This hour thy footsteps onward bend, And make that mighty prince thy friend. With him before the attesting flame In solemn truth alliance frame. Nor wilt thou, if thy heart be wise, Sugríva, Vánar king, despise. Of boundless strength, all shapes he wears, He hearkens to a suppliant’s prayers, And, grateful for each kindly deed, Will help and save in hour of need. And you, I ween, the power possess To aid his hopes and give redress. He, let his cause succeed or fail, Will help you, and you must prevail. A banished prince, in fear and woe He roams where Pampá’s waters flow, True offspring of the Lord of Light Expelled by Báli’s conquering might. Go, Raghu’s son, that chieftain seek Who dwells on Rishyamúka’s peak. Before the flame thy weapons cast And bind the bonds of friendship fast. For, prince of all the Vánar race, He in his wisdom knows each place Where dwell the fierce gigantic brood Who make the flesh of man their food. To him, O Raghu’s son, to him Naught in the world is dark or dim, Where’er the mighty Day-God gleams Resplendent with a thousand beams. He over rocky height and hill, Through gloomy cave, by lake and rill, Will with his Vánars seek the prize, And tell thee where thy lady lies. And he will send great chieftains forth To east and west and south and north, To seek the distant spot where she All desolate laments for thee. He even in Rávaṇ’s halls would find Thy Sítá, gem of womankind.   Yea, if the blameless lady lay     On Meru’s loftiest steep,   Or, far removed from light of day,     Where hell is dark and deep,   That chief of all the Vánar race     His way would still explore,   Meet the cowed giants face to face     And thy dear spouse restore.”




Canto LXXIV. Kabandha’s Death.


When wise Kabandha thus had taught The means to find the dame they sought, And urged them onward in the quest, He thus again the prince addressed:

  “This path, O Raghu’s son, pursue Where those fair trees which charm the view, Extending westward far away, The glory of their bloom display, Where their bright leaves Rose-apples show, And the tall Jak and Mango grow. Whene’er you will, those trees ascend, Or the long branches shake and bend, Their savoury fruit like Amrit eat, Then onward speed with willing feet. Beyond this shady forest, decked With flowering trees, your course direct. Another grove you then will find With every joy to take the mind, Like Nandan with its charms displayed, Or Northern Kuru’s blissful shade; Where trees distil their balmy juice, And fruit through all the year produce; Where shades with seasons ever fair With Chaitraratha may compare: Where trees whose sprays with fruit are bowed Rise like a mountain or a cloud. There, when you list, from time to time, The loaded trees may Lakshmaṇ climb, Or from the shaken boughs supply Sweet fruit that may with Amrit vie. The onward path pursuing still From wood to wood, from hill to hill, Your happy eyes at length will rest On Pampá’s lotus-covered breast. Her banks with gentle slope descend, Nor stones nor weed the eyes offend, And o’er smooth beds of silver sand Lotus and lily blooms expand. There swans and ducks and curlews play, And keen-eyed ospreys watch their prey, And from the limpid waves are heard Glad notes of many a water-bird. Untaught a deadly foe to fear They fly not when a man is near, And fat as balls of butter they Will, when you list, your hunger stay. Then Lakshmaṇ with his shafts will take The fish that swim the brook and lake, Remove each bone and scale and fin, Or strip away the speckled skin, And then on iron skewers broil For thy repast the savoury spoil. Thou on a heap of flowers shalt rest And eat the meal his hands have dressed, There shalt thou lie on Pampá’s brink, And Lakshmaṇ’s hand shall give thee drink, Filling a lotus leaf with cool Pure water from the crystal pool, To which the opening blooms have lent The riches of divinest scent. Beside thee at the close of day Will Lakshmaṇ through the woodland stray, And show thee where the monkeys sleep In caves beneath the mountain steep. Loud-voiced as bulls they forth will burst And seek the flood, oppressed by thirst; Then rest a while, their wants supplied, Their well-fed bands on Pampá’s side. Thou roving there at eve shalt see Rich clusters hang on shrub and tree, And Pampá flushed with roseate glow, And at the view forget thy woe. There shalt thou mark with strange delight Each loveliest flower that blooms by night, While lily buds that shrink from day Their tender loveliness display. In that far wild no hand but thine Those peerless flowers in wreaths shall twine: Immortal in their changeless pride, Ne’er fade those blooms and ne’er are dried. There erst on holy thoughts intent Their days Matanga’s pupils spent. Once for their master food they sought, And store of fruit and berries brought. Then as they laboured through the dell From limb and brow the heat-drops fell: Thence sprang and bloomed those wondrous trees: Such holy power have devotees. Thus, from the hermits’ heat-drops sprung, Their growth is ever fresh and young. There Śavarí is dwelling yet, Who served each vanished anchoret. Beneath the shade of holy boughs That ancient votaress keeps her vows. Her happy eyes on thee will fall, O godlike prince, adored by all, And she, whose life is pure from sin, A blissful seat in heaven will win. But cross, O son of Raghu, o’er, And stand on Pampá’s western shore. A tranquil hermitage that lies Deep in the woods will meet thine eyes. No wandering elephants invade The stillness of that holy shade, But checked by saint Matanga’s power They spare each consecrated bower. Through many an age those trees have stood World-famous as Matanga’s wood Still, Raghu’s son, pursue thy way: Through shades where birds are vocal stray, Fair as the blessed wood where rove Immortal Gods, or Nandan’s grove. Near Pampá eastward, full in sight, Stands Rishyamúka’s wood-crowned height. ’Tis hard to climb that towering steep Where serpents unmolested sleep. The free and bounteous, formed of old By Brahmá of superior mould, Who sink when day is done to rest Reclining on that mountain crest,— What wealth or joy in dreams they view, Awaking find the vision true. But if a villain stained with crime That holy hill presume to climb, The giants in their fury sweep From the hill top the wretch asleep. There loud and long is heard the roar Of elephants on Pampá’s shore, Who near Matanga’s dwelling stray And in those waters bathe and play. A while they revel by the flood, Their temples stained with streams like blood, Then wander far away dispersed, Dark as huge clouds before they burst. But ere they part they drink their fill Of bright pure water from the rill, Delightful to the touch, where meet Scents of all flowers divinely sweet, Then speeding from the river side Deep in the sheltering thicket hide. Then bears and tigers shalt thou view Whose soft skins show the sapphire’s hue, And silvan deer that wander nigh Shall harmless from thy presence fly. High in that mountain’s wooded side Is a fair cavern deep and wide, Yet hard to enter: piles of rock The portals of the cavern block.(521) Fast by the eastern door a pool Gleams with broad waters fresh and cool, Where stores of roots and fruit abound, And thick trees shade the grassy ground. This mountain cave the virtuous-souled Sugríva, and his Vánars hold, And oft the mighty chieftain seeks The summits of those towering peaks.”

  Thus spake Kabandha high in air His counsel to the royal pair. Still on his neck that wreath he bore, And radiance like the sun’s he wore. Their eyes the princely brothers raised And on that blissful being gazed: “Behold, we go: no more delay; Begin,” they cried, “thy heavenward way.” “Depart,” Kabandha’s voice replied, “Pursue your search, and bliss betide.”

  Thus to the happy chiefs he said, Then on his heavenward journey sped. Thus once again Kabandha won A shape that glittered like the sun   Without a spot or stain. Thus bade he Ráma from the air To great Sugríva’s side repair   His friendly love to gain.




Canto LXXV. Savarí.


Thus counselled by their friendly guide On through the wood the princes hied, Pursuing still the eastern road To Pampá which Kabandha showed, Where trees that on the mountains grew With fruit like honey charmed the view. They rested weary for the night Upon a mountain’s wooded height, Then onward with the dawn they hied And stood on Pampá’s western side, Where Śavarí’s fair home they viewed Deep in that shady solitude. The princes reached the holy ground Where noble trees stood thick around, And joying in the lovely view Near to the aged votaress drew. To meet the sons of Raghu came, With hands upraised, the pious dame, And bending low with reverence meet Welcomed them both and pressed their feet. Then water, as beseems, she gave, Their lips to cool, their feet to lave. To that pure saint who never broke One law of duty Ráma spoke:

  “I trust no cares invade thy peace, While holy works and zeal increase; That thou content with scanty food All touch of ire hast long subdued; That all thy vows are well maintained While peace of mind is surely gained, That reverence of the saints who taught Thy faithful heart due fruit has brought.”

  The aged votaress pure of taint, Revered by every perfect saint, Rose to her feet by Ráma’s side And thus in gentle tones replied: “My penance meed this day I see Complete, my lord, in meeting thee. This day the fruit of birth I gain, Nor have I served the saints in vain. I reap rich fruits of toil and vow, And heaven itself awaits me now, When I, O chief of men, have done Honour to thee the godlike one. I feel, great lord, thy gentle eye My earthly spirit purify, And I, brave tamer of thy foes, Shall through thy grace in bliss repose. Thy feet by Chitrakúṭa strayed When those great saints whom I obeyed, In dazzling chariots bright of hue, Hence to their heavenly mansions flew. As the high saints were borne away I heard their holy voices say: “In this pure grove, O devotee, Prince Ráma soon will visit thee. When he and Lakshmaṇ seek this shade, Be to thy guests all honour paid. Him shalt thou see, and pass away To those blest worlds which ne’er decay.” To me, O mighty chief, the best Of lofty saints these words addressed. Laid up within my dwelling lie Fruits of each sort which woods supply,— Food culled for thee in endless store From every tree on Pampá’s shore.”

  Thus to her virtuous guest she sued And he, with heavenly lore endued, Words such as these in turn addressed To her with equal knowledge blest: “Danu himself the power has told Of thy great masters lofty-souled. Now if thou will, mine eyes would fain Assurance of their glories gain.”

  She heard the prince his wish declare: Then rose she, and the royal pair Of brothers through the wood she led That round her holy dwelling spread. “Behold Matanga’s wood” she cried, “A grove made famous far and wide. Dark as thick clouds and filled with herds Of wandering deer, and joyous birds. In this pure spot each reverend sire With offerings fed the holy fire. See here the western altar stands Where daily with their trembling hands The aged saints, so long obeyed By me, their gifts of blossoms laid. The holy power, O Raghu’s son, By their ascetic virtue won, Still keeps their well-loved altar bright, Filling the air with beams of light. And those seven neighbouring lakes behold Which, when the saints infirm and old, Worn out by fasts, no longer sought, Moved hither drawn by power of thought. Look, Ráma, where the devotees Hung their bark mantles on the trees, Fresh from the bath: those garments wet Through many a day are dripping yet. See, through those aged hermits’ power The tender spray, this bright-hued flower With which the saints their worship paid, Fresh to this hour nor change nor fade. Here thou hast seen each lawn and dell, And heard the tale I had to tell: Permit thy servant, lord, I pray, To cast this mortal shell away, For I would dwell, this life resigned, With those great saints of lofty mind, Whom I within this holy shade With reverential care obeyed.”

  When Ráma and his brother heard The pious prayer the dame preferred, Filled full of transport and amazed They marvelled as her words they praised. Then Ráma to the votaress said Whose holy vows were perfected: “Go, lady, where thou fain wouldst be, O thou who well hast honoured me.”

  Her locks in hermit fashion tied, Clad in bark coat and black deer-hide, When Ráma gave consent, the dame Resigned her body to the flame. Then like the fire that burns and glows, To heaven the sainted lady rose, In all her heavenly garments dressed, Immortal wreaths on neck and breast, Bright with celestial gems she shone Most beautiful to look upon, And like the flame of lightning sent A glory through the firmament. That holy sphere the dame attained, By depth of contemplation gained, Where roam high saints with spirits pure In bliss that shall for aye endure.




Canto LXXVI. Pampá.


When Śavarí had sought the skies And gained her splendid virtue’s prize, Ráma with Lakshmaṇ stayed to brood O’er the strange scenes their eyes had viewed. His mind upon those saints was bent, For power and might preëminent And he to musing Lakshmaṇ spoke The thoughts that in his bosom woke: “Mine eyes this wondrous home have viewed Of those great saints with souls subdued, Where peaceful tigers dwell and birds, And deer abound in heedless herds. Our feet upon the banks have stood Of those seven lakes within the wood, Where we have duly dipped, and paid Libations to each royal shade. Forgotten now are thoughts of ill And joyful hopes my bosom fill. Again my heart is light and gay And grief and care have passed away. Come, brother, let us hasten where Bright Pampá’s flood is fresh and fair, And towering in their beauty near Mount Rishyamúka’s heights appear, Which, offspring of the Lord of Light, Still fearing Báli’s conquering might, With four brave chiefs of Vánar race Sugríva makes his dwelling-place. I long with eager heart to find That leader of the Vánar kind, For on that chief my hopes depend That this our quest have prosperous end.”

  Thus Ráma spoke, in battle tried, And thus Sumitrá’s son replied: “Come, brother, come, and speed away: My spirit brooks no more delay.” Thus spake Sumitrá’s son, and then Forth from the grove the king of men With his dear brother by his side To Pampá’s lucid waters hied. He gazed upon the woods where grew Trees rich in flowers of every hue. From brake and dell on every side The curlew and the peacock cried, And flocks of screaming parrots made Shrill music in the bloomy shade. His eager eyes, as on he went, On many a pool and tree were bent. Inflamed with love he journeyed on Till a fair flood before him shone. He stood upon the water’s side Which streams from distant hills supplied: Matanga’s name that water bore: There bathed he from the shelving shore. Then, each on earnest thoughts intent, Still farther on their way they went. But Ráma’s heart once more gave way Beneath his grief and wild dismay. Before him lay the noble flood Adorned with many a lotus bud. On its fair banks Aśoka glowed, And all bright trees their blossoms showed. Green banks that silver waves confined With lovely groves were fringed and lined. The crystal waters in their flow Showed level sands that gleamed below. There glittering fish and tortoise played, And bending trees gave pleasant shade. There creepers on the branches hung With lover-like embraces clung. There gay Gandharvas loved to meet, And Kinnars sought the calm retreat. There wandering Yakshas found delight, Snake-gods and rovers of the night. Cool were the pleasant waters, gay Each tree with creeper, flower, and spray. There flushed the lotus darkly red, Here their white glory lilies spread, Here sweet buds showed their tints of blue: So carpets gleam with many a hue. A grove of Mangoes blossomed nigh, Echoing with the peacock’s cry. When Ráma by his brother’s side The lovely flood of Pampá eyed, Decked like a beauty, fair to see With every charm of flower and tree, His mighty heart with woe was rent And thus he spoke in wild lament

  “Here, Lakshmaṇ, on this beauteous shore, Stands, dyed with tints of many an ore, The mountain Rishyamúka bright With flowery trees that crown each height. Sprung from the chief who, famed of yore, The name of Riksharajas bore, Sugríva, chieftain strong and dread, Dwells on that mountain’s towering head. Go to him, best of men, and seek That prince of Vánars on the peak, I cannot longer brook my pain, Or, Sítá lost, my life retain.”   Thus by the pangs of love distressed,     His thoughts on Sítá bent,   His faithful brother he addressed,     And cried in wild lament.   He reached the lovely ground that lay     On Pampá’s wooded side,   And told in anguish and dismay,     The grief he could not hide.   With listless footsteps faint and slow     His way the chief pursued,   Till Pampá with her glorious show     Of flowering woods he viewed.   Through shades where every bird was found     The prince with Lakshmaṇ passed,   And Pampá with her groves around     Burst on his eyes at last.





BOOK IV.




Canto I. Ráma’s Lament.


The princes stood by Pampá’s side(522) Which blooming lilies glorified. With troubled heart and sense o’erthrown There Ráma made his piteous moan. As the fair flood before him lay The reason of the chief gave way; And tender thoughts within him woke, As to Sumitrá’s son he spoke:

  “How lovely Pampá’s waters show, Where streams of lucid crystal flow! What glorious trees o’erhang the flood Which blooms of opening lotus stud! Look on the banks of Pampá where Thick groves extend divinely fair; And piles of trees, like hills in size, Lift their proud summits to the skies. But thought of Bharat’s(523) pain and toil, And my dear spouse the giant’s spoil, Afflict my tortured heart and press My spirit down with heaviness. Still fair to me though sunk in woe Bright Pampá and her forest show. Where cool fresh waters charm the sight, And flowers of every hue are bright. The lotuses in close array Their passing loveliness display, And pard and tiger, deer and snake Haunt every glade and dell and brake. Those grassy spots display the hue Of topazes and sapphires’ blue, And, gay with flowers of every dye, With richly broidered housings vie. What loads of bloom the high trees crown, Or weigh the bending branches down! And creepers tipped with bud and flower Each spray and loaded limb o’erpower. Now cool delicious breezes blow, And kindle love’s voluptuous glow, When balmy sweetness fills the air, And fruit and flowers and trees are fair. Those waving woods, that shine with bloom, Each varied tint in turn assume. Like labouring clouds they pour their showers In rain or ever-changing flowers. Behold, those forest trees, that stand High upon rock and table-land, As the cool gales their branches bend, Their floating blossoms downward send. See, Lakshmaṇ, how the breezes play With every floweret on the spray. And sport in merry guise with all The fallen blooms and those that fall. See, brother, where the merry breeze Shakes the gay boughs of flowery trees, Disturbed amid their toil a throng Of bees pursue him, loud in song. The Koïls,(524) mad with sweet delight, The bending trees to dance invite; And in its joy the wild wind sings As from the mountain cave he springs. On speed the gales in rapid course, And bend the woods beneath their force, Till every branch and spray they bind In many a tangled knot entwined. What balmy sweets those gales dispense With cool and sacred influence! Fatigue and trouble vanish: such The magic of their gentle touch. Hark, when the gale the boughs has bent In woods of honey redolent, Through all their quivering sprays the trees Are vocal with the murmuring bees. The hills with towering summits rise, And with their beauty charm the eyes, Gay with the giant trees which bright With blossom spring from every height: And as the soft wind gently sways The clustering blooms that load the sprays, The very trees break forth and sing With startled wild bees’ murmuring. Thine eyes to yonder Cassias(525) turn Whose glorious clusters glow and burn. Those trees in yellow robes behold, Like giants decked with burnished gold. Ah me, Sumitrá’s son, the spring Dear to sweet birds who love and sing, Wakes in my lonely breast the flame Of sorrow as I mourn my dame. Love strikes me through with darts of fire, And wakes in vain the sweet desire. Hark, the loud Koïl swells his throat, And mocks me with his joyful note. I hear the happy wild-cock call Beside the shady waterfall. His cry of joy afflicts my breast By love’s absorbing might possessed. My darling from our cottage heard One morn in spring this shrill-toned bird, And called me in her joy to hear The happy cry that charmed her ear. See, birds of every varied voice Around us in the woods rejoice, On creeper, shrub, and plant alight, Or wing from tree to tree their flight. Each bird his kindly mate has found, And loud their notes of triumph sound, Blending in sweetest music like The distant warblings of the shrike. See how the river banks are lined With birds of every hue and kind. Here in his joy the Koïl sings, There the glad wild-cock flaps his wings. The blooms of bright Aśokas(526) where The song of wild bees fills the air, And the soft whisper of the boughs Increase my longing for my spouse. The vernal flush of flower and spray Will burn my very soul away. What use, what care have I for life If I no more may see my wife Soft speaker with the glorious hair, And eyes with silken lashes fair? Now is the time when all day long The Koïls fill the woods with song. And gardens bloom at spring’s sweet touch Which my beloved loved so much. Ah me, Sumitrá’s son, the fire Of sorrow, sprung from soft desire, Fanned by the charms the spring time shows, Will burn my heart and end my woes, Whose sad eyes look on each fair tree, But my sweet love no more may see. Ah me, Ah me, from hour to hour Love in my soul will wax in power, And spring, upon whose charms I gaze, Whose breath the heat of toil allays, With thoughts of her for whom I strain My hopeless eyes, increase my pain. As fire in summer rages through The forests thick with dry bamboo, So will my fawn eyed love consume My soul o’erwhelmed with thoughts of gloom. Behold, beneath each spreading tree The peacocks dance(527) in frantic glee, And, stirred by all the gales that blow, Their tails with jewelled windows glow, Each bird, in happy love elate, Rejoices with his darling mate. But sights like these of joy and peace My pangs of hopeless love increase. See on the mountain slope above The peahen languishing with love. Behold her now in amorous dance Close to her consort’s side advance. He with a laugh of joy and pride Displays his glittering pinions wide; And follows through the tangled dell The partner whom he loves so well. Ah happy bird! no giant’s hate Has robbed him of his tender mate; And still beside his loved one he Dances beneath the shade in glee. Ah, in this month when flowers are fair My widowed woe is hard to bear. See, gentle love a home may find In creatures of inferior kind. See how the peahen turns to meet Her consort now with love-drawn feet. So, Lakshmaṇ, if my large-eyed dear, The child of Janak still were here, She, by love’s thrilling influence led, Upon my breast would lay her head. These blooms I gathered from the bough Without my love are useless now. A thousand blossoms fair to see With passing glory clothe each tree That hangs its cluster-burthened head Now that the dewy months(528) are fled, But, followed by the bees that ply Their fragrant task, they fall and die. A thousand birds in wild delight Their rapture-breathing notes unite; Bird calls to bird in joyous strain, And turns my love to frenzied pain. O, if beneath those alien skies, There be a spring where Sítá lies, I know my prisoned love must be Touched with like grief, and mourn with me. But ah, methinks that dreary clime Knows not the touch of spring’s sweet time. How could my black eyed love sustain, Without her lord, so dire a pain? Or if the sweet spring come to her In distant lands a prisoner, How may his advent and her met On every side with taunt and threat? Ah, if the springtide’s languor came With soft enchantment o’er my dame, My darling of the lotus eye, My gently speaking love, would die; For well my spirit knows that she Can never live bereft of me With love that never wavered yet My Sítá’s heart, on me is set, Who, with a soul that ne’er can stray, With equal love her love repay. In vain, in vain the soft wind brings Sweet blossoms on his balmy wings; Delicious from his native snow, To me like fire he seems to glow. O, how I loved a breeze like this When darling Sítá shared the bliss! But now in vain for me it blows To fan the fury of my woes. That dark-winged bird that sought the skies Foretelling grief with warning cries, Sits on the tree where buds are gay, And pours glad music from the spray. That rover of the fields of air Will aid my love with friendly care, And me with gracious pity guide To my large-eyed Videhan’s side.(529) Hark, Lakshmaṇ, how the woods around With love-inspiring chants resound, Where birds in every bloom-crowned tree Pour forth their amorous minstrelsy. As though an eager gallant wooed A gentle maid by love subdued, Enamoured of her flowers the bee Darts at the wind-rocked Tila tree.(530) Aśoka, brightest tree that grows, That lends a pang to lovers’ woes, Hangs out his gorgeous bloom in scorn And mocks me as I weep forlorn. O Lakshmaṇ, turn thine eye and see Each blossom-laden Mango tree, Like a young lover gaily dressed Whom fond desire forbids to rest. Look, son of Queen Sumitrá through The forest glades of varied hue, Where blooms are bright and grass is green The Kinnars(531) with their loves are seen. See, brother, see where sweet and bright Those crimson lilies charm the sight, And o’er the flood a radiance throw Fair as the morning’s roseate glow. See, Pampá, most divinely sweet, The swan’s and mallard’s loved retreat, Shows her glad waters bright and clear, Where lotuses their heads uprear From the pure wave, and charm the view With mingled tints of red and blue. Each like the morning’s early beams Reflected in the crystal gleams; And bees on their sweet toil intent Weigh down each tender filament. There with gay lawns the wood recedes; There wildfowl sport amid the reeds, There roedeer stand upon the brink, And elephants descend to drink. The rippling waves which winds make fleet Against the bending lilies beat, And opening bud and flower and stem Gleam with the drops that hang on them. Life has no pleasure left for me While my dear queen I may not see, Who loved so well those blooms that vie With the full splendour of her eye. O tyrant Love, who will not let My bosom for one hour forget The lost one whom I yearn to meet, Whose words were ever kind and sweet. Ah, haply might my heart endure This hopeless love that knows not cure, If spring with all his trees in flower Assailed me not with ruthless power. Each lovely scene, each sound and sight Wherein, with her, I found delight, Has lost the charm so sweet of yore, And glads my widowed heart no more. On lotus buds I seem to gaze, Or blooms that deck Paláśa(532) sprays;(533)

But to my tortured memory rise The glories of my darling’s eyes. Cool breezes through the forest stray Gathering odours on their way, Enriched with all the rifled scent Of lotus flower and filament. Their touch upon my temples falls And Sítá’s fragrant breath recalls. Now look, dear brother, on the right Of Pampá towers a mountain height Where fairest Cassia trees unfold The treasures of their burnished gold. Proud mountain king! his woody side With myriad ores is decked and dyed, And as the wind-swept blossoms fall Their fragrant dust is stained with all. To yon high lands thy glances turn: With pendent fire they flash and burn, Where in their vernal glory blaze Paláśa flowers on leafless sprays. O Lakshmaṇ, look! on Pampá’s side What fair trees rise in blooming pride! What climbing plants above them show Or hang their flowery garlands low! See how the amorous creeper rings The wind-rocked trees to which she clings, As though a dame by love impelled With clasping arms her lover held. Drunk with the varied scents that fill The balmy air, from hill to hill, From grove to grove, from tree to tree, The joyous wind is wandering free. These gay trees wave their branches bent By blooms, of honey redolent. There, slowly opening to the day, Buds with dark lustre deck the spray. The wild bee rests a moment where Each tempting flower is sweet and fair, Then, coloured by the pollen dyes, Deep in some odorous blossom lies. Soon from his couch away he springs: To other trees his course he wings, And tastes the honeyed blooms that grow Where Pampá’s lucid waters flow. See, Lakshmaṇ, see, how thickly spread With blossoms from the trees o’erhead, That grass the weary traveller woos With couches of a thousand hues, And beds on every height arrayed With red and yellow tints are laid, No longer winter chills the earth: A thousand flowerets spring to birth, And trees in rivalry assume Their vernal garb of bud and bloom. How fair they look, how bright and gay With tasselled flowers on every spray! While each to each proud challenge flings Borne in the song the wild bee sings. That mallard by the river edge Has bathed amid the reeds and sedge: Now with his mate he fondly plays And fires my bosom as I gaze.

  Mandákiní(534) is far renowned: No lovelier flood on earth is found; But all her fairest charms combined In this sweet stream enchant the mind. O, if my love were here to look With me upon this lovely brook, Never for Ayodhyá would I pine, Or wish that Indra’s lot were mine. If by my darling’s side I strayed O’er the soft turf which decks the glade, Each craving thought were sweetly stilled, Each longing of my soul fulfilled. But, now my love is far away, Those trees which make the woods so gay, In all their varied beauty dressed, Wake thoughts of anguish in my breast.

  That lotus-covered stream behold Whose waters run so fresh and cold, Sweet rill, the wildfowl’s loved resort, Where curlew, swan, and diver sport; Where with his consort plays the drake, And tall deer love their thirst to slake, While from each woody bank is heard The wild note of each happy bird. The music of that joyous quire Fills all my soul with soft desire; And, as I hear, my sad thoughts fly To Sítá of the lotus eye, Whom, lovely with her moonbright cheek, In vain mine eager glances seek. Now turn, those chequered lawns survey Where hart and hind together stray. Ah, as they wander at their will My troubled breast with grief they fill, While torn by hopeless love I sigh For Sítá of the fawn-like eye. If in those glades where, touched by spring, Gay birds their amorous ditties sing, Mine own beloved I might see, Then, brother, it were well with me: If by my side she wandered still, And this cool breeze that stirs the rill Touched with its gentle breath the brows Of mine own dear Videhan spouse. For, Lakshmaṇ, O how blest are those On whom the breath of Pampá blows, Dispelling all their care and gloom With sweets from where the lilies bloom! How can my gentle love remain Alive amid the woe and pain, Where prisoned far away she lies,— My darling of the lotus eyes? How shall I dare her sire to greet Whose lips have never known deceit? How stand before the childless king And meet his eager questioning? When banished by my sire’s decree, In low estate, she followed me. So pure, so true to every vow, Where is my gentle darling now? How can I bear my widowed lot, And linger on where she is not, Who followed when from home I fled Distracted, disinherited? My spirit sinks in hopeless pain When my fond glances yearn in vain For that dear face with whose bright eye The worshipped lotus scarce can vie. Ah when, my brother, shall I hear That voice that rang so soft and clear, When, sweetly smiling as she spoke, From her dear lips gay laughter broke? When worn with toil and love I strayed With Sítá through the forest shade, No trace of grief was seen in her, My kind and thoughtful comforter. How shall my faltering tongue relate To Queen Kauśalyá Sítá’s fate? How answer when in wild despair She questions, Where is Sítá, where? Haste, brother, haste: to Bharat hie, On whose fond love I still rely. My life can be no longer borne, Since Sítá from my side is torn.”

  Thus like a helpless mourner, bent By sorrow, Ráma made lament; And with wise counsel Lakshmaṇ tried To soothe his care, and thus replied: “O best of men, thy grief oppose, Nor sink beneath thy weight of woes. Not thus despond the great and pure And brave like thee, but still endure. Reflect what anguish wrings the heart When loving souls are forced to part; And, mindful of the coming pain, Thy love within thy breast restrain. For earth, though cooled by wandering streams, Lies scorched beneath the midday beams. Rávaṇ his steps to hell may bend, Or lower yet in flight descend; But be thou sure, O Raghu’s son, Avenging death he shall not shun. Rise, Ráma, rise: the search begin, And track the giant foul with sin. Then shall the fiend, though far he fly, Resign his prey or surely die. Yea, though the trembling monster hide With Sítá close to Diti’s(535) side, E’en there, unless he yield the prize, Slain by this wrathful hand he dies. Thy heart with strength and courage stay, And cast this weakling mood away. Our fainting hopes in vain revive Unless with firm resolve we strive. The zeal that fires the toiler’s breast Mid earthly powers is first and best. Zeal every check and bar defies, And wins at length the loftiest prize, In woe and danger, toil and care, Zeal never yields to weak despair. With zealous heart thy task begin, And thou once more thy spouse shalt win. Cast fruitless sorrow from thy soul, Nor let this love thy heart control. Forget not all thy sacred lore, But be thy noble self once more.”

  He heard, his bosom rent by grief, The counsel of his brother chief; Crushed in his heart the maddening pain, And rose resolved and strong again. Then forth upon his journey went The hero on his task intent, Nor thought of Pampá’s lovely brook, Or trees which murmuring breezes shook, Though on dark woods his glances fell, On waterfall and cave and dell; And still by many a care distressed The son of Raghu onward pressed. As some wild elephant elate   Moves through the woods in pride, So Lakshmaṇ with majestic gait   Strode by his brother’s side. He, for his lofty spirit famed,   Admonished and consoled; Showed Raghu’s son what duty claimed,   And bade his heart be bold. Then as the brothers strode apace   To Rishyamúka’s height, The sovereign of the Vánar race(536)   Was troubled at the sight. As on the lofty hill he strayed   He saw the chiefs draw near: A while their glorious forms surveyed,   And mused in restless fear. His slow majestic step he stayed   And gazed upon the pair. And all his spirit sank dismayed   By fear too great to bear. When in their glorious might the best   Of royal chiefs came nigh, The Vánars in their wild unrest   Prepared to turn and fly. They sought the hermit’s sacred home(537)   For peace and bliss ordained, And there, where Vánars loved to roam,   A sure asylum gained.




Canto II. Sugríva’s Alarm.


  Sugríva moved by wondering awe The high-souled sons of Raghu saw, In all their glorious arms arrayed; And grief upon his spirit weighed. To every quarter of the sky He turned in fear his anxious eye, And roving still from spot to spot With troubled steps he rested not. He durst not, as he viewed the pair, Resolve to stand and meet them there; And drooping cheer and quailing breast The terror of the chief confessed. While the great fear his bosom shook, Brief counsel with his lords he took; Each gain and danger closely scanned, What hope in flight, what power to stand, While doubt and fear his bosom rent, On Raghu’s sons his eyes he bent, And with a spirit ill at ease Addressed his lords in words like these:

  “Those chiefs with wandering steps invade The shelter of our pathless shade, And hither come in fair disguise Of hermit garb as Báli’s spies.”

  Each lord beheld with troubled heart Those masters of the bowman’s art, And left the mountain side to seek Sure refuge on a loftier peak. The Vánar chief in rapid flight Found shelter on a towering height, And all the band with one accord Were closely gathered round their lord. Their course the same, with desperate leap Each made his way from steep to steep, And speeding on in wild career Filled every height with sudden fear. Each heart was struck with mortal dread, As on their course the Vánars sped, While trees that crowned the steep were bent And crushed beneath them as they went. As in their eager flight they pressed For safety to each mountain crest, The wild confusion struck with fear Tiger and cat and wandering deer. The lords who watched Sugríva’s will Were gathered on the royal hill, And all with reverent hands upraised Upon their king and leader gazed. Sugríva feared some evil planned, Some train prepared by Báli’s hand. But, skilled in words that charm and teach, Thus Hanumán(538) began his speech:

  “Dismiss, dismiss thine idle fear, Nor dread the power of Báli here. For this is Malaya’s glorious hill(539) Where Báli’s might can work no ill. I look around but nowhere see The hated foe who made thee flee, Fell Báli, fierce in form and face: Then fear not, lord of Vánar race. Alas, in thee I clearly find The weakness of the Vánar kind, That loves from thought to thought to range, Fix no belief and welcome change. Mark well each hint and sign and scan, Discreet and wise, thine every plan. How may a king, with sense denied, The subjects of his sceptre guide?”

  Hanúmán,(540) wise in hour of need, Urged on the chief his prudent rede. His listening ear Sugríva bent, And spake in words more excellent:

  “Where is the dauntless heart that free From terror’s chilling touch can see Two stranger warriors, strong as those, Equipped with swords and shafts and bows, With mighty arms and large full eyes, Like glorious children of the skies? Báli my foe, I ween, has sent These chiefs to aid his dark intent. Hence doubt and fear disturb me still, For thousands serve a monarch’s will, In borrowed garb they come, and those Who walk disguised are counted foes. With secret thoughts they watch their time, And wound fond hearts that fear no crime. My foe in state affairs is wise, And prudent kings have searching eyes. By other hands they strike the foe: By meaner tools the truth they know. Now to those stranger warriors turn, And, less than king, their purpose learn. Mark well the trick and look of each; Observe his form and note his speech. With care their mood and temper sound, And, if their minds be friendly found, With courteous looks and words begin Their confidence and love to win. Then as my friend and envoy speak, And question what the strangers seek. Ask why equipped with shaft and bow Through this wild maze of wood they go. If they, O chief, at first appear Pure of all guile, in heart sincere, Detect in speech and look the sin And treachery that lurk within.”

  He spoke: the Wind-God’s son obeyed. With ready zeal he sought the shade, And reached with hasty steps the wood Where Raghu’s son and Lakshmaṇ stood.(541)




Canto III. Hanumán’s Speech.


The envoy in his faithful breast Pondered Sugríva’s high behest. From Rishyamúka’s peak he hied And placed him by the princes’ side. The Wind-God’s son with cautious art Had laid his Vánar form apart, And wore, to cheat the strangers eyes, A wandering mendicant’s disguise.(542) Before the heroes’ feet he bent And did obeisance reverent, And spoke, the glorious pair to praise, His words of truth in courteous phrase, High honour duly paid, the best Of all the Vánar kind addressed, With free accord and gentle grace, Those glories of their warrior race:

  “O hermits, blest in vows, who shine Like royal saints or Gods divine, O best of young ascetics, say How to this spot you found your way, Scaring the troops of wandering deer And silvan things that harbour here Searching amid the trees that grow Where Pampá’s gentle waters flow. And lending from your brows a gleam Of glory to the lovely stream. Who are you, say, so brave and fair, Clad in the bark which hermits wear? I see you heave the frequent sigh, I see the deer before you fly. While you, for strength and valour dread, The earth, like lordly lions, tread, Each bearing in his hand a bow, Like Indra’s own, to slay the foe. With the grand paces of a bull, So bright and young and beautiful. The mighty arms you raise appear Like trunks which elephants uprear, And as you move this mountain-king(543) Is glorious with the light you bring. How have you reached, like Gods in face, Best lords of earth, this lonely place, With tresses coiled in hermit guise,(544) And splendours of those lotus eyes? As Gods who leave their heavenly sphere, Alike your beauteous forms appear. The Lords of Day and Night(545) might thus Stray from the skies to visit us. Heroic youth, so broad of chest, Fair with the beauty of the Blest, With lion shoulders, tall and strong, Like bulls who lead the lowing throng, Your arms, unmatched for grace and length, With massive clubs may vie in strength. Why do no gauds those limbs adorn Where priceless gems were meetly worn? Each noble youth is fit, I deem, To guard this earth, as lord supreme, With all her woods and seas, to reign From Meru’s peak to Vindhya’s chain. Your smooth bows decked with dyes and gold Are glorious in their masters’ hold, And with the arms of Indra(546) vie Which diamond splendours beautify. Your quivers glow with golden sheen, Well stored with arrows fleet and keen, Each gleaming like a fiery snake That joys the foeman’s life to take. As serpents cast their sloughs away And all their new born sheen display, So flash your mighty swords inlaid With burning gold on hilt and blade. Why are you silent, heroes? Why My questions hear nor deign reply? Sugríva, lord of virtuous mind, The foremost of the Vánar kind, An exile from his royal state, Roams through the land disconsolate. I, Hanumán, of Vánar race, Sent by the king have sought this place, For he, the pious, just, and true, In friendly league would join with you. Know, godlike youths, that I am one Of his chief lords, the Wind-God’s son. With course unchecked I roam at will, And now from Rishyamúka’s hill, To please his heart, his hope to speed, I came disguised in beggar’s weed.”

  Thus Hanúmán, well trained in lore Of language, spoke, and said no more. The son of Raghu joyed to hear The envoy’s speech, and bright of cheer He turned to Lakshmaṇ by his side, And thus in words of transport cried:

  “The counselor we now behold Of King Sugríva righteous-souled. His face I long have yearned to see, And now his envoy comes to me With sweetest words in courteous phrase Answer this mighty lord who slays His foemen, by Sugríva sent, This Vánar chief most eloquent. For one whose words so sweetly flow The whole Rig-veda(547) needs must know, And in his well-trained memory store The Yajush and the Sáman’s lore. He must have bent his faithful ear All grammar’s varied rules to hear. For his long speech how well he spoke! In all its length no rule he broke. In eye, on brow, in all his face The keenest look no guile could trace. No change of hue, no pose of limb Gave sign that aught was false in him. Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear, Without a word to pain the ear. From chest to throat, nor high nor low, His accents came in measured flow. How well he spoke with perfect art That wondrous speech that charmed the heart, With finest skill and order graced In words that knew nor pause nor haste! That speech, with consonants that spring From the three seats of uttering,(548) Would charm the spirit of a foe Whose sword is raised for mortal blow. How may a ruler’s plan succeed Who lacks such envoy good at need? How fail, if one whose mind is stored With gifts so rare assist his lord? What plans can fail, with wisest speech Of envoy’s lips to further each?”

  Thus Ráma spoke; and Lakshmaṇ taught In all the art that utters thought, To King Sugríva’s learned spy Thus made his eloquent reply: “Full well we know the gifts that grace Sugríva, lord of Vánar race, And hither turn our wandering feet That we that high-souled king may meet. So now our pleasant task shall be To do the words he speaks by thee.”

  His prudent speech the Vánar heard, And all his heart with joy was stirred. And hope that league with them would bring Redress and triumph to his king.




Canto IV. Lakshman’s Reply.


Cheered by the words that Ráma spoke, Joy in the Vánar’s breast awoke, And, as his friendly mood he knew, His thoughts to King Sugríva flew: “Again,” he mused, “my high-souled lord Shall rule, to kingly state restored; Since one so mighty comes to save, And freely gives the help we crave.”

  Then joyous Hanumán, the best Of all the Vánar kind, addressed These words to Ráma, trained of yore In all the arts of speakers’ lore:(549) “Why do your feet this forest tread By silvan life inhabited, This awful maze of tree and thorn Which Pampá’s flowering groves adorn?”

  He spoke: obedient to the eye Of Ráma, Lakshmaṇ made reply, The name and fortune to unfold Of Raghu’s son the lofty-souled: “True to the law, of fame unstained, The glorious Daśaratha reigned, And, steadfast in his duty, long Kept the four castes(550) from scathe and wrong. Through his wide realm his will was done, And, loved by all, he hated none. Just to each creature great and small, Like the Good Sire he cared for all. The Ágnishṭom,(551) as priests advised, And various rites he solemnized, Where ample largess ever paid The Bráhmans for their holy aid. Here Ráma stands, his heir by birth, Whose name is glorious in the earth: Sure refuge he of all oppressed, Most faithful to his sire’s behest. He, Daśaratha’s eldest born Whom gifts above the rest adorn, Lord of each high imperial sign,(552) The glory of his kingly line, Reft of his right, expelled from home, Came forth with me the woods to roam. And Sítá too, his faithful dame, Forth with her virtuous husband came, Like the sweet light when day is done Still cleaving to her lord the sun. And me his sweet perfections drew To follow as his servant true. Named Lakshmaṇ, brother of my lord Of grateful heart with knowledge stored Most meet is he all bliss to share, Who makes the good of all his care. While, power and lordship cast away, In the wild wood he chose to stay, A giant came,—his name unknown,— And stole the princess left alone. Then Diti’s son(553) who, cursed of yore, The semblance of a Rákshas wore, To King Sugríva bade us turn The robber’s name and home to learn. For he, the Vánar chief, would know The dwelling of our secret foe. Such words of hope spake Diti’s son, And sought the heaven his deeds had won. Thou hast my tale. From first to last Thine ears have heard whate’er has past. Ráma the mighty lord and I For refuge to Sugríva fly. The prince whose arm bright glory gained, O’er the whole earth as monarch reigned, And richest gifts to others gave, Is come Sugríva’s help to crave; Son of a king the surest friend Of virtue, him who loved to lend His succour to the suffering weak, Is come Sugríva’s aid to seek. Yes, Raghu’s son whose matchless hand Protected all this sea-girt land, The virtuous prince, my holy guide, For refuge seeks Sugríva’s side. His favour sent on great and small Should ever save and prosper all. He now to win Sugríva’s grace Has sought his woodland dwelling-place. Son of a king of glorious fame;— Who knows not Daśaratha’s name?— From whom all princes of the earth Received each honour due to worth;— Heir of that best of earthly kings, Ráma the prince whose glory rings Through realms below and earth and skies, For refuge to Sugríva flies. Nor should the Vánar king refuse The boon for which the suppliant sues, But with his forest legions speed To save him in his utmost need.”

  Sumitrá’s son, his eyes bedewed With piteous tears, thus sighed and sued. Then, trained in all the arts that guide The speaker, Hanumán replied:

  “Yea, lords like you of wisest thought, Whom happy fate has hither brought, Who vanquish ire and rule each sense, Must of our lord have audience. Reft of his kingdom, sad, forlorn, Once Báli’s hate now Báli’s scorn, Defeated, severed from his spouse, Wandering under forest boughs, Child of the Sun, our lord and king Sugríva will his succours bring, And all our Vánar hosts combined Will trace the dame you long to find.”

  With gentle tone and winning grace Thus spake the chief of Vánar race, And then to Raghu’s son he cried: “Come, haste we to Sugríva’s side.”

  He spoke, and for his words so sweet Good Lakshmaṇ paid all honour meet; Then turned and cried to Raghu’s son: “Now deem thy task already done, Because this chief of Vánar kind, Son of the God who rules the wind, Declares Sugríva’s self would be Assisted in his need by thee. Bright gleams of joy his cheek o’erspread As each glad word of hope he said; And ne’er will one so valiant deign To cheer our hearts with hope in vain.”

  He spoke, and Hanumán the wise Cast off his mendicant disguise, And took again his Vánar form, Son of the God of wind and storm. High on his ample back in haste Raghu’s heroic sons he placed, And turned with rapid steps to find The sovereign of the Vánar kind.




Canto V. The League.


From Rishyamúka’s rugged side To Malaya’s hill the Vánar hied, And to his royal chieftain there Announced the coming of the pair: “See, here with Lakshmaṇ Ráma stands Illustrious in a hundred lands. Whose valiant heart will never quail Although a thousand foes assail; King Daśaratha’s son, the grace And glory of Ikshváku’s race. Obedient to his father’s will He cleaves to sacred duty still. With rites of royal pomp and pride His sire the Fire-God gratified; Ten hundred thousand kine he freed, And priests enriched with ample meed; And the broad land protected, famed For truthful lips and passions tamed. Through woman’s guile his son has made His dwelling in the forest shade, Where, as he lived with every sense Subdued in hermit abstinence, Fierce Rávaṇ stole his wife, and he Is come a suppliant, lord, to thee. Now let all honour due be paid To these great chiefs who seek thine aid.”

  Thus spake the Vánar prince, and, stirred With friendly thoughts, Sugríva heard. The light of joy his face o’erspread, And thus to Raghu’s son he said: “O Prince, in rules of duty trained, Caring for all with love unfeigned, Hanúmán’s tongue has truly shown The virtues that are thine alone. My chiefest glory, gain, and bliss, O stranger Prince, I reckon this, That Raghu’s son will condescend To seek the Vánar for his friend. If thou my true ally wouldst be Accept the pledge I offer thee, This hand in sign of friendship take, And bind the bond we ne’er will break.”

  He spoke, and joy thrilled Ráma’s breast; Sugríva’s hand he seized and pressed And, transport beaming from his eye, Held to his heart his new ally. In wanderer’s weed disguised no more, His proper form Hanúmán wore. Then, wood with wood engendering,(554) came Neath his deft hands the kindled flame. Between the chiefs that fire he placed With wreaths of flowers and worship graced. And round its blazing glory went The friends with slow steps reverent.

  Thus each to other pledged and bound In solemn league new transport found, And bent upon his dear ally The gaze he ne’er could satisfy. “Friend of my soul art thou: we share Each other’s joy, each other’s care;” Thus in the bliss that thrilled his breast Sugríva Raghu’s son addressed. From a high Sál a branch he tore Which many a leaf and blossom bore, And the fine twigs beneath them laid A seat for him and Ráma made. Then Hanumán with joyous mind, Son of the God who rules the wind, To Lakshmaṇ gave, his seat to be, The gay branch of a Sandal tree. Then King Sugríva with his eyes Still trembling with the sweet surprise Of the great joy he could not hide, To Raghu’s noblest scion cried: “O Ráma, racked with woe and fear, Spurned by my foes, I wander here. Reft of my spouse, forlorn I dwell Here in my forest citadel. Or wild with terror and distress Roam through the distant wilderness. Vext by my brother Báli long My soul has borne the scathe and wrong. Do thou, whose virtues all revere, Release me from my woe and fear. From dire distress thy friend to free Is a high task and worthy thee.”

  He spoke, and Raghu’s son who knew All sacred duties men should do. The friend of justice, void of guile, Thus answered with a gentle smile: “Great Vánar, friends who seek my aid Still find their trust with fruit repaid. Báli, thy foe, who stole away Thy wife this vengeful hand shall slay. These shafts which sunlike flash and burn, Winged with the feathers of the hern, Each swift of flight and sure and dread, With even knot and pointed head, Fierce as the crashing fire-bolt sent By him who rules the firmament,(555) Shall reach thy wicked foe and like Infuriate serpents hiss and strike. Thou, Vánar King, this day shalt see The foe who long has injured thee Lie, like a shattered mountain, low, Slain by the tempest of my bow.”

  Thus Ráma spake: Sugríva heard, And mighty joy his bosom stirred: As thus his champion he addressed: “Now by thy favour, first and best Of heroes, shall thy friend obtain His realm and darling wife again     Recovered from the foe. Check thou mine elder brother’s might; That ne’er again his deadly spite May rob me of mine ancient right,     Or vex my soul with woe.” The league was struck, a league to bring To Sítá fiends, and Vánar king(556)     Apportioned bliss and bale. Through her left eye quick throbbings shot,(557) Glad signs the lady doubted not,     That told their hopeful tale. The bright left eye of Báli felt An inauspicious throb that dealt     A deadly blow that day. The fiery left eyes of the crew Of demons felt the throb, and knew     The herald of dismay.




Canto VI. The Tokens.


With joy that sprang from hope restored To Ráma spake the Vánar lord: “I know, by wise Hanúmán taught, Why thou the lonely wood hast sought. Where with thy brother Lakshmaṇ thou Hast sojourned, bound by hermit vow; Have heard how Sítá, Janak’s child, Was stolen in the pathless wild, How by a roving Rákshas she Weeping was reft from him and thee; How, bent on death, the giant slew The vulture king, her guardian true, And gave thy widowed breast to know A solitary mourner’s woe. But soon, dear Prince, thy heart shall be From every trace of sorrow free; For I thy darling will restore, Lost like the prize of holy lore.(558) Yea, though in heaven the lady dwell, Or prisoned in the depths of hell, My friendly care her way shall track And bring thy ransomed darling back. Let this my promise soothe thy care, Nor doubt the words I truly swear. Saints, fiends, and dwellers of the skies Shall find thy wife a bitter prize, Like the rash child who rues too late The treacherous lure of poisoned cate. No longer, Prince, thy loss deplore: Thy darling wife will I restore. ’Twas she I saw: my heart infers That shrinking form was doubtless hers, Which gaint Rávaṇ, fierce and dread, Bore swiftly through the clouds o’erhead Still writhing in his strict embrace Like helpless queen of serpent race,(559) And from her lips that sad voice came Shrieking thine own and Lakshmaṇ’s name. High on a hill she saw me stand With comrades twain on either hand. Her outer robe to earth she threw, And with it sent her anklets too. We saw the glittering tokens fall, We found them there and kept them all. These will I bring: perchance thine eyes The treasured spoils will recognize.”

  He ceased: then Raghu’s son replied To the glad tale, and eager cried: “Bring them with all thy speed: delay No more, dear friend, but haste away.”

  Thus Ráma spoke. Sugríva hied Within the mountain’s caverned side, Impelled by love that stirred each thought The precious tokens quickly brought, And said to Raghu’s son: Behold This garment and these rings of gold. In Ráma’s hand with friendly haste The jewels and the robe he placed. Then, like the moon by mist assailed, The tear-dimmed eyes of Ráma failed; That burst of woe unmanned his frame, Woe sprung from passion for his dame, And with his manly strength o’erthrown, He fell and cried, Ah me! mine own! Again, again close to his breast The ornaments and robe he pressed, While the quick pants that shook his frame As from a furious serpent came. On his dear brother standing nigh He turned at length his piteous eye; And, while his tears increasing ran, In bitter wail he thus began: “Look, brother, and behold once more The ornaments and robe she wore, Dropped while the giant bore away In cruel arras his struggling prey, Dropped in some quiet spot, I ween, Where the young grass was soft and green; For still untouched by spot or stain Their former beauty all retain.”

  He spoke with many a tear and sigh, And thus his brother made reply: “The bracelets thou hast fondly shown, And earrings, are to me unknown, But by long service taught I greet The anklets of her honoured feet.”(560)

  Then to Sugríva Ráma, best Of Raghu’s sons, these words addressed:

  “Say to what quarter of the sky The cruel fiend was seen to fly, Bearing afar my captured wife, My darling dearer than my life. Speak, Vánar King, that I may know Where dwells the cause of all my woe; The fiend for whose transgression all The giants by this hand shall fall. He who the Maithil lady stole And kindled fury in my soul, Has sought his fate in senseless pride And opened Death’s dark portal wide. Then tell me, Vánar lord, I pray,   The dwelling of my foe, And he, beneath this hand, to-day   To Yáma’s halls shall go.”




Canto VII. Ráma Consoled.


With longing love and woe oppressed The Vánar chief he thus addressed: And he, while sobs his utterance broke, Raised up his reverent hands and spoke:

  “O Raghu’s son, I cannot tell Where now that cruel fiend may dwell, Declare his power and might, or trace The author of his cursed race. Still trust the promise that I make And let thy breast no longer ache. So will I toil, nor toil in vain, That thou thy consort mayst regain. So will I work with might and skill That joy anew thy heart shall fill: The valour of my soul display, And Rávaṇ and his legions slay. Awake, awake! unmanned no more Recall the strength was thine of yore. Beseems not men like thee to wear A weak heart yielding to despair. Like troubles, too, mine eyes have seen, Lamenting for a long-lost queen; But, by despair unconquered yet, My strength of mind I ne’er forget. Far more shouldst thou of lofty soul Thy passion and thy tears control, When I, of Vánar’s humbler strain, Weep not for her in ceaseless pain. Be firm, be patient, nor forget The bounds the brave of heart have set In loss, in woe, in strife, in fear, When the dark hour of death is near. Up! with thine own brave heart advise: Not thus despond the firm and wise. But he who gives his childish heart To choose the coward’s weakling part, Sinks, like a foundered vessel, deep In waves of woe that o’er him sweep. See, suppliant hand to hand I lay, And, moved by faithful love, I pray. Give way no more to grief and gloom, But all thy native strength resume. No joy on earth, I ween, have they Who yield their souls to sorrow’s sway. Their glory fades in slow decline: ’Tis not for thee to grieve and pine. I do but hint with friendly speech The wiser part I dare not teach. This better path, dear friend, pursue, And let not grief thy soul subdue.”

  Sugríva thus with gentle art And sweet words soothed the mourner’s heart, Who brushed off with his mantle’s hem Tears from the eyes bedewed with them. Sugríva’s words were not in vain, And Ráma was himself again, Around the king his arms he threw And thus began his speech anew:

  “Whate’er a friend most wise and true, Who counsels for the best, should do, Whate’er his gentle part should be, Has been performed, dear friend, by thee. Taught by thy counsel, O my lord, I feel my native strength restored. A friend like thee is hard to gain, Most rare in time of grief and pain. Now strain thine utmost power to trace The Maithil lady’s dwelling place, And aid me in my search to find Fierce Rávaṇ of the impious mind. Trust thou, in turn, thy loyal friend, And say what aid this arm can lend To speed thy hopes, as fostering rain Quickens in earth the scattered grain. Deem not those words, that seemed to spring From pride, are false, O Vánar King. None from these lips has ever heard, None e’er shall hear, one lying word. Again I promise and declare, Yea, by my truth, dear friend, I swear.”

  Then glad was King Sugríva’s breast, And all his lords their joy confessed, Stirred by sure hope of Ráma’s aid, And promise which the prince had made.




Canto VIII. Ráma’s Promise.


Doubt from Sugríva’s heart had fled, And thus to Raghu’s son he said: “No bliss the Gods of heaven deny. Each views me with a favouring eye, When thou, whom all good gifts attend, Hast sought me and become my friend. Leagued, friend, with thee in bold emprise My arm might win the conquered skies; And shall our banded strength be weak To gain the realm which now I seek? A happy fate was mine above My kith and kin and all I love, When, near the witness fire, I won Thy friendship, Raghu’s glorious son. Thou too in ripening time shall see Thy friend not all unworthy thee. What gifts I have shall thus be shown: Not mine the tongue to make them known. Strong is the changeless bond that binds The friendly faith of noble minds, In woe, in danger, firm and sure Their constancy and love endure. Gold, silver, jewels rich and rare They count as wealth for friends to share. Yea, be they rich or poor and low, Blest with all joys or sunk in woe, Stained with each fault or pure of blame, Their friends the nearest place may claim; For whom they leave, at friendship’s call, Their gold, their bliss, their homes and all.”

  He spoke by generous impulse moved, And Raghu’s son his speech approved Glancing at Lakshmaṇ by his side, Like Indra in his beauty’s pride. The Vánar monarch saw the pair Of mighty brothers standing there, And turned his rapid eye to view The forest trees that near him grew. He saw, not far from where he stood, A Sál tree towering o’er the wood. Amid the thick leaves many a bee Graced the scant blossoms of the tree, From whose dark shade a bough, that bore A load of leafy twigs, he tore, Which on the grassy ground he laid And seats for him and Ráma made. Hanúmán saw them sit, he sought A Sál tree’s leafy bough and brought The burthen, and with meek request Entreated Lakshmaṇ, too, to rest. There on the noble mountain’s brow, Strewn with the young leaves of the bough, Sat Raghu’s son in placid ease Calm as the sea when sleeps the breeze. Sugríva’s heart with rapture swelled, And thus, by eager love impelled, He spoke in gracious tone, that, oft Checked by his joy, was low and soft: “I, by my brother’s might oppressed, By ceaseless woe and fear distressed, Mourning my consort far away, On Rishyamúka’s mountain stray. Expelled by Báli’s cruel hate I wander here disconsolate. Do thou to whom all sufferers flee, From his dread hand deliver me.”

  He spoke, and Ráma, just and brave, Whose pious soul to virtue clave, Smiled as in conscious might he eyed The king of Vánars, and replied: “Best fruit of friendship is the deed That helps the friend in hour of need; And this mine arm in death shall lay Thy robber ere the close of day. For see, these feathered darts of mine Whose points so fiercely flash and shine, And shafts with golden emblem, came From dark woods known by Skanda’s name,(561) Winged from the pinion of the hern Like Indra’s bolts they strike and burn. With even knots and piercing head Each like a furious snake is sped; With these, to-day, before thine eye Shall, like a shattered mountain, lie Báli, thy dread and wicked foe, O’erwhelmed in hideous overthrow.”

  He spoke: Sugríva’s bosom swelled With hope and joy unparalleled. Then his glad voice the Vánar raised, And thus the son of Raghu praised: “Long have I pined in depth of grief; Thou art the hope of all, O chief. Now, Raghu’s son, I hail thee friend, And bid thee to my woes attend; For, by my truth I swear it, now Not life itself is dear as thou, Since by the witness fire we met And friendly hand in hand was set. Friend communes now with friend, and hence I tell with surest confidence, How woes that on my spirit weigh Consume me through the night and day.”

  For sobs and sighs he scarce could speak, And his sad voice came low and weak, As, while his eyes with tears o’erflowed, The burden of his soul he showed. Then by strong effort, bravely made, The torrent of his tears he stayed, Wiped his bright eyes, his grief subdued, And thus, more calm, his speech renewed:

  “By Báli’s conquering might oppressed, Of power and kingship dispossessed, Loaded with taunts of scorn and hate I left my realm and royal state. He tore away my consort: she Was dearer than my life to me, And many a friend to me and mine In hopeless chains was doomed to pine. With wicked thoughts, unsated still, Me whom he wrongs he yearns to kill; And spies of Vánar race, who tried To slay me, by this hand have died. Moved by this constant doubt and fear I saw thee, Prince, and came not near. When woe and peril gather round A foe in every form is found. Save Hanumán, O Raghu’s son, And these, no friend is left me, none. Through their kind aid, a faithful band Who guard their lord from hostile hand, Rest when their chieftain rests and bend Their steps where’er he lists to wend,— Through them alone, in toil and pain, My wretched life I still sustain. Enough, for thou hast heard in brief The story of my pain and grief. His mighty strength all regions know, My brother, but my deadly foe. Ah, if the proud oppressor fell, His death would all my woe dispel. Yea, on my cruel conqueror’s fall My joy depends, my life, my all. This were the end and sure relief, O Ráma, of my tale of grief. Fair be his lot or dark with woe, No comfort like a friend I know.”

  Then Ráma spoke: “O friend, relate Whence sprang fraternal strife and hate, That duly taught by thee, I may Each foeman’s strength and weakness weigh: And skilled in every chance restore The blissful state thou hadst before. For, when I think of all the scorn And bitter woe thou long hast borne, My soul indignant swells with pain Like waters flushed with furious rain. Then, ere I string this bended bow, Tell me the tale I long to know, Ere from the cord my arrow fly, And low in death thy foeman lie.”

  He spoke: Sugríva joyed to hear, Nor less his lords were glad of cheer: And thus to Ráma mighty-souled The cause that moved their strife he told:




Canto IX. Sugríva’s Story.(562)


“My brother, known by Báli’s name, Had won by might a conqueror’s fame. My father’s eldest-born was he, Well honoured by his sire and me. My father died, and each sage lord Named Báli king with one accord; And he, by right of birth ordained, The sovereign of the Vánars reigned. He in his royal place controlled The kingdom of our sires of old, And I all faithful service lent To aid my brother’s government. The fiend Máyáví,—him of yore To Dundubhi(563) his mother bore,— For woman’s love in strife engaged, A deadly war with Báli waged. When sleep had chained each weary frame To vast Kishkindhá(564) gates he came, And, shouting through the shades of night, Challenged his foeman to the fight. My brother heard the furious shout, And wild with rage rushed madly out, Though fain would I and each sad wife Detain him from the deadly strife. He burned his demon foe to slay, And rushed impetuous to the fray. His weeping wives he thrust aside, And forth, impelled by fury, hied; While, by my love and duty led, I followed where my brother sped. Máyáví looked, and at the sight Fled from his foes in wild affright. The flying fiend we quickly viewed, And with swift feet his steps pursued. Then rose the moon, whose friendly ray Cast light upon our headlong way. By the soft beams was dimly shown A mighty cave with grass o’ergrown. Within its depths he sprang, and we The demon’s form no more might see. My brother’s breast was all aglow With fury when he missed the foe, And, turning, thus to me he said With senses all disquieted: “Here by the cavern’s mouth remain; Keep ear and eye upon the strain, While I the dark recess explore And dip my brand in foeman’s gore.” I heard his angry speech, and tried To turn him from his plan aside. He made me swear by both his feet, And sped within the dark retreat. While in the cave he stayed, and I Watched at the mouth, a year went by. For his return I looked in vain, And, moved by love, believed him slain. I mourned, by doubt and fear distressed, And greater horror seized my breast When from the cavern rolled a flood, A carnage stream of froth and blood; And from the depths a sound of fear, The roar of demons, smote mine ear; But never rang my brother’s shout Triumphant in the battle rout. I closed the cavern with a block, Huge as a hill, of shattered rock. Gave offerings due to Báli’s shade, And sought Kishkindhá, sore dismayed. Long time with anxious care I tried From Báli’s lords his fate to hide, But they, when once the tale was known, Placed me as king on Báli’s throne. There for a while I justly reigned And all with equal care ordained, When joyous from the demon slain My brother Báli came again. He found me ruling in his stead, And, fired with rage, his eyes grew red. He slew the lords who made me king, And spoke keen words to taunt and sting. The kingly rank and power I held My brother’s rage with ease had quelled, But still, restrained by old respect For claims of birth, the thought I checked. Thus having struck the demon down Came Báli to his royal town. With meek respect, with humble speech, His haughty heart I strove to reach. But all my arts were tried in vain, No gentle word his lips would deign, Though to the ground I bent and set His feet upon my coronet: Still Báli in his rage and pride All signs of grace and love denied.”




Canto X. Sugríva’s Story.


“I strove to soothe and lull to rest The fury of his troubled breast: “Well art thou come, dear lord,” I cried. “By whose strong arm thy foe has died. Forlorn I languished here, but now My saviour and defence art thou. Once more receive this regal shade(565) Like the full moon in heaven displayed; And let the chouries,(566) thus restored, Wave glorious o’er the rightful lord. I kept my watch, thy word obeyed, And by the cave a year I stayed. But when I saw that stream of blood Rush from the cavern in a flood, My sad heart broken with dismay, And every wandering sense astray, I barred the entrance with a stone,— A crag from some high mountain thrown— Turned from the spot I watched in vain, And to Kishkindhá came again. My deep distress and downcast mien By citizen and lord were seen. They made me king against my will: Forgive me if the deed was ill. True as I ever was I see My honoured king once more in thee; I only ruled a while the state When thou hadst left us desolate. This town with people, lords, and lands, Lay as a trust in guardian hands: And now, my gracious lord, accept The kingdom which thy servant kept. Forgive me, victor of the foe, Nor let thy wrath against me glow. See joining suppliant hands I pray, And at thy feet my head I lay. Believe my words: against my will The royal seat they made me fill. Unkinged they saw the city, hence They made me lord for her defence.”

  But Báli, though I humbly sued, Reviled me in his furious mood: “Out on thee, wretch!” in wrath he cried With many a bitter taunt beside. He summoned every lord, and all His subjects gathered at his call. Then forth his burning anger broke, And thus amid his friends he spoke: “I need not tell, for well ye know, How fierce Máyáví, fiend and foe, Came to Kishkindhá’s gate by night, And dared me in his wrath to fight. I heard each word the demon said: Forth from my royal hall I sped; And, foe in brother’s guise concealed, Sugríva followed to the field. The mighty demon through the shade Beheld me come with one to aid: Then shrinking from unequal fight, He turned his back in swiftest flight. From vengeful foes his life to save He sought the refuge of a cave. Then when I saw the fiend had fled Within that cavern dark and dread, Thus to my brother cruel-eyed, Impatient in my wrath, I cried: “I seek no more my royal town Till I have struck the demon down. Here by the cavern’s mouth remain Until my hand the foe have slain.” Upon his faith my heart relied, And swift within the depths I hied. A year went by: in every spot I sought the fiend, but found him not. At length my foe I saw and slew, Whom long I feared when lost to view; And all his kinsmen by his side Beneath my vengeful fury died. The monster, as he reeled and fell, Poured forth his blood with roar and yell; And, filling all the cavern, dyed The portal with the crimson tide. Upon my foeman slain at last One look, one pitying look, I cast. I sought again the light of day: The cave was closed and left no way. To the barred mouth I sadly came, And called aloud Sugríva’s name. But all was still: no voice replied, And hope within my bosom died. With furious efforts, vain at first, Through bars of rock my way I burst. Then, free once more, the path that brought My feet in safety home I sought. ’Twas thus Sugríva dared despise The claim of brothers’ friendly ties. With crags of rock he barred me in, And for himself the realm would win.”

  Thus Báli spoke in words severe; And then, unmoved by ruth or fear, Left me a single robe and sent His brother forth in banishment. He cast me out with scathe and scorn, And from my side my wife was torn. Now in great fear and ill at ease I roam this land with woods and seas, Or dwell on Rishyamúka’s hill, And sorrow for my consort still. Thou hast the tale how first arose This bitter hate of brother foes. Such are the griefs neath which I pine, And all without a fault of mine. O swift to save in hour of fear, My prayer who dread this Báli, hear With gracious love assistance deign, And mine oppressor’s arm restrain.”

  Then Raghu’s son, the good and brave, With a gay laugh his answer gave: “These shafts of mine which ne’er can fail, Before whose sheen the sun grows pale, Winged by my fury, fleet and fierce, The wicked Báli’s heart shall pierce. Yea, mark the words I speak, so long Shall live that wretch who joys in wrong, Until these angered eyes have seen The robber of thy darling queen. I, taught by equal suffering, know What waves of grief above thee flow. This hand thy captive wife shall free, And give thy kingdom back to thee.”

  Sugríva joyed as Ráma spoke, And valour in his breast awoke. His eye grew bright, his heart grew bold, And thus his wondrous tale he told:




Canto XI. Dundubhi.


“I doubt not, Prince, thy peerless might, Armed with these shafts so keen and bright, Like all-destroying fires of fate, The worlds could burn and devastate. But lend thou first thy mind and ear Of Báli’s power and might to hear. How bold, how firm, in battle tried, Is Báli’s heart; and then decide. From east to west, from south to north On restless errand hurrying forth, From farthest sea to sea he flies Before the sun has lit the skies. A mountain top he oft will seek, Tear from its root a towering peak, Hurl it aloft, as ’twere a ball, And catch it ere to earth it fall. And many a tree that long has stood In health and vigour in the wood, His single arm to earth will throw, The marvels of his might to show. Shaped like a bull, a monster bore The name of Dundubhi of yore: He matched in size a mountain height, A thousand elephants in might. By pride of wondrous gifts impelled, And strength he deemed unparalleled, To Ocean, lord of stream and brook, Athirst for war, his way he took. He reached the king of rolling waves Whose gems are piled in sunless caves, And threw his challenge to the sea; “Come forth, O King, and fight with me.” He spoke, and from his ocean bed The righteous(567) monarch heaved his head, And gave, sedate, his calm reply To him whom fate impelled to die: “Not mine, not mine the power,” he cried, “To cope with thee in battle tried; But listen to my voice, and seek The worthier foe of whom I speak. The Lord of Hills, where hermits live And love the home his forests give, Whose child is Śankar’s darling queen,(568) The King of Snows is he I mean. Deep caves has he, and dark boughs shade The torrent and the wild cascade. From him expect the fierce delight Which heroes feel in equal fight.”

  He deemed that fear checked ocean’s king, And, like an arrow from the string, To the wild woods that clothe the side Of Lord Himálaya’s hills he hied. Then Dundubhi, with hideous roar, Huge fragments from the summit tore Vast as Airávat,(569) white with snow, And hurled them to the plains below. Then like a white cloud soft, serene, The Lord of Mountains’ form was seen. It sat upon a lofty crest, And thus the furious fiend addressed: “Beseems thee not, O virtue’s friend, My mountain tops to rive and rend; For I, the hermit’s calm retreat, For deeds of war am all unmeet.”

  The demon’s eye with rage grew red, And thus in furious tone he said: “If thou from fear or sloth decline To match thy strength in war with mine, Where shall I find a champion, say, To meet me burning for the fray?” He spoke: Himálaya, skilled in lore Of eloquence, replied once more, And, angered in his righteous mind, Addressed the chief of demon kind: “The Vánar Báli, brave and wise, Son of the God who rules the skies,(570) Sways, glorious in his high renown, Kishkindhá his imperial town. Well may that valiant lord who knows Each art of war his might oppose To thine, in equal battle set, As Namuehi(571) and Indra met. Go, if thy soul desire the fray; To Báli’s city speed away, And that unconquered hero meet Whose fame is high for warlike feat.” He listened to the Lord of Snow, And, his proud heart with rage aglow, Sped swift away and lighted down By vast Kishkindhá, Báli’s town. With pointed horns to strike and gore The semblance of a bull he bore, Huge as a cloud that downward bends Ere the full flood of rain descends. Impelled by pride and rage and hate, He thundered at Kishkindhá’s gate; And with his bellowing, like the sound Of pealing drums, he shook the ground, He rent the earth and prostrate threw The trees that near the portal grew. King Báli from the bowers within Indignant heard the roar and din. Then, moonlike mid the stars, with all His dames he hurried to the wall; And to the fiend this speech, expressed In clear and measured words, addressed: “Know me for monarch. Báli styled, Of Vánar tribes that roam the wild. Say why dost thou this gate molest, And bellowing thus disturb our rest? I know thee, mighty fiend: beware And guard thy life with wiser care.” He spoke: and thus the fiend returned, While red with rage his eyeballs burned: “What! speak when all thy dames are nigh And hero-like thy foe defy? Come, meet me in the fight this day, And learn my strength by bold assay. Or shall I spare thee, and relent Until the coming night be spent? Take then the respite of a night And yield thee to each soft delight. Then, monarch of the Vánar race With loving arms thy friends embrace. Gifts on thy faithful lords bestow, Bid each and all farewell, and go. Show in the streets once more thy face, Install thy son to fill thy place. Dally a while with each dear dame; And then my strength thy pride shall tame For, should I smite thee drunk with wine Enamoured of those dames of thine, Beneath diseases bowed and bent, Or weak, unarmed, or negligent, My deed would merit hate and scorn As his who slays the child unborn.” Then Báli’s soul with rage was fired, Queen Tára and the dames retired; And slowly, with a laugh of pride, The king of Vánars thus replied: “Me, fiend, thou deemest drunk with wine: Unless thy fear the fight decline, Come, meet me in the fray, and test The spirit of my valiant breast.” He spoke in wrath and high disdain; And, laying down his golden chain, Gift of his sire Mahendra, dared The demon, for the fray prepared; Seized by the horns the monster, vast As a huge hill, and held him fast, Then fiercely dragged him round and round, And, shouting, hurled him to the ground. Blood streaming from his ears, he rose, And wild with fury strove the foes. Then Báli, match for Indra’s might, With every arm renewed the fight. He fought with fists, and feet, and knees, With fragments of the rock, and trees. At last the monster’s strength, assailed By Śakra’s(572) conquering offspring, failed. Him Báli raised with mighty strain And dashed upon the ground again; Where, bruised and shattered, in a tide Of rushing blood, the demon died. King Báli saw the lifeless corse, And bending, with tremendous force Raised the huge bulk from where it lay, And hurled it full a league away. As through the air the body flew, Some blood-drops, caught by gales that blew, Welled from his shattered jaw and fell By Saint Matanga’s hermit cell: Matanga saw, illustrious sage, Those drops defile his hermitage, And, as he marvelled whence they came, Fierce anger filled his soul with flame: “Who is the villain, evil-souled, With childish thoughts unwise and bold, Who is the impious wretch,” he cried, “By whom my grove with blood is dyed?”

  Thus spoke Matanga in his rage, And hastened from the hermitage, When lo, before his wondering eyes Lay the dead bull of mountain size. His hermit soul was nothing slow The doer of the deed to know, And thus the Vánar in a burst Of wild tempestuous wrath he cursed: “Ne’er let that Vánar wander here, For, if he come, his death is near, Whose impious hand with blood has dyed The holy place where I abide, Who threw this demon corse and made A ruin of the pleasant shade. If e’er he plant his wicked feet Within one league of my retreat; Yea, if the villain come so nigh That very hour he needs must die. And let the Vánar lords who dwell In the dark woods that skirt my cell Obey my words, and speeding hence Find them some meeter residence. Here if they dare to stay, on all The terrors of my curse shall fall. They spoil the tender saplings, dear As children which I cherish here, Mar root and branch and leaf and spray, And steal the ripening fruit away. One day I grant, no further hour, To-morrow shall my curse have power, And then each Vánar I may see A stone through countless years shall be.” The Vánars heard the curse and hied From sheltering wood and mountain side. King Báli marked their haste and dread, And to the flying leaders said: “Speak, Vánar chiefs, and tell me why From Saint Matanga’s grove ye fly To gather round me: is it well With all who in those woodlands dwell?” He spoke: the Vánar leaders told King Báli with his chain of gold What curse the saint had on them laid, Which drove them from their ancient shade. Then royal Báli sought the sage, With reverent hands to soothe his rage. The holy man his suppliant spurned, And to his cell in anger turned. That curse on Báli sorely pressed, And long his conscious soul distressed. Him still the curse and terror keep Afar from Rishyamúka’s steep. He dares not to the grove draw nigh, Nay scarce will hither turn his eye. We know what terrors warm him hence, And roam these woods in confidence. Look, Prince, before thee white and dry The demon’s bones uncovered lie, Who, like a hill in bulk and length, Fell ruind for his pride of strength. See those high Sál trees seven in row That droop their mighty branches low, These at one grasp would Báli seize, And leafless shake the trembling trees. These tales I tell, O Prince, to show The matchless power that arms the foe. How canst thou hope to slay him? how Meet Báli in the battle now?”

  Sugríva spoke and sadly sighed: And Lakshmaṇ with a laugh replied: “What show of power, what proof and test May still the doubts that fill thy breast?”

  He spoke. Sugríva thus replied: “See yonder Sál trees side by side. King Báli here would take his stand Grasping his bow with vigorous hand, And every arrow, keen and true, Would strike its tree and pierce it through. If Ráma now his bow will bend, And through one trunk an arrow send; Or if his arm can raise and throw Two hundred measures of his bow, Grasped by a foot and hurled through air, The demon bull that moulders there, My heart will own his might and fain Believe my foe already slain.”

  Sugríva spoke inflamed with ire, Scanned Ráma with a glance of fire, Pondered a while in silent mood. And thus again his speech renewed: “All lands with Báli’s glories ring, A valiant, strong, and mighty king; In conscious power unused to yield, A hero first in every field. His wondrous deeds his might declare, Deeds Gods might scarcely do or dare; And on this power reflecting still I roam on Rishyamúka’s hill. Awed by my brother’s might I rove, In doubt and fear, from grove to grove, While Hanumán, my chosen friend, And faithful lords my steps attend; And now, O true to friendship’s tie, I hail in thee my best ally. My surest refuge from my foes, And steadfast as the Lord of Snows. Still, when I muse how strong and bold Is cruel Báli, evil-souled, But ne’er, O chief of Raghu’s line, Have seen what strength in war is thine, Though in my heart I may not dare Doubt thy great might, despise, compare, Thoughts of his fearful deeds will rise And fill my soul with sad surmise. Speech, form, and trust which naught may move Thy secret strength and glory prove, As smouldering ashes dimly show The dormant fires that live below.”

  He ceased: and Ráma answered, while Played o’er his lips a gracious smile: “Not yet convinced? This clear assay Shall drive each lingering doubt away.” Thus Ráma spoke his heart to cheer, To Dundubhi’s vast frame drew near: He touched it with his foot in play And sent it twenty leagues away. Sugríva marked what easy force Hurled through the air that demon’s corse Whose mighty bones were white and dried, And to the son of Raghu cried: “My brother Báli, when his might Was drunk and weary from the fight, Hurled forth the monster body, fresh With skin and sinews, blood and flesh. Now flesh and blood are dried away, The crumbling bones are light as hay, Which thou, O Raghu’s son, hast sent Flying through air in merriment. This test alone is weak to show If thou be stronger or the foe. By thee a heap of mouldering bone, By him the recent corse was thrown. Thy strength, O Prince, is yet untried: Come, pierce one tree: let this decide. Prepare thy ponderous bow and bring Close to thine ear the straining string. On yonder Sál tree fix thine eye, And let the mighty arrow fly, I doubt not, chief, that I shall see Thy pointed shaft transfix the tree. Then come, assay the easy task, And do for love the thing I ask.   Best of all lights, the Day-God fills     With glory earth and sky:   Himálaya is the lord of hills     That heave their heads on high.   The royal lion is the best     Of beasts that tread the earth;   And thou, O hero, art confessed     First in heroic worth.”




Canto XII. The Palm Trees.


Then Ráma, that his friend might know His strength unrivalled, grasped his bow, That mighty bow the foe’s dismay,— And on the string an arrow lay. Next on the tree his eye he bent, And forth the hurtling weapon went. Loosed from the matchless hero’s hold, That arrow, decked with burning gold, Cleft the seven palms in line, and through The hill that rose behind them flew: Six subterranean realms it passed, And reached the lowest depth at last, Whence speeding back through earth and air It sought the quiver, and rested there.(573) Upon the cloven trees amazed, The sovereign of the Vánars gazed. With all his chains and gold outspread Prostrate on earth he laid his head. Then, rising, palm to palm he laid In reverent act, obeisance made, And joyously to Ráma, best Of war-trained chiefs, these words addressed:

  “What champion, Raghu’s son, may hope With thee in deadly fight to cope, Whose arrow, leaping from the bow, Cleaves tree and hill and earth below? Scarce might the Gods, arrayed for strife By Indra’s self, escape, with life Assailed by thy victorious hand: And how may Báli hope to stand? All grief and care are past away, And joyous thoughts my bosom sway, Who have in thee a friend, renowned, As Varuṇ(574) or as Indra, found. Then on! subdue,—’tis friendship’s claim,— My foe who bears a brother’s name. Strike Báli down beneath thy feet: With suppliant hands I thus entreat.” Sugríva ceased, and Ráma pressed The grateful Vánar to his breast; And thoughts of kindred feeling woke In Lakshmaṇ’s bosom, as he spoke: “On to Kishkindhá, on with speed! Thou, Vánar King, our way shalt lead, Then challenge Báli forth to fight. Thy foe who scorns a brother’s right.”

  They sought Kishkindhá’s gate and stood Concealed by trees in densest wood, Sugríva, to the fight addressed, More closely drew his cinctured vest, And raised a wild sky-piercing shout To call the foeman Báli out.

  Forth came impetuous Báli, stirred To fury by the shout he heard. So the great sun, ere night has ceased, Springs up impatient to the east. Then fierce and wild the conflict raged As hand to hand the foes engaged, As though in battle mid the stars Fought Mercury and fiery Mars.(575) To highest pitch of frenzy wrought With fists like thunderbolts they fought, While near them Ráma took his stand, And viewed the battle, bow in hand. Alike they stood in form and might, Like heavenly Aśvins(576) paired in fight, Nor might the son of Raghu know Where fought the friend and where the foe; So, while his bow was ready bent, No life-destroying shaft he sent. Crushed down by Báli’s mightier stroke Sugríva’s force now sank and broke, Who, hoping naught from Ráma’s aid, To Rishyamúka fled dismayed, Weary, and faint, and wounded sore, His body bruised and dyed with gore, From Báli’s blows, in rage and dread, Afar to sheltering woods he fled.

  Nor Báli farther dared pursue, The curbing curse too well he knew. “Fled from thy death!” the victor cried, And home the mighty warrior hied. Hanúmán, Lakshmaṇ, Raghu’s son Beheld the conquered Vánar run, And followed to the sheltering shade Where yet Sugríva stood dismayed. Near and more near the chieftains came, Then, for intolerable shame, Not daring yet to lift his eyes, Sugríva spoke with burning sighs: “Thy matchless strength I first beheld, And dared my foe, by thee impelled. Why hast thou tried me with deceit And urged me to a sure defeat? Thou shouldst have said, “I will not slay Thy foeman in the coming fray.” For had I then thy purpose known I had not waged the fight alone.”

  The Vánar sovereign, lofty-souled, In plaintive voice his sorrows told. Then Ráma spake: “Sugríva, list, All anger from thy heart dismissed, And I will tell the cause that stayed Mine arrow, and withheld the aid. In dress, adornment, port, and height, In splendour, battle-shout, and might, No shade of difference could I see Between thy foe, O King, and thee. So like was each, I stood at gaze, My senses lost in wildering maze, Nor loosened from my straining bow A deadly arrow at the foe, Lest in my doubt the shaft should send To sudden death our surest friend. O, if this hand in heedless guilt And rash resolve thy blood had spilt, Through every land, O Vánar King, My wild and foolish act would ring. Sore weight of sin on him must lie By whom a friend is made to die; And Lakshmaṇ, I, and Sítá, best Of dames, on thy protection rest. On, warrior! for the fight prepare; Nor fear again thy foe to dare. Within one hour thine eye shall view My arrow strike thy foeman through; Shall see the stricken Báli lie Low on the earth, and gasp and die. But come, a badge about thee bind, O monarch of the Vánar kind, That in the battle shock mine eyes The friend and foe may recognize. Come, Lakshmaṇ, let that creeper deck With brightest bloom Sugríva’s neck, And be a happy token, twined Around the chief of lofty mind.”

  Upon the mountain slope there grew A threading creeper fair to view, And Lakshmaṇ plucked the bloom and round Sugríva’s neck a garland wound. Graced with the flowery wreath he wore, The Vánar chief the semblance bore Of a dark cloud at close of day Engarlanded with cranes at play, In glorious light the Vánar glowed As by his comrade’s side he strode, And, still on Ráma’s word intent, His steps to great Kishkindhá bent.




Canto XIII. The Return To Kishkindhá.


Thus with Sugríva, from the side Of Rishyamúka, Ráma hied, And stood before Kishkindhá’s gate Where Báli kept his regal state. The hero in his warrior hold Raised his great bow adorned with gold, And drew his pointed arrow bright As sunbeams, finisher of fight. Strong-necked Sugríva led the way With Lakshmaṇ mighty in the fray. Nala and Níla came behind With Hanumán of lofty mind, And valiant Tára, last in place, A leader of the Vánar race. They gazed on many a tree that showed The glory of its pendent load, And brook and limpid rill that made Sweet murmurs as they seaward strayed. They looked on caverns dark and deep, On bower and glen and mountain steep, And saw the opening lotus stud With roseate cup the crystal flood, While crane and swan and coot and drake Made pleasant music on the lake, And from the reedy bank was heard The note of many a happy bird. In open lawns, in tangled ways, They saw the tall deer stand at gaze, Or marked them free and fearless roam, Fed with sweet grass, their woodland home. At times two flashing tusks between The wavings of the wood were seen, And some mad elephant, alone, Like a huge moving hill, was shown. And scarcely less in size appeared Great monkeys all with dust besmeared. And various birds that roam the skies, And silvan creatures, met their eyes, As through the wood the chieftains sped, And followed where Sugríva led.

  Then Ráma, as their way they made, Saw near at hand a lovely shade, And, as he gazed upon the trees, Spake to Sugríva words like these; “Those stately trees in beauty rise, Fair as a cloud in autumn skies. I fain, my friend, would learn from thee What pleasant grove is that I see.”

  Thus Ráma spake, the mighty souled; And thus his tale Sugríva told:

  “That, Ráma, is a wide retreat That brings repose to weary feet. Bright streams and fruit and roots are there, And shady gardens passing fair. There, neath the roof of hanging boughs, The sacred Seven maintained their vows. Their heads in dust were lowly laid, In streams their nightly beds were made. Each seventh night they broke their fast, But air was still their sole repast, And when seven hundred years were spent To homes in heaven the hermits went. Their glory keeps the garden yet, With walls of stately trees beset. Scarce would the Gods and demons dare, By Indra led, to enter there. No beast that roams the wood is found, No bird of air, within the bound; Or, thither if they idly stray, They find no more their homeward way. You hear at times mid dulcet tones The chime of anklets, rings, and zones. You hear the song and music sound, And heavenly fragrance breathes around, There duly burn the triple fires(577) Where mounts the smoke in curling spires, And, in a dun wreath, hangs above The tall trees, like a brooding dove. Round branch and crest the vapours close Till every tree enveloped shows A hill of lazulite when clouds Hang round it with their misty shrouds. With Lakshmaṇ, lord of Raghu’s line, In reverent guise thine head incline, And with fixt heart and suppliant hand Give honour to the sainted band. They who with faithful hearts revere The holy Seven who harboured here, Shall never, son of Raghu, know In all their lives an hour of woe.”

  Then Ráma and his brother bent, And did obeisance reverent With suppliant hand and lowly head, Then with Sugríva onward sped. Beyond the sainted Seven’s abode Far on their way the chieftains strode, And great Kishkindhá’s portal gained, The royal town where Báli reigned. Then by the gate they took their stand All ready armed a noble band,   And burning every one To slay in battle, hand to hand,   Their foeman, Indra’s son.




Canto XIV. The Challenge.


They stood where trees of densest green Wove round their forms a veiling screen. O’er all the garden’s pleasant shade The eyes of King Sugríva strayed, And, as on grass and tree he gazed, The fires of wrath within him blazed. Then like a mighty cloud on high, When roars the tempest through the sky, Girt by his friends he thundered out His dread sky-rending battle-shout Like some proud lion in his gait, Or as the sun begins his state, Sugríva let his quick glance rest On Ráma whom he thus addressed: “There is the seat of Báli’s sway, Where flags on wall and turret play, Which mighty bands of Vánars hold, Rich in all arms and store of gold. Thy promise to thy mind recall That Báli by thy hand shall fall. As kindly fruits adorn the bough. So give my hopes their harvest now.”

  In suppliant tone the Vánar prayed, And Raghu’s son his answer made: “By Lakshmaṇ’s hand this flowery twine Was wound about thee for a sign. The wreath of giant creeper throws About thy form its brillant glows, As though about the sun were set The bright stars for a coronet. One shaft of mine this day, dear friend, Thy sorrow and thy fear shall end. And, from the bowstring freed, shall be Giver of freedom, King, to thee. Then come, Sugríva, quickly show, Where’er he lie, thy bitter foe; And let my glance the wretch descry Whose deeds, a brother’s name belie. Yea, soon in dust and blood o’erthrown Shall Báli fall and gasp and groan. Once let this eye the foeman see, Then, if he live to turn and flee, Despise my puny strength, and shame With foul opprobrium Ráma’s name. Hast thou not seen his hand, O King, Through seven tall trees one arrow wing? Still in that strength securely trust, And deem thy foeman in the dust. In all my days, though surely tried By grief and woe, I ne’er have lied; And still by duty’s law restrained Will ne’er with falsehood’s charge be stained. Cast doubt away: the oath I sware Its kindly fruit shall quickly bear, As smiles the land with golden grain By mercy of the Lord of rain. Oh, warrior to the gate I defy Thy foe with shout and battle-cry, Till Báli with his chain of gold Come speeding from his royal hold. Proud hearts, with warlike fire aglow, Brook not the challenge of a foe: Each on his power and might relies, And most before his ladies eyes. King Báli loves the fray too well To linger in his citadel, And, when he hears thy battle-shout, All wild for war will hasten out.”

  He spoke. Sugríva raised a cry That shook and rent the echoing sky, A shout so fierce and loud and dread That stately bulls in terror fled, Like dames who fly from threatened stain In some ignoble monarch’s reign. The deer in wild confusion ran Like horses turned in battle’s van. Down fell the birds, like Gods who fall When merits fail,(578) at that dread call. So fiercely, boldened for the fray, The offspring of the Lord of Day Sent forth his furious shout as loud As thunder from a labouring cloud, Or, where the gale blows fresh and free, The roaring of the troubled sea.




Canto XV. Tárá.


That shout, which shook the land with fear, In thunder smote on Báli’s ear, Where in the chamber barred and closed The sovereign with his dame reposed. Each amorous thought was rudely stilled, And pride and rage his bosom filled. His angry eyes flashed darkly red, And all his native brightness fled, As when, by swift eclipse assailed, The glory of the sun has failed. While in his fury uncontrolled He ground his teeth, his eyeballs rolled, He seemed a lake wherein no gem Of blossom decks the lotus stem. He heard, and with indignant pride Forth from the bower the Vánar hied. And the earth trembled at the beat And fury of his hastening feet. But Tárá to her consort flew, Her loving arms around him threw, And trembling and bewildered, gave Wise counsel that might heal and save: “O dear my lord, this rage control That like a torrent floods thy soul, And cast these idle thoughts away Like faded wreath of yesterday, O tarry till the morning light, Then, if thou wilt, go forth and fight. Think not I doubt thy valour, no; Or deem thee weaker than thy foe, Yet for a while would have thee stay Nor see thee tempt the fight to-day. Now list, my loving lord, and learn The reason why I bid thee turn. Thy foeman came in wrath and pride, And thee to deadly fight defied. Thou wentest out: he fought, and fled Sore wounded and discomfited. But yet, untaught by late defeat, He comes his conquering foe to meet, And calls thee forth with cry and shout: Hence spring, my lord, this fear and doubt. A heart so bold that will not yield, But yearns to tempt the desperate field, Such loud defiance, fiercely pressed, On no uncertain hope can rest. So lately by thine arm o’erthrown, He comes not back, I ween, alone. Some mightier comrade guards his side, And spurs him to this burst of pride. For nature made the Vánar wise: On arms of might his hope relies; And never will Sugríva seek A friend whose power to save is weak. Now listen while my lips unfold The wondrous tale my Angad told. Our child the distant forest sought, And, learnt from spies, the tidings brought. Two sons of Daśaratha, sprung From old Ikshváku, brave and young, Renowned in arms, in war untamed— Ráma and Lakshmaṇ are they named— Have with thy foe Sugríva made A league of love and friendly aid. Now Ráma, famed for exploit high, Is bound thy brother’s firm ally, Like fires of doom(579) that ruin all He makes each foe before him fall. He is the suppliant’s sure defence, The tree that shelters innocence. The poor and wretched seek his feet: In him the noblest glories meet. With skill and knowledge vast and deep His sire’s commands he loved to keep; With princely gifts and graces stored As metals deck the Mountains’ Lord.(580) Thou canst not, O my hero, stand Before the might of Ráma’s hand; For none may match his powers or dare With him in deeds of war compare. Hear, I entreat, the words I say, Nor lightly turn my rede away. O let fraternal discord cease, And link you in the bonds of peace. Let consecrating rites ordain Sugríva partner of thy reign. Let war and thoughts of conflict end, And be thou his and Ráma’s friend, Each soft approach of love begin, And to thy soul thy brother win; For whether here or there he be, Thy brother still, dear lord, is he. Though far and wide these eyes I strain A friend like him I seek in vain. Let gentle words his heart incline, And gifts and honours make him thine, Till, foes no more, in love allied, You stand as brothers side by side. Thou in high rank wast wont to hold Sugríva, formed in massive mould; Then come, thy brother’s love regain, For other aids are weak and vain. If thou would please my soul, and still Preserve me from all fear and ill, I pray thee by thy love be wise And do the thing which I advise. Assuage thy fruitless wrath, and shun The mightier arms of Raghu’s son; For Indra’s peer in might is he, A foe too strong, my lord, for thee.”




Canto XVI. The Fall Of Báli.


Thus Tárá with the starry eyes(581) Her counsel gave with burning sighs. But Báli, by her prayers unmoved, Spurned her advice, and thus reproved: “How may this insult, scathe, and scorn By me, dear love, be tamely born? My brother, yea my foe, comes nigh And dares me forth with shout and cry. Learn, trembler! that the valiant, they Who yield no step in battle fray, Will die a thousand deaths but ne’er An unavenged dishonour bear. Nor, O my love, be thou dismayed Though Ráma lend Sugríva aid, For one so pure and duteous, one Who loves the right, all sin will shun, Release me from thy soft embrace, And with thy dames thy steps retrace: Enough already, O mine own, Of love and sweet devotion shown. Drive all thy fear and doubt away; I seek Sugríva in the fray His boisterous rage and pride to still, And tame the foe I would not kill. My fury, armed with brandished trees, Shall strike Sugríva to his knees: Nor shall the humbled foe withstand The blows of my avenging hand, When, nerved by rage and pride, I beat The traitor down beneath my feet. Thou, love, hast lent thine own sweet aid, And all thy tender care displayed; Now by my life, by these who yearn To serve thee well, I pray thee turn. But for a while, dear dame, I go To come triumphant o’er the foe.”

  Thus Báli spake in gentlest tone: Soft arms about his neck were thrown; Then round her lord the lady went With sad steps slow and reverent. She stood in solemn guise to bless With prayers for safety and success, Then with her train her chamber sought By grief and racking fear distraught.

  With serpent’s pantings fierce and fast King Báli from the city passed. His glance, as each quick breath he drew, Around to find the foe he threw, And saw where fierce Sugríva showed His form with golden hues that glowed, And, as a fire resplendent, stayed To meet his foe in arms arrayed. When Báli, long-armed chieftain, found Sugríva stationed on the ground, Impelled by warlike rage he braced His warrior garb about his waist, And with his mighty arm raised high Rushed at Sugríva with a cry. But when Sugríva, fierce and bold, Saw Báli with his chain of gold, His arm he heaved, his hand he closed, And face to face his foe opposed. To him whose eyes with fury shone, In charge impetuous rushing on, Skilled in each warlike art and plan, Báli with hasty words began: “My ponderous hand, to fight addressed With fingers clenched and arm compressed Shall on thy death doomed brow descend And, crashing down, thy life shall end.” He spoke; and wild with rage and pride, The fierce Sugríva thus replied: “Thus let my arm begin the strife And from thy body crush the life.”

  Then Báli, wounded and enraged, With furious blows the battle waged. Sugríva seemed, with blood-streams dyed, A hill with fountains in his side. But with his native force unspent A Sál tree from the earth he rent, And like the bolt of Indra smote On Báli’s head and chest and throat. Bruised by the blows he could not shield, Half vanquished Báli sank and reeled, As sinks a vessel with her freight Borne down by overwhelming weight. Swift as Suparṇa’s(582) swiftest flight In awful strength they rushed to fight: So might the sun and moon on high Encountering battle in the sky. Fierce and more fierce, as fought the foes, The furious rage of combat rose. They warred with feet and arms and knees, With nails and stones and boughs and trees, And blows descending fast as rain Dyed each dark form with crimson stain, While like two thunder-clouds they met With battle-cry and shout and threat. Then Ráma saw Sugríva quail, Marked his worn strength grow weak and fail. Saw how he turned his wistful eye To every quarter of the sky. His friend’s defeat he could not brook, Bent on his shaft an eager look, Then burned to slay the conquering foe, And laid his arrow on the bow. As to an orb the bow he drew Forth from the string the arrow flew Like Fate’s tremendous discus hurled By Yáma(583) forth to end the world. So loud the din that every bird The bow-string’s clans with terror heard, And wildly fled the affrighted deer As though the day of doom were near. So, deadly as the serpent’s fang, Forth from the string the arrow sprang. Like the red lightning’s flash and flame It flew unerring to its aim, And, hissing murder through the air, Pierced Báli’s breast, and quivered there. Struck by the shaft that flew so well The mighty Vánar reeled and fell, As earthward Indra’s flag they pull When Aśvíní’s fair moon is full.(584)




Canto XVII. Báli’s Speech.


Like some proud tree before the blast Brave Báli to the ground was cast, Where prostrate in the dust he rolled Clad in the sheen of glistening gold, As when uptorn the standard lies Of the great God who rules the skies. When low upon the earth was laid The lord whom Vánar tribes obeyed, Dark as a moonless sky no more His land her joyous aspect wore. Though low in dust and mire was rolled The form of Báli lofty-souled, Still life and valour, might and grace Clung to their well-loved dwelling-place. That golden chain with rich gems set, The choicest gift of Sákra,(585) yet Preserved his life nor let decay Steal strength and beauty’s light away. Still from that chain divinely wrought His dusky form a glory caught, As a dark cloud, when day is done, Made splendid by the dying sun. As fell the hero, crushed in fight, There beamed afar a triple light From limbs, from chain, from shaft that drank His life-blood as the warrior sank. The never-failing shaft, impelled By the great bow which Ráma held, Brought bliss supreme, and lit the way To Brahmá’s worlds which ne’er decay.(586)

  Ráma and Lakshmaṇ nearer drew The mighty fallen foe to view, Mahendra’s son, the brave and bold, The monarch with his chain of gold, With lustrous face and tawny eyes, Broad chest, and arms of wondrous size, Like Lord Mahendra fierce in fight, Or Vishṇu’s never-conquered might, Now fallen like Yayáti(587) sent From heaven, his store of merit spent, Like the bright flame that pales and dies, Like the great sun who fires the skies, Doomed in the general doom to fall When time shall end and ruin all.

  The wounded Báli, when he saw Ráma and Lakshmaṇ nearer draw, Keen words to Raghu’s son, impressed With justice’ holy stamp, addressed:

  “What fame, from one thou hast not slain In front of battle, canst thou gain, Whose secret hand has laid me low When madly fighting with my foe? From every tongue thy glory rings, A scion of a line of kings, True to thy vows, of noblest race, With every gentle gift and grace: Whose tender heart for woe can feel, And joy in every creature’s weal: Whose breast with high ambition swells, Knows duty’s claim and ne’er rebels. They praise thy valour, patience, ruth, Thy firmness, self-restraint, and truth: Thy hand prepared for sin’s control, All virtues of a princely soul. I thought of all these gifts of thine, And glories of an ancient line, I set my Tárá’s tears at naught, I met Sugríva and we fought. O Ráma, till this fatal morn I held that thou wouldst surely scorn To strike me as I fought my foe And thought not of a stranger’s blow, But now thine evil heart is shown, A yawning well with grass o’ergrown. Thou wearest virtue’s badge,(588) but guile And meanest sin thy soul defile. I took thee not for treacherous fire, A sinner clad in saint’s attire; Nor deemed thou idly wouldst profess The show and garb of righteousness. In fenced town, in open land, Ne’er hast thou suffered at this hand, Nor canst of proud contempt complain: Then wherefore is the guiltless slain? My harmless life in woods I lead, On forest fruits and roots I feed. My foeman in the field I sought, And ne’er with thee, O Ráma, fought. Upon thy limbs, O King, I see The raiment of a devotee; And how can one like thee, who springs From a proud line of ancient kings, Beneath fair virtue’s mask, disgrace His lineage by a deed so base? From Raghu is thy long descent, For duteous deeds prëeminent: Why, sinner clad in saintly dress, Roamest thou through the wilderness? Truth, valour, justice free from spot, The hand that gives and grudges not, The might that strikes the sinner down, These bring a prince his best renown. Here in the woods, O King, we live On roots and fruit which branches give.(589) Thus nature framed our harmless race: Thou art a man supreme in place. Silver and gold and land provoke The fierce attack, the robber’s stroke, Canst thou desire this wild retreat, The berries and the fruit we eat? ’Tis not for mighty kings to tread The flowery path, by pleasure led. Theirs be the arm that crushes sin, Theirs the soft grace to woo and win: The steadfast will that guides the state, Wise favour to the good and great; And for all time are kings renowned Who blend these arts and ne’er confound. But thou art weak and swift to ire, Unstable, slave of each desire. Thou tramplest duty in the dust, And in thy bow is all thy trust. Thou carest naught for noble gain, And treatest virtue with disdain, While every sense its captive draws To follow pleasure’s changing laws. I wronged thee not in word or deed, But by thy deadly dart I bleed. What wilt thou, mid the virtuous, say To purge thy lasting stain away? All these, O King, must sink to hell, The regicide, the infidel, He who in blood and slaughter joys, A Bráhman or a cow destroys, Untimely weds in law’s despite Scorning an elder brother’s right,(590) Who dares his Teacher’s bed ascend, The miser, spy, and treacherous friend. These impious wretches, one and all, Must to the hell of sinners fall. My skin the holy may not wear, Useless to thee my bones and hair; Nor may my slaughtered body be The food of devotees like thee. These five-toed things a man may slay And feed upon the fallen prey; The mailed rhinoceros may die, And, with the hare his food supply. Iguanas he may kill and eat, With porcupine and tortoise meat.(591) But all the wise account it sin To touch my bones and hair and skin. My flesh they may not eat; and I A useless prey, O Ráma, die. In vain my Tárá reasoned well, On dull deaf ears her counsel fell. I scorned her words though sooth and sweet, And hither rushed my fate to meet. Ah for the land thou rulest! she Finds no protection, lord, from thee, Neglected like some noble dame By a vile husband dead to shame. Mean-hearted coward, false and vile, Whose cruel soul delights in guile, Could Daśaratha, noblest king, Beget so mean and base a thing? Alas! an elephant, in form Of Ráma, in a maddening storm Of passion casting to the ground The girth of law(592) that clipped him round, Too wildly passionate to feel The prick of duty’s guiding steel,(593) Has charged me unawares, and dead I fall beneath his murderous tread. How, stained with this my base defeat, How wilt thou dare, where good men meet, To speak, when every tongue will blame With keen reproach this deed of shame? Such hero strength and valour, shown Upon the innocent alone, Thou hast not proved in manly strife On him who robbed thee of thy wife. Hadst thou but fought in open field And met me boldly unconcealed, This day had been thy fate to fall, Slain by this hand, to Yáma’s hall. In vain I strove, and struck by thee Fell by a hand I could not see. Thus bites a snake, for sins of yore, A sleeping man who wakes no more. Sugríva’s foeman thou hast killed, And thus his heart’s desire fulfilled; But, Ráma, hadst thou sought me first, And told the hope thy soul has nursed, That very day had I restored The Maithil lady to her lord; And, binding Rávaṇ with a chain, Had laid him at thy feet unslain. Yea, were she sunk in deepest hell, Or whelmed beneath the ocean’s swell, I would have followed on her track And brought the rescued lady back, As Hayagríva(594) once set free From hell the white Aśvatarí.(595) That when my spirit wings its flight Sugríva reign, is just and right. But most unjust, O King, that I, Slain by thy treacherous hand, should lie. Be still, my heart: this earthly state Is darkly ruled by sovereign Fate. The realm is lost and won: defy Thy questioners with apt reply.”(596)




Canto XVIII. Ráma’s Reply.


He ceased: and Ráma’s heart was stirred At every keen reproach he heard. There Báli lay, a dim dark sun, His course of light and glory run: Or like the bed of Ocean dried Of his broad floods from side to side, Or helpless, as the dying fire, Hushed his last words of righteous ire. Then Ráma, with his spirit moved, The Vánar king in turn reproved: “Why dost thou, Báli, thus revile, And castest not a glance the while On claims of duty, love, and gain, And customs o’er the world that reign? Why dost thou blame me, rash and blind, Fickle as all thy Vánar kind, Slighting each rule of ancient days Which all the good and prudent praise? This land, each hill and woody chase, Belongs to old Ikshváku’s race: With bird and beast and man, the whole Is ours to cherish and control. Now Bharat, prompt at duty’s call, Wise, just, and true, is lord of all. Each claim of law, love, gain he knows, And wrath and favour duly shows. A king from truth who never bends, And grace with vigour wisely blends; With valour worthy of his race, He knows the claims of time and place. Now we and other kings of might, By his ensample taught aright, The lands of every region tread That justice may increase and spread. While royal Bharat, wise and just, Rules the broad earth, his glorious trust, Who shall attempt, while he is lord, A deed by Justice held abhorred? We now, as Bharat has decreed, Let justice guide our every deed, And toil each sinner to repress Who scorns the way of righteousness. Thou from that path hast turned aside, And virtue’s holy law defied, Left the fair path which kings should tread, And followed pleasure’s voice instead. The man who cleaves to duty’s law Regards these three with filial awe— The sire, the elder brother, third Him from whose lips his lore he heard. Thus too, for duty’s sake, the wise Regard with fond paternal eyes The well-loved younger brother, one Their lore has ripened, and a son. Fine are the laws which guide the good, Abstruse, and hardly understood; Only the soul, enthroned within The breast of each, knows right from sin. But thou art wild and weak of soul, And spurnest, like thy race, control; The true and right thou canst not find, The blind consulting with the blind. Incline thine ear and I will teach The cause that prompts my present speech. This tempest of thy soul assuage, Nor blame me in thine idle rage. On this great sin thy thoughts bestow, The sin for which I lay thee low. Thou, Báli, in thy brother’s life Hast robbed him of his wedded wife, And keepest, scorning ancient right, His Rumá for thine own delight. Thy son’s own wife should scarcely be More sacred in thine eyes than she. All duty thou hast scorned, and hence Comes punishment for dire offence. For those who blindly do amiss There is, I ween, no way but this: To check the rash who dare to stray From customs which the good obey, I may not, sprung of Kshatriya line, Forgive this heinous sin of thine: The laws for those who sin like thee The penalty of death decree. Now Bharat rules with sovereign sway, And we his royal word obey. There was no hope of pardon, none, For the vile deed that thou hast done, That wisest monarch dooms to die The wretch whose crimes the law defy; And we, chastising those who err, His righteous doom administer. My soul accounts Sugríva dear E’en as my brother Lakshmaṇ here. He brings me blessing, and I swore His wife and kingdom to restore: A bond in solemn honour bound When Vánar chieftains stood around. And can a king like me forsake His friend, and plighted promise break? Reflect, O Vánar, on the cause, The sanction of eternal laws, And, justly smitten down, confess Thou diest for thy wickedness. By honour was I bound to lend Assistance to a faithful friend; And thou hast met a righteous fate Thy former sins to expiate. And thus wilt thou some merit win And make atonement for thy sin. For hear me, Vánar King, rehearse What Manu(597) spake in ancient verse,— This holy law, which all accept Who honour duty, have I kept: “Pure grow the sinners kings chastise, And, like the virtuous, gain the skies; By pain or full atonement freed, They reap the fruit of righteous deed, While kings who punish not incur The penalties of those who err.” Mándhátá(598) once, a noble king, Light of the line from which I spring, Punished with death a devotee When he had stooped to sin like thee; And many a king in ancient time Has punished frantic sinners’ crime, And, when their impious blood was spilt, Has washed away the stain of guilt. Cease, Báli, cease: no more complain: Reproaches and laments are vain, For thou art justly punished: we Obey our king and are not free. Once more, O Báli, lend thine ear Another weightiest plea to hear. For this, when heard and pondered well, Will all complaint and rage dispel. My soul will ne’er this deed repent, Nor was my shaft in anger sent. We take the silvan tribes beset With snare and trap and gin and net, And many a heedless deer we smite From thickest shade, concealed from sight. Wild for the slaughter of the game, At stately stags our shafts we aim. We strike them bounding scared away, We strike them as they stand at bay, When careless in the shade they lie, Or scan the plain with watchful eye. They turn away their heads; we aim, And none the eager hunter blame. Each royal saint, well trained in law Of duty, loves his bow to draw And strike the quarry, e’en as thou Hast fallen by mine arrow now, Fighting with him or unaware,— A Vánar thou.—I little care.(599) But yet, O best of Vánars, know That kings who rule the earth bestow Fruit of pure life and virtuous deed, And lofty duty’s hard-won meed. Harm not thy lord the king: abstain From act and word that cause him pain; For kings are children of the skies Who walk this earth in men’s disguise. But thou, in duty’s claims untaught, Thy breast with blinding passion fraught, Assailest me who still have clung To duty, with thy bitter tongue.”

  He ceased: and Báli sore distressed The sovereign claims of law confessed, And freed, o’erwhelmed with woe and shame, The lord of Raghu’s race from blame. Then, reverent palm to palm applied, To Ráma thus the Vánar cried: “True, best of men, is every word That from thy lips these ears have heard, It ill beseems a wretch like me To bandy empty words with thee. Forgive the angry taunts that broke From my wild bosom as I spoke. And lay not to my charge, O King, My mad reproaches’ idle sting. Thou, in the truth by trial trained, Best knowledge of the right hast gained: And layest, just and pure within, The meetest penalty on sin. Through every bond of law I burst, The boldest sinner and the worst. O let thy right-instructing speech Console my heart and wisely teach.”

  Like some sad elephant who stands Fast sinking in the treacherous sands, Thus Báli raised despairing eyes; Then spake again with sobs and sighs:

  “Not for myself, O King, I grieve, For Tárá or the friends I leave, As for sweet Angad, my dear son, My noble, only little one. For, nursed in luxury and bliss, His father he will mourn and miss, And like a stream whose fount is dry Will waste away and sink and die,— My own dear child, my only boy, His mother Tárá’s hope and joy. Spare him, O son of Raghu, spare The child entrusted to thy care. My Angad and Sugríva treat E’en as thy heart considers meet, For thou, O chief of men, art strong To guard the right and punish wrong. O, if thou wilt thine ear incline To hear these dying words of mine, He and Sugríva will to thee As Bharat and as Lakshmaṇ be. Let not my Tárá, left forlorn, Weep for Sugríva’s wrathful scorn; Nor let him, for her lord’s offence, Condemn her faithful innocence. And well and wisely may he reign If thy dear grace his power sustain: If, following thee his friend and guide, He turn not from thy hest aside: Thus may he reign with glory, nay Thus to the skies will win his way. Though stayed by Tárá’s fond recall, By thy dear hand I longed to fall. Against my brother rushed and fought, And gained the death I long have sought.”

  Then Ráma thus the prince consoled From whose clear eyes the mists were rolled: “Grieve not for those thou leavest thus, Nor tremble for thyself or us, For we will deal with thine and thee As duty and the laws decree. He who exacts and he who pays, Is justly slain or justly slays, Shall in the life to come have bliss; For each has done his task in this. Thou, wandering from the right, art made Pure by the forfeit thou hast paid. Thy weight of sins is cast aside, And duty’s claim is satisfied. Then grieve no more, O Prince, but clear Thy bosom from all doubt and fear, For fate, inexorably stern, Thou hast no power to move or turn. Thy princely Angad still will share My tender love, Sugríva’s care; And to thy offspring shall be shown Affection that shall match thine own.”




Canto XIX. Tárá’s Grief.


No answer gave the Vánar king To Ráma’s prudent counselling. Battered and bruised by tree and stone, By Ráma’s arrow overthrown, Fainting upon the ground he lay, Gasping his troubled life away.

  But Tárá in the Vánar’s hall Heard tidings of her husband’s fall; Heard that a shaft from Ráma’s bow Had laid the royal Báli low. Her darling Angad by her side, Distracted from her home she hied. Then nigh the place of battle drew The Vánars, Angad’s retinue. They saw the bow-armed Ráma: dread Fell on them, and they turned and fled. Like helpless deer, their leaders slain, So wildly fled the startled train. But Tárá saw, and nearer pressed, And thus the flying band addressed: “O Vánars, ye who ever stand About our king, a trusty band, Where is the lion master? why Forsake ye thus your lord and fly? Say, lies he dead upon the plain, A brother by a brother slain, Or pierced by shafts from Ráma’s bow That rain from far upon the foe?”

  Thus Tárá questioned, and was still: Then, wearers of each shape at will, The Vánars thus with one accord Answered the Lady of their lord: “Turn, Tárá turn, and half undone Save Angad thy beloved son. There Ráma stands in death’s disguise, And conquered Báli faints and dies. He by whose strong arm, thick and fast, Uprooted trees and rocks were cast, Lies smitten by a shaft that came Resistless as the lightning flame. When he, whose splendour once could vie With Indra’s, regent of the sky, Fell by that deadly arrow, all The Vánars fled who marked his fall. Let all our chiefs their succours bring, And Angad be anointed king; For all who come of Vánar race Will serve him set in Báli’s place. Or else our conquering foes to-day Within our wall will force their way, Polluting with their hostile feet The chambers of thy loved retreat. Great fear is on us, all and one. Those who have wives and who have none, They lust for power, are fierce and bold, Or hate us for the strife of old.”

  She heard their speech as, sore afraid, Arrested in their flight, they stayed, And gave her answer as became The spirit of so true a dame: “Nay, what have I to do with pelf, With son, with kingdom, or with self, When he, my noble lord, who leads The Vánars like a lion, bleeds? His high-souled victor will I meet, And throw me prostrate at his feet.”

  She hastened forth, her bosom rent With anguish, weeping as she went, And striking, mastered by her woes, Her head and breast with frantic blows. She hurried to the field and found Her husband prostrate on the ground, Who quelled the hostile Vánars’ might, Whose bank was never turned in flight: Whose arm a massy rock could throw As Indra hurls his bolts below: Fierce as the rushing tempest, loud As thunder from a labouring cloud: Whene’er he roared his voice of fear Struck terror on the boldest ear: Now slain, as, hungry for the prey, A tiger might a lion slay: Or when, his serpent foe to seek, Suparṇa(600) with his furious beak Tears up a sacred hillock, long The reverence of a village throng, Its altar with their offerings spread, And the gay flag that waved o’erhead. She looked and saw the victor stand Resting upon his bow his hand: And fierce Sugríva she descried, And Lakshmaṇ by his brother’s side. She passed them by, nor stayed to view, Swift to her husband’s side she flew; Then as she looked, her strength gave way, And in the dust she fell and lay. Then, as if startled ere the close Of slumber, from the earth she rose. Upon her dying husband, round Whose soul the coils of Death were wound, Her eyes in agony she bent And called him with a shrill lament. Sugríva, when he heard her cries, And saw the queen with weeping eyes, And youthful Angad standing there, His load of grief could hardly bear.




Canto XX. Tárá’s Lament.


Again she bent her to the ground, Her arms about her husband wound. Sobbed on his breast, and sick and faint With anguish poured her wild complaint: “Brave in the charge of battle, boast And glory of the Vánar host, Why on the cold earth wilt thou lie And give no answer when I cry? Up, warrior, from thy lowly bed! A meeter couch for thee is spread. It ill beseems a glorious king On the bare ground his limbs to fling. Ah, surely must thy love be strong For her whom thou hast governed long, If thou, my hero, canst recline On her cold breast forsaking mine. Or, famed for justice through the land, Thou on the road to heaven hast planned Some city fairer far than this To be thy new metropolis. Are all our pleasures ended now, With those delicious hours which thou And I, dear lord, together spent In woods that breathed the honey’s scent? Whelmed in my sorrow’s boundless sea, There is no joy, no hope, for me, When my beloved lord, who led The Vánars to the fight, is dead, My widowed heart is stern and cold. Or, at the sight mine eyes behold, O’ermastered would it end this ache And in a thousand fragments break. Ah noble Vánar, doomed to pay The penalty of all today— Sugríva from his home expelled, And Rumá(601) from his arms withheld. Our Vánar race and thee to save, Wise counsel for thy weal I gave; But thou, by wildest folly stirred, Wouldst give no credence to my word, And now wilt woo the nymphs above, And shake their souls with pangs of love. Ah, never could it be that thou Beneath Sugríva’s power shouldst bow, Thy conqueror is none but Fate Whose mandates all who breathe await. And does no thrill of anguish run Through the stern breast of Raghu’s son, Whose base hand dealt a coward’s blow, And smote thee fighting with thy foe? Reft of my lord my days, alas! In bitter bitter woe will pass: And I, long blest with every good, Must bear my dreary widowhood. And when his uncle’s brow is stern, When his fierce eyes with fury burn, Ah, what will be my Angad’s fate, So fair and young and delicate? Come, darling, for the last sad sight, Of thy dear sire who loved the right; For soon thine eyes will long in vain A look at that loved face to gain. And, hero, as thy child draws near, With tender words his spirit cheer; Thy dying wishes gently speak, And kiss him on the brows and cheek. High fame, I ween, has Ráma won By this great deed his hand has done, His debt to brave Sugríva paid And kept the promise that he made. Be happy, King Sugríva, lord Of Ramá to thine arms restored: Enjoy uninterrupted reign, For he, thy foe, at length is slain. Dost thou not hear me speak, and why Hast thou no word of soft reply? Will thou not lift thine eyes and see These dames who look to none but thee?”

  From their sad eyes, as Tárá spoke, The floods of bitter sorrow broke: Then, pressing close to Angad’s side, Each lifted up her voice and cried:

  “How couldst thou leave thine Angad thus, And go, for ever go, from us— Thy child so dear in brave attire, Graced with the virtues of his sire? If e’er in want of thought, O chief, One deed of mine have caused thee grief, Forgive my folly, I entreat, And with my head I touch thy feet.”

  Again the hapless Tárá wept As to her husband’s side she crept, And wild with sorrow and dismay Sat on the ground where Báli lay.




Canto XXI. Hanumán’s Speech.


There, like a fallen star, the dame Fell by her lord’s half lifeless frame; And Hanumán drew softly near, And strove her grieving heart to cheer:

“By changeless law our bliss and woe From ancient worth and folly flow. What fruits soe’er we cull, the seeds Were scattered by our former deeds.(602) Why mourn another’s mournful fate, And weep, thyself unfortunate? Be calm, O thou whose heart is wise, For none deserves another’s sighs. Look up, with idle sorrow strive: Thy child, his heir, is yet alive. Let needful rites be duly done, Nor in thy woe forget thy son. Regard the law which all obey: They spring to life, they pass away. Begin the task that bids thee rise, And stay these tears, for thou art wise. Our lord the king is doomed to die, On whom ten million hearts rely. Kind, liberal, patient, true, and just Was he in whom they place their trust, And now he seeks the land of those Who for the right subdue their foes. Each Vánar lord with all his train, Each ranger of this wild domain, And Angad here, thy darling, see A governor and friend in thee. These twain(603) whose hearts with sorrow ache The funeral rites shall undertake, And Angad by his mother’s care Be king, his father’s rightful heir. Now let him pay, as laws require, His sacred duty to his sire, Nor one solemnity omit Of all that mighty kings befit. And when thy fond eye sees thine own Dear Angad on his father’s throne, Then, lightened of its load of pain, Thy spirit will have rest again.”

  She heard his speech, she heaved her head, Looked upon Hanumán and said:

  “Sweeter my slain lord’s limbs to touch, Than Angad or a hundred such. No rule or right, a widowed dame, O’er Angad or the realm I claim. Sugríva is the uncle, he In every act supreme must be. I pray thee, chief, this plan resign, Nor claim from me what ne’er is mine. The father with his tender care Guards the dear child the mother bare, Where’er I be, no sweeter task, No happier joy I hope or ask Than thus to sit with loving eyes And watch the bed where Báli lies.




Canto XXII. Báli Dead.


There breathing still with slow faint sighs Lay Báli on the ground: his eyes, Damp with the tears of death, he raised, On conquering Sugríva gazed, And then in clearest speech expressed The tender feelings of his breast: “Not to my charge, Sugríva, lay Thine injuries avenged to-day; But rather blame resistless Fate That urged me on infuriate. Fate ne’er agreed our lives to bless With simultaneous happiness: To dwell like brothers side by side In tender love was still denied. The Vánars’ realm is thine to-day: Begin, O King, thy rightful sway;(604) For I must go at Yáma’s call To sojourn in his gloomy hall; Must part and leave this very hour My life, my realm, my kingly power, And go instead of these to gain Bright glory free from spot and stain. Now at thy hands one boon I seek With the last words my lips shall speak, And, though it be no easy thing, Perform the task I give thee, King. This son of mine, no foolish boy, Worthy of bliss and nursed in joy,— See, prostrate on the ground he lies, The hot tears welling from his eyes— The child I love so well, more sweet Than life itself, for woe unmeet,— To him be kindly favour shown: O guard and keep him as thine own. Retain him ever by thy side, His father, helper, friend, and guide. From fear and woe his young life save, And give him all his father gave. Then Tárá’s son in time shall be Brave, resolute, and famed like thee, And march before thee to the fight Where stricken fiends shall own his might. While yet a tender stripling, fame Shall bruit abroad his warrior name, And brightly shall his glory shine For exploits worthy of his line. Child of Susheṇ,(605) my Tárá well Obscurest lore can read and tell; And, trained in wondrous art, divines Each mystery of boding signs. Her solemn warning ne’er despise, Do boldly what her lips advise; For things to come her eye can see, And with her words events agree. And for the son of Raghu’s sake The toil and danger undertake: For breach of faith were grievous wrong, Nor wouldst thou be unpunished long. Now, brother, take this chain of gold, Gift of celestial hands of old, Or when I die its charm will flee, And all its might be lost with me.”

  The loving speech Sugríva heard, And all his heart with woe was stirred. Remorse and gentle pity stole Each thought of triumph from his soul: Thus fades the light when Ráhu(606) mars The glory of the Lord of Stars.(607) All angry thoughts were stayed and stilled And kindly love his bosom filled. His brother’s word the chief obeyed And took the chain as Báli prayed. On little Angad standing nigh The dying hero fixed his eye, And, ready from this world to part, Spoke the fond utterance of his heart:

  “Let time and place thy thoughts employ: In woe be strong, be meek in joy. Accept both pain and pleasure, still Obedient to Sugríva’s will. Thou hast, my darling, from the first With tender care been softly nursed; But harder days, if thou wouldst win Sugríva’s love, must now begin. To those who hate him ne’er incline, Nor count his foe a friend of thine. In all thy thoughts his welfare seek, Obedient, lowly, faithful, meek. Let no rash suit his bosom pain, Nor yet from due requests abstain.(608) Each is a grievous fault, between The two is found the happy mean.”

  Then Báli ceased: his eyeballs rolled In stress of anguish uncontrolled His massive teeth were bared to view, And from the frame the spirit flew. Their lord and leader dead, the crowd Of noblest Vánars shrieked aloud: “Since thou, O King, hast sought the skies All desolate Kishkindhá lies. Her woods, where Vánars loved to rove, Are empty now, and hill and grove. From every eye the light is fled, Since thou, our mighty lord, art dead. Thine was the unwearied arm that bore The brunt of deadly fight of yore With Golabh the Gandharva, when, Lasting through five long years and ten, The dreadful conflict knew no stay In gloom of night, in glare of day; And when the fifteenth year had past Thy dire opponent fell at last. If such a foeman fell beneath Our hero’s arm and awful teeth Who freed us from our terror, how Is conquering Báli fallen now?”

  Then when they saw their leader slain Great anguish seized the Vánar train, Weeping their mighty chief, as when In pastures near a lion’s den The cows by sudden fear are stirred, Slain the bold bull who led the herd. And hapless Tárá sank below The whelming waters of her woe, Looked upon Báli’s face and fell Beside him whom she loved go well, Like a young creeper clinging round A tall tree prostrate on the ground.




Canto XXIII. Tárá’s Lament.


She kissed her lifeless husband’s face, She clasped him in a close embrace, Laid her soft lips upon his head; Then words like these the mourner said:

  “No words of mine wouldst thou regard, And now thy bed is cold and hard. Upon the rude rough ground o’erthrown, Beneath thee naught but sand and stone. To thee the earth is dearer far Than I and my caresses are, If thou upon her breast wilt lie, And to my words make no reply. Ah my beloved, good and brave, Bold to attack and strong to save, Fate is Sugríva’s thrall, and we In him our lord and master see. Lo, by thy bed, a mournful band, Thy Vánar chiefs lamenting stand. O hear thy nobles’ groans and cries, O mark thy Angad’s weeping eyes, O list to my entreaties, break The chains of slumber and awake. Ah me, my lord, this lowly bed Where rest thy limbs and fallen head, Is the cold couch where smitten lay Thy foemen in the bloody fray. O noble heart from blemish free, Lover of war, beloved by me. Why hast thou fled away and left Thy Tárá of all hope bereft? Unwise the father who allows His child to be a warrior’s spouse, For, hero, see thy consort’s fate, A widow now most desolate, For ever broken is my pride, My hope of lasting bliss has died, And sinking in the lowest deep Of sorrow’s sea I pine and weep. Ah, surely not of earthly mould, This stony heart is stern and cold, Or, in a hundred pieces rent, It had not lingered to lament. Dead, dead! my husband, friend, and lord In whom my loving hopes were stored, First in the field, his foemen’s dread, My own victorious Báli, dead! A woman when her lord has died, Though children flourish by her side, Though stores of gold her coffers fill, Is called a lonely widow still. Alas, thy bleeding gashes make Around thy limbs a purple lake: Thus slumbering was thy wont to lie On cushions bright with crimson dye. Dark streams of welling blood besmear Thy limbs where dust and mire adhere, Nor have I strength, weighed down by woe, Mine arms about thy form to throw. The issue of this day has brought Sugríva all his wishes sought, For Ráma shot one shaft and he Is freed from fear and jeopardy. Alas, alas, I may not rest My head upon thy wounded breast, Obstructed by the massive dart Deep buried in thy bleeding heart.”

  Then Níla from his bosom drew The fatal shaft that pierced him through, Like some tremendous serpent deep In caverns of a hill asleep. As from the hero’s wound it came, Shot from the shaft a gleam of flame, Like the last flashes of the sun Descending when his course is run. From the wide rent in crimson flood Rushed the full stream of Báli’s blood, Like torrents down a mountain’s side With golden ore and copper dyed. Then Tárá brushed with tender care The dust of battle from his hair, While her sad eyes poured down their rain Upon her lord untimely slain. Once more she looked upon the dead; Then to her bright-eyed child she said: “Turn hither, turn thy weeping eyes Where low in death thy father lies. By sinful deed and bitter hate Our lord has met his mournful fate. Bright as the sun at early morn To Yáma’s halls is Báli borne. Then go, my child, salute the king, From whom our bliss and honour spring.”

  Obedient to his mother’s hest His father’s feet he gently pressed With twining arms and lingering hands: “Father,” he cried, “here Angad stands.”

  Then Tárá: “Art thou stern and mute, Regardless of thy child’s salute? Hast thou no blessing for thy son, No word for little Angad, none? O, hero, at thy lifeless feet Here with my boy I take my seat, As some sad mother of the herd, By the fierce lion undeterred, Lies moaning by the grassy dell Wherein her lord and leader fell. How, having wrought that awful rite, The sacrifice of deadly fight, Wherein the shaft by Ráma sped Supplied the place of water shed, How hast thou bathed thee at the end Without thy wife her aid to lend?(609) Why do mine eyes no more behold Thy bright beloved chain of gold, Which, pleased with thee, the Immortals’ King About thy neck vouchsafed to fling? Still lingering on thy lifeless face I see the pride of royal race: Thus when the sun has set, his glow Still rests upon the Lord of Snow. Alas my hero! undeterred Thou wouldst not listen to my word. With tears and prayers I sued in vain: Thou wouldst not listen, and art slain. Gone is my bliss, my glory: I And Angad now with thee will die.”




Canto XXIV. Sugríva’s Lament.


But when Sugríva saw her weep O’erwhelmed in sorrow’s rushing deep, Swift through his bosom pierced the sting Of anguish for the fallen king. At the sad sight his eyes beheld A flood of bitter tears outwelled, And, with his bosom racked and rent, To Ráma with his train he went. He came with faltering steps and slow Where Ráma held his mighty bow And arrow like a venomed snake, And to the son of Raghu spake: “Well hast thou kept, O King, thy vow: The promised fruit is gathered now. But life is marred, my soul to-day Turns sickening from all joy away. For, while this queen laments and sighs Amid a mourning people’s cries, And Angad weeps his father slain, How can my heart delight to reign? For outrage, fury, senseless pride, My brother, doomed of yore, has died. Yet, Raghu’s son, in bitter woe I mourn his fated overthrow. Ah, better far in pain and ill To dwell on Rishyamúka still Than gain the heaven of Gods and all Its pleasures by my brother’s fall. Did not he cry,—great-hearted foe,— “Go, for I will not slay thee, Go”? With his brave soul those words agree: My speech, my deeds, are worthy me. How can a brother counterweigh His grievous loss with joys of sway, And see with dull unpitying eye So brave and good a brother die? His lofty soul was nobly blind: My death alas, he ne’er designed; But I, urged blindly on by hate, Sought with his life my rage to sate. He smote me with a splintered tree: I groaned aloud and turned to flee, From stern reproaches he forbore, And gently bade me sin no more. Serene and dutiful and good He kept the laws of brotherhood: I, fierce and greedy, vengeful, base, Showed all the vices of our race. Ah me, dear friend, my brother’s fate Lays on my soul a crushing weight: A sin no heart should e’er conceive, But at the thought each soul should grieve: Sin such as Indra’s when his blow Laid heavenly Viśvarúpa(610) low. Yet earth, the waters of the seas, The race of women and the trees Were fain upon themselves to take The weight of sin for Indra’s sake. But who a Vánar’s soul will free, Or ease the load that crushes me? Wretch that I am, I may not claim The reverence due to royal name. How shall I reign supreme, or dare Affect the power I should not share? Ah me, I sorrow for my sin, The ruin of my race and kin, Polluted by a hideous crime World-hated till the end of time. Alas, the floods of sorrow roll With whelming force upon my soul: So gathers the descending rain In the deep hollow of the plain.”




Canto XXV. Ráma’s Speech.


Then Raghu’s son, whose feeling breast Shared the great woe that moved the rest, Strove with wise charm their grief to ease And gently spoke in words like these:

  “You ne’er can raise the dead to bliss By agony of grief like this. Cease your lament, nor leave undone The funeral task you may not shun. As nature orders o’er the dead. Your tributary tears are shed, But Fate, directing each event, Is still the lord preëminent. Yes, all obey the changeless laws Of Fate the universal cause. By Fate, the lives of all proceed, That governs every word and deed, None acts, none sees his hest obeyed, But each and all by Fate are swayed. The world its ordered course maintains, And o’er that course Fate ever reigns. Fate ne’er exceeds the rule of Fate: Is ne’er too swift, is ne’er too late, And making nature its ally Forgets no life, nor passes by. No kith and kin, no power and force Can check or stay its settled course, No friend or client, grace or charm, That victor of the world disarm. So all who see with prudent eyes The hand of Fate must recognize, For virtue rules, or love, or gain, As Fate’s unchanged decrees ordain. Báli has died and won the meed That waits in heaven on noble deed, Throned in the seats the brave may reach By liberal hand and gentle speech, True to a warrior’s duty, bold In fight, the hero lofty-souled Deigned not to guard his life: he died, And now in heaven is glorified. Then cease these tears and wild despair: Turn to the task that claims your care, For Báli’s is the glorious fate Which warriors count most fortunate.”

  When Ráma’s speech had found a close, Brave Lakshmaṇ, terror of his foes, With wise and soothing words addressed Sugríva still with woe oppressed: “Arise Sugríva,” thus he said, “Perform the service of the dead. Prepare with Tárá and her son That Báli’s rites be duly done. A store of funeral wood provide Which wind and sun and time have dried And richest sandal fit to grace The pyre of one of royal race. With words of comfort soft and kind Console poor Angad’s troubled mind, Nor let thy heart be thus cast down, For thine is now the Vánars’ town. Let Angad’s care a wreath supply, And raiment rich with varied dye, And oil and perfumes for the fire, And all the solemn rites require. Go, hasten to the town, O King, And Tárá’s little quickly bring. A virtue is despatch: and speed Is best of all in hour of need. Go, let a chosen band prepare The litter of the dead to bear. For stout and tall and strong of limb Must be the chiefs who carry him.”

  He spoke,—his friends’ delight and pride,— Then stood again by Ráma’s side. When Tára(611) heard the words he said Within the town he quickly sped, And brought, on stalwart shoulders laid, The litter for the rites arrayed, Framed like a car for Gods, complete With painted sides and royal seat, With latticed windows deftly made, And golden birds and trees inlaid: Well joined and wrought in every part, A marvel of ingenious art. Where pleasure mounds in carven wood And many a graven figure stood. The best of jewels o’er it hung, And wreaths of flowers around it clung, And over all was raised on high A canopy of saffron dye, While like the sun of morning shone The brilliant blooms that lay thereon. That glorious litter Ráma eyed. And spake to Lakshmaṇ by his side: “Let Báli on the bier be placed And with all funeral service graced.” Sugríva then with many a tear Drew Báli’s body to the bier Whereon, with weeping Angad’s aid, The relics of the chief were laid Neath many a vesture’s varied fold, And wreaths and ornaments and gold. Then King Sugríva bade them speed The obsequies by law decreed: “Let Vánars lead the way and throw Rich gems around them as they go, And be the chosen bearers near Behind them laden with the bier. No costly rite may you deny, Used when the proudest monarchs die: As for a king of widest sway. Perform his obsequies to-day.” Sugríva gave his high behest; Then Princely Tára and the rest, With little Angad weeping, led The long procession of the dead. Behind the funeral litter came, With Tárá first, each widowed dame, In tears and shrieks her loss deplored, Add cried aloud, My lord! My lord! While wood and hill and valley sent In echoes back the shrill lament. Then on a low and sandy isle Was reared the hero’s funeral pile By crowds of toiling Vánars, where The mountain stream ran fresh and fair, The Vánar chiefs, a noble band, Had laid the litter on the sand, And stood a little space apart, Each mourning in his inmost heart. But Tárá, when her weeping eye Saw Báli, on the litter lie, Laid his dear head upon her lap, And wailed aloud her dire mishap; “O mighty Vánar, lord and king, To whose fond breast I loved to cling, Of goodly arms, wise, brave, and bold, Rise, look upon me as of old. Rise up, my sovereign, dost thou see A crowd of subjects weep for thee? Still o’er thy face, though breath has fled, The joyous light of life is spread: Thus around the sun, although he set, A crimson glory lingers yet. Death clad in Ráma’s form to-day Hast dragged thee from the world away. One shaft from his tremendous bow Dooms us to widowhood and woe. Hast thou, O Vánar King, no eyes Thy weeping wives to recognize, Who for the length of way unmeet Have followed thee with weary feet? Yet every moon-faced beauty here By thee, O King was counted dear. Lord of the Vánar race, hast thou No eyes to see Sugríva now? About thee stands in mournful mood A sore-afflicted multitude, And Tára and thy lords of state Around their monarch weep and wait. Arise my lord, with gentle speech, As was thy wont, dismissing each, Then in the forest will we play And love shall make our spirits gay.”

  The Vánar dames raised Tárá, drowned In floods of sorrow, from the ground; And Angad with Sugríva’s aid, O’erwhelmed with anguish and dismayed, Weeping for his departed sire, Placed Báli’s body on the pyre: Then lit the flame, and round the dead Passed slowly with a mourner’s tread. Thus with full rites the funeral train Performed the service for the slain, Then sought the flowing stream and made Libations to the parted shade. There, setting Angad first in place, The chieftains of the Vánar race, With Tárá and Sugríva, shed The water that delights the dead.




Canto XXVI. The Coronation.


Each Vánar councillor and peer In crowded numbers gathered near Sugríva, mournful king, while yet His vesture from the wave was wet, Before the chief of Raghu’s seed Unwearied in each arduous deed, They stood and raised the reverent hand As saints before Lord Brahmá stand. Then Hanumán of massive mould, Like some tall hill of glistering gold, Son of the God whose wild blasts shake The forest, thus to Ráma spake: “By thy kind favour, O my lord, Sugríva, to his home restored Triumphant, has regained to-day His rank and power and royal sway. He now will call each faithful friend, Enter the city, and attend With sage advice and prudent care To every task that waits him there. Then balm and unguent shall anoint Our monarch, as the laws appoint, And gems and precious wreaths shall be His grateful offering, King, to thee. Do thou, O Ráma, with thy friend Thy steps within the city bend; Our ruler on his throne install, And with thy presence cheer us all.”

  Then, skilled in lore and arts that guide The speaker, Raghu’s son replied: “For fourteen years I might not break The mandate that my father spake; Nor can I, till that time be fled, The street of town or village tread. Let King Sugríva seek the town Most worthy of her high renown, There let him be without delay Anointed, and begin his sway.”

  This answered, to Sugríva then Thus spake anew the king of men: “Do thou who knowest right ordain Prince Angad consort of thy reign; For he is noble, true, and bold, And trained a righteous course to hold Gifts like his sire’s that youth adorn Born eldest to the eldest born. This is the month of Śrávaṇ,(612) first Of those that see the rain-clouds burst. Four months, thou knowest well, extends The season when the rain descends. No time for deeds of war is this: Seek thou thy fair metropolis, And I with Lakshmaṇ, O my friend, The time upon this hill will spend. An ample cavern opens there Made lovely by the mountain air, And lotuses and lilies fill The pleasant lake and murmuring rill. When Kártik’s(613) month shall clear the skies, Then tempt the mighty enterprise. Now, chieftain to thy home repair, And be anointed sovereign there.”

  Sugríva heard: he bowed his head: Within the lovely town he sped Which Báli’s royal will had swayed, Where thousand Vánar chiefs arrayed Gathered in order round their king, And led him on with welcoming. Low on the earth the lesser crowd Fell in prostration as they bowed. Sugríva looked with grateful eyes, Spake to them all and bade them rise. Then through the royal bowers he strode Wherein the monarch’s wives abode. Soon from the inner chambers came The Vánar of exalted fame; And joyful friends drew near and shed King-making balm upon his head, Like Gods anointing in the skies Their sovereign of the thousand eyes.(614) Then brought they, o’er their king to hold The white umbrella decked with gold, And chouries with their waving hair In golden handles wondrous fair; And fragrant herbs and seed and spice, And sparkling gems exceeding price, And every bloom from woods and leas, And gum distilled from milky trees; And precious ointment white as milk, And spotless robes of cloth and silk, Wreaths of sweet flowers whose glories gleam In grassy grove, on lake or stream. And fragrant sandal and each scent That makes the soft breeze redolent; Grain, honey, odorous seed, and store Of oil and curd and golden ore; A noble tiger’s skin, a pair Of sandals wrought with costliest care, Eight pairs of damsels drawing nigh Brought unguents stained with varied dye. Then gems and cates and robes displayed Before the twice-born priests were laid, That they would deign in order due To consecrate the king anew. The sacred grass was duly spread And sacrificial flame was fed, Which Scripture-learned priests supplied With oil which texts had sanctified. Then, with all rites ordained of old, High on the terrace bright with gold, Whereon a glorious carpet lay, And fresh-culled garlands sweet and gay, Placed on his throne, Sugríva bent His looks toward the Orient. In horns from forehead of the bull, In pitchers bright and beautiful, In urns of gold the Vánara took Pure water brought from stream and brook, From every consecrated strand And every sea that beats the land. Then, as prescribed by sacred lore And many a mighty sage of yore,(615) The leaders of the Vánars poured The sacred water on their lord.(616) From every Vánar at the close Of that imperial rite arose Shouts of glad triumph, loud and long Repeated by the high-souled throng. Sugríva, when the rite was done, Obeyed the hest of Raghu’s son, Prince Angad to his breast he strained, And partner of his sway ordained. Once more from all the host rang out The loud huzza and jovful shout. “Well done! well done!” each Vánar cried, And good Sugríva glorified. Then with glad voices loudly raised Were Ráma and his brother praised; And bright Kishkindhá shone that day With happy throngs and banners gay.




Canto XXVII. Ráma On The Hill.


But when the solemn rite was o’er, And bold Sugríva reigned once more, The sons of Raghu sought the hill, Praśravaṇ of the rushing rill, Where roamed the tiger and the deer, And lions raised their voice of fear; Thick set with trees of every kind, With trailing shrubs and plants entwined; Home of the ape and monkey, lair Of mountain cat and pard and bear. In cloudy gloom against the sky The sanctifying hills rose high. Pierced in their crest, a spacious cave To Raghu’s sons a shelter gave. Then Ráma, pure from every crime, In words well suited to the time To Lakshmaṇ spake, whose faithful zeal Watched humbly for his brother’s weal: “I love this spacious cavern where There breathes a fresh and pleasant air. Brave brother, let us here remain Throughout the season of the rain. For in mine eyes this mountain crest Is above all, the loveliest. Where copper-hued and black and white Show the huge blocks that face the height; Where gleams the shine of varied ore, Where dark clouds hang and torrents roar; Where waving woods are fair to see, And creepers climb from tree to tree; Where the gay peacock’s voice is shrill, And sweet birds carol on the hill; Where odorous breath is wafted far From Jessamine and Sinduvár;(617) And opening flowers of every hue Give wondrous beauty to the view. See, too, this pleasant water near Our cavern home is fresh and clear; And lilies gay with flower and bud Are glorious on the lovely flood. This cave that fares north and east Will shelter us till rain has ceased; And towering hills that rise behind Will screen us from the furious wind. Close by the cavern’s portal lies And level stone of ample size And sable hue, a mighty block Long severed from the parent rock. Now let thine eye bent northward rest A while upon that mountain crest, High as a cloud that brings the rain, And dark as iron rent in twain. Look southward, brother, now and view A cloudy pile of paler hue Like Mount Kailása’s topmost height Where ores of every tint are bright. See, Lakshman, see before our cave That clear brook eastward roll its wave As though ’twere Gangá’s infant rill Down streaming from the three-peaked hill. See, by the water’s gentle flow Aśoka, sál, and sandal grow. And every lovely tree most fair With leaf and bud and flower is there. See there, beneath the bending trees That fringe her bank, the river flees, Clothed with their beauty like a maid In all her robes and gems arrayed, While from the sedgy banks are heard The soft notes of each amorous bird. O see what lovely islets stud Like gems the bosom of the flood, And sárases and wild swans crowd About her till she laughs aloud. See, lotus blooms the brook o’erspread, Some tender blue, some dazzling red, And opening lilies white as snow Their buds in rich profusion show. There rings the joyous peacock’s scream, There stands the curlew by the stream, And holy hermits love to throng Where the sweet waters speed along. Ranged on the grassy margin shine Gay sandal trees in glittering line, And all the wondrous verdure seems The offspring of creative dreams. O conquering Prince, there cannot be A lovelier place than this we see. Here sheltered on the beauteous height Our days will pass in calm delight. Nor is Kishkindhá’s city, gay With grove and garden, far away. Thence will the breeze of evening bring Sweet music as the minstrels sing; And, when the Vánars dance, will come The sound of tabour and of drum. Again to spouse and realm restored, Girt by his friends, the Vánar lord Great glory has acquired; and how Can he be less than happy now?”

  This said, the son of Raghu made His dwelling in that pleasant shade Upon the mountain’s shelving side That sweetly all his wants supplied. But still the hero’s troubled mind No comfort in his woe could find, Yet mourning for his stolen wife Dearer to Ráma than his life, Chief when he saw the Lord of Night Rise slowly o’er the eastern height, He tossed upon his leafy bed With eyes by sleep unvisited. Outwelled the tears in ceaseless flow, And every sense was numbed by woe. Each pang that pierced the mourner through Smote Lakshmaṇ’s faithful bosom too, Who, troubled for his brother’s sake, With wisest words the prince bespake: “Arise, my brother, and be strong: Thy hero heart has mourned too long. Thou knowest well that tears and sighs Will mar the mightiest enterprise. Thine was the soul that loved to dare: To serve the Gods was still thy care; And ne’er may sorrow’s sting subdue A heart so resolute and true. How canst thou hope to slay in fight The giant cruel in his might? Unwearied must the champion be Who strives with such a foe as he. Tear out this sorrow by the root; Again be bold and resolute. Arise, my brother, and subdue The demon and his wicked crew. Thou canst destroy the earth, her seas, Her rooted hills and giant trees Unseated by thy furious hand: And shall one fiend thy power withstand? Wait through this season of the rain Till suns of autumn dry the plain, Then shall thy giant foe, and all His host and realm, before thee fall. I wake thy valour that has slept Amid the tears thine eyes have wept; As drops of oil in worship raise The dormant flame to sudden blaze.”

  The son of Raghu heard: he knew His brother’s rede was wise and true; And, honouring his friendly guide, In gentle words he thus replied: “Whate’er a hero firm and bold, Devoted, true, and lofty-souled Should speak by deep affection led, Such are the words which thou hast said. I cast away each pensive thought That brings the noblest plans to naught, And each uninjured power will strain Until the purposed end we gain. Thy prudent words will I obey, And till the close of rain-time stay, When King Sugríva will invite To action, and the streams be bright. The hero saved in hour of need Repays the debt with friendly deed: But hated by the good are they Who take the boon and ne’er repay.”




Canto XXVIII. The Rains.


“See, brother, see” thus Ráma cried On Mályavat’s(618) dark-wooded side, “A chain of clouds, like lofty hills, The sky with gathering shadow fills. Nine months those clouds have borne the load Conceived from sunbeams as they glowed, And, having drunk the seas, give birth, And drop their offspring on the earth. Easy it seems at such a time That flight of cloudy stairs to climb, And, from their summit, safely won, Hang flowery wreaths about the sun. See how the flash of evening’s red Fringes the fleecy clouds o’erhead Till all the sky is streaked and lined With bleeding wounds incarnadined, Or the wide firmament above Shows like a lover sick with love And, pale with cloudlets, heaves a sigh In the soft breeze that wanders by. See, by the fervent heat embrowned, How drenched with recent showers, the ground Pours out in floods her gushing tears, Like Sítá wild with torturing fears. So softly blows this cloud-born breeze Cool through the boughs of camphor trees That one might hold it in the cup Of hollowed hands and drink it up. See, brother, where that rocky steep, Where odorous shrubs in rain-drops weep, Shows like Sugríva when they shed Tne royal balm upon his head. Like students at their task appear These hills whose misty peaks are near: Black deerskin(619) garments wrought of cloud Their forms with fitting mantles shroud, Each torrent from the summit poured Supplies the place of sacred cord.(620) And winds that in their caverns moan Sound like the voice’s undertone.(621) From east to west red lightnings flash, And, quivering neath the golden lash, The great sky like a generous steed Groans inly at each call to speed. Yon lightning, as it flashes through The giant cloud of sable hue, Recalls my votaress Sítá pressed Mid struggles to the demon’s breast. See, on those mountain ridges stand Sweet shrubs that bud and bloom expand. The soft rain ends their pangs of grief, And drops its pearls on flower and leaf. But all their raptures stab me through And wake my pining love anew.(622) Now through the air no wild bird flies, Each lily shuts her weary eyes; And blooms of opening jasmin show The parting sun has ceased to glow. No captain now for conquest burns, But homeward with his host returns; For roads and kings’ ambitious dreams Have vanished neath descending streams. This is the watery month(623) wherein The Sámar’s(624) sacred chants begin. Áshádha(625) past, now Kośal’s lord(626) The harvest of the spring has stored,(627) And dwells within his palace freed From every care of pressing need. Full is the moon, and fierce and strong Impetuous Sarjú(628) roars along As though Ayodhyá’s crowds ran out To greet their king with echoing shout. In this sweet time of ease and rest No care disturbs Sugríva’s breast, The foe that marred his peace o’erthrown, And queen and realm once more his own. Alas, a harder fate is mine, Reft both of realm and queen to pine, And, like the bank which floods erode, I sink beneath my sorrow’s load. Sore on my soul my miseries weigh, And these long rains our action stay, While Rávan seems a mightier foe Than I dare hope to overthrow. I saw the roads were barred by rain, I knew the hopes of war were vain; Nor could I bid Sugríva rise, Though prompt to aid my enterprise. E’en now I scarce can urge my friend On whom his house and realm depend, Who, after toil and peril past, Is happy with his queen at last. Sugríva after rest will know The hour is come to strike the blow, Nor will his grateful soul forget My succour, or deny the debt I know his generous heart, and hence Await the time with confidence When he his friendly zeal will show, And brooks again untroubled flow.”(629)




Canto XXIX. Hanumán’s Counsel.


No flash of lightning lit the sky, No cloudlet marred the blue on high. The Saras(630) missed the welcome rain, The moon’s full beams were bright again. Sugríva, lapped in bliss, forgot The claims of faith, or heeded not; And by alluring joys misled The path of falsehood learned to tread. In careless ease he passed each hour, And dallied in his lady’s bower. Each longing of his heart was stilled, And every lofty hope fulfilled. With royal Rumá by his side, Or Tárá yet a dearer bride, He spent each joyous day and night In revelry and wild delight, Like Indra whom the nymphs entice To taste the joys of Paradise. The power to courtiers’ hands resigned, To all their acts his eyes were blind. All doubt, all fear he cast aside And lived with pleasure for his guide. But sage Hanúmán, firm and true, Whose heart the lore of Scripture knew, Well trained to meet occasion, trained In all by duty’s law ordained, Strove with his prudent speech to find Soft access to the monarch’s mind. He, skilled in every gentle art Of eloquence that wins the heart, Sugríva from his trance to wake, His salutary counsel spake:

  “The realm is won, thy name advanced, The glory of thy house enhanced, And now thy foremost care should be To aid the friends who succoured thee. He who is firm and faithful found To friendly ties in honour bound, Will see his name and fame increase And his blest kingdom thrive in peace. Wide sway is his who truly boasts That friends and treasure, self and hosts, All blent in one harmonious whole, Are subject to his firm control. Do thou, whose footsteps never stray From the clear bounds of duty’s way, Assist, as honour bids thee, now Thy friends, observant of thy vow. For if all cares we lay not by, And to our friend’s assistance fly, We, after, toil in idle haste, And all the late endeavour waste. Up! nor the promised help delay Until the hour have slipped away. Up! and with Raghu’s son renew The search for Sítá lost to view. The hour is come: he hears the call, But not on thee reproaches fall From him who labours to repress His eager spirit’s restlessness. Long joined to thee in friendly ties He made thy fame and fortune rise, In gentle gifts by none excelled. In splendid might unparalleled. Up, to his succour, King! repay The favour of that prosperous day, And to thy bravest captains send Prompt mandates to assist thy friend. The cry for help thou wilt not spurn Although no grace demands return: And wilt thou not thine aid afford To him who realm and life restored? Exert thy power, and thou hast won The love of Daśaratha’s son: And wilt thou for his summons wait, And, till he call thee, hesitate? Think not the hero needs thy power To save him in the desperate hour: He with his arrows could subdue The Gods and all the demon crew, And only waits that he may see Redeemed the promise made by thee. For thee he risked his life and fought, For thee that great deliverance wrought. Then let us trace through earth and skies His lady wheresoe’er she lies. Through realms above, beneath, we flee, And plant our footsteps on the sea. Then why, O Lord of Vánars, still Delay us waiting for thy will? Give thy commands, O King, and say What task has each and where the way. Before thee myriad Vánars stand To sweep through heaven, o’er seas and land.”

  Sugríva heard the timely rede That roused him in the day of need, And thus to Níla prompt and brave His hest the imperial Vánar gave: “Go, Níla, to the distant hosts That keep in arms their several posts, And all the armies that protect The quarters,(631) with their chiefs, collect. To all the luminaries placed In intermediate regions haste, And bid each captain rise and lead His squadrons to their king with speed. Do thou meanwhile with strictest care All that the time requires prepare. The loitering Vánar who delays To gather here ere thrice five days, Shall surely die for his offence, Condemned for sinful negligence.”




Canto XXX. Ráma’s Lament.


But Ráma in the autumn night Stood musing on the mountain height, While grief and love that scorned control Shook with wild storms the hero’s soul. Clear was the sky, without a cloud The glory of the moon to shroud. And bright with purest silver shone Each hill the soft beams looked upon. He knew Sugríva’s heart was bent On pleasure, gay and negligent. He thought on Janak’s child forlorn From his fond arms for ever torn. He mourned occasion slipping by, And faint with anguish heaved each sigh. He sat where many a varied streak Of rich ore marked the mountain peak. He raised his eyes the sky to view, And to his love his sad thoughts flew. He heard the Sáras cry, and faint With sorrow poured his love-born plaint: “She, she who mocked the softest tone Of wild birds’ voices with her own,— Where strays she now, my love who played So happy in our hermit shade? How can my absent love behold The bright trees with their flowers of gold, And all their gleaming glory see With eyes that vainly look for me? How is it with my darling when From the deep tangles of the glen Float carols of each bird elate With rapture singing to his mate? In vain my weary glances rove From lake to hill, from stream to grove: I find no rapture in the scene, And languish for my fawn-eyed queen. Ah, does strong love with wild unrest, Born of the autumn, stir her breast? And does the gentle lady pine Till her bright eyes shall look in mine?”

  Thus Raghu’s son in piteous tone, O’erwhelmed with sorrow, made his moan. E’en as the bird that drinks the rains(632) To Indra thousand-eyed complains. Then Lakshmaṇ who had wandered through The copses where the berries grew,