[ADA-ramayana  —  part 12 of 12, continuation of part 11]
============================================================

Schlegel’s which gives the tears of joy to the courtiers.

  357 The commentator says “Śatrughna accompanied by the other sons of the       king.”

  358 Not Bharat’s uncle, but some councillor.

_  359 Śatakratu_, Lord of a hundred sacrifices, the performance of a       hundred _Aśvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse entitling the       sacrificer to this exalted dignity.

  360 The modern Malabar.

  361 Now Sungroor, in the Allahabad district.

  362 Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, and Sumantra.

  363 The _svastika_, a little cross with a transverse line at each       extremity.

  364 When an army marched it was customary to burn the huts in which it       had spent the night.

  365 Yáma, Varuṇa, and Kuvera.

  366 “A happy land in the remote north where the inhabitants enjoy a       natural pefection attended with complete happiness obtained without       exertion. There is there no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death,       nor fear: no distinction of virtue and vice, none of the       inequalities denoted by the words best, worst, and intermediate, nor       any change resulting from the succession of the four Yugas.” See       MUIR’S _Sanskrit Texts_, Vol. I. p. 492.

  367 The Moon.

  368 The poet does not tell us what these lakes contained.

  369 These ten lines are a substitution for, and not a translation of the       text which Carey and Marshman thus render: “This mountain adorned       with mango, jumboo, usuna, lodhra, piala, punusa, dhava, unkotha,       bhuvya, tinisha, vilwa, tindooka, bamboo, kashmaree, urista, uruna,       madhooka, tilaka, vuduree, amluka, nipa, vetra, dhunwuna, veejaka,       and other trees affording flowers, and fruits, and the most       delightful shade, how charming does it appear!”

_  370 Vidyadharis_, Spirits of Air, sylphs.

  371 A lake attached either to Amarávatí the residence of Indra, or Alaká       that of Kuvera.

  372 The Ganges of heaven.

  373 Naliní, as here, may be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.

  374 This canto is allowed, by Indian commentators, to be an       interpolation. It cannot be the work of Válmíki.

  375 A fine bird with a strong, sweet note, and great imitative powers.

  376 Bauhinea variegata, a species of ebony.

  377 The rainbow is called the bow of Indra.

  378 Bhogavatí, the abode of the Nágas or Serpent race.

  379 “The order of the procession on these occasions is that the children       precede according to age, then the women and after that the men       according to age, the youngest first and the eldest last: when they       descend into the water this is reversed and resumed when they come       out of it.” CAREY AND MARSHMAN.

  380 Vṛihaspati, the preceptor of the Gods.

  381 Garuḍ, the king of birds.

  382 To be won by virtue.

  383 The four religious orders, referable to different times of life are,       that of the student, that of the householder, that of the anchorite,       and that of the mendicant.

  384 To Gods, men, and Manes.

  385 Gayá is a very holy city in Behar. Every good Hindu ought once in       his life to make funeral offerings in Gayá in honour of his       ancestors.

_  386 Put_ is the name of that region of hell to which men are doomed who       leave no son to perform the funeral rites which are necessary to       assure the happiness of the departed. _Putra_, the common word for a       son is said by the highest authority to be derived from _Put_ and       _tra_ deliverer.

  387 It was the custom of Indian women when mourning for their absent       husbands to bind their hair in a long single braid.

      Carey and Marshman translate, “the one-tailed city.”

  388 The verses in a different metre with which some cantos end are all       to be regarded with suspicion. Schlegel regrets that he did not       exclude them all from his edition. These lines are manifestly       spurious. See _Additional Notes_.

  389 This genealogy is a repetition with slight variation of that given       in Book I, Canto LXX.

  390 In Gorresio’s recension identified with Vishṇu. See Muir’s _Sanskrit       Texts, Vol. IV. pp 29, 30_.

  391 From _sa_ with, and _gara_ poison.

  392 See Book I. Canto XL.

  393 A practice which has frequently been described, under the name of       _dherna_, by European travellers in India.

  394 Compare Milton’s “_beseeching or beseiging_.”

  395 Ten-headed, ten-necked, ten faced, are common epithets of Rávaṇ the       giant king of Lanká.

  396 The spouse of Rohiṇí is the Moon: Ráhu is the demon who causes       eclipses.

  397 “Once,” says the Commentator Tírtha, “in the battle between the Gods       and demons the Gods were vanquished, and the sun was overthrown by       Ráhu. At the request of the Gods Atri undertook the management of       the sun for a week.”

  398 Now Nundgaon, in Oudh.

  399 A part of the great Daṇḍak forest.

  400 When the saint Máṇḍavya had doomed some saint’s wife, who was       Anasúyá’s friend, to become a widow on the morrow.

  401 Heavenly nymphs.

  402 The _ball_ or present of food to all created beings.

  403 The clarified butter &c. cast into the sacred fire.

  404 The Moon-God: “he is,” says the commentator, “the special deity of       Bráhmans.”

  405 “Because he was an incarnation of the deity,” says the commentator,       “otherwise such honour paid by men of the sacerdotal caste to one of       the military would be improper.”

  406 The king of birds.

_  407 Kálántakayamopamam_, resembling Yáma the destroyer.

  408 Somewhat inconsistently with this part of the story Tumburu is       mentioned in Book II, Canto XII as one of the Gandharvas or heavenly       minstrels summoned to perform at Bharadvája’s feast.

  409 Rambhá appears in Book I Canto LXIV as the temptress of Viśvámitra.

  410 The conclusion of this Canto is all a vain repetition: it is       manifestly spurious and a very feeble imitation of Válmíki’s style.       See _Additional Notes_.

  411 “Even when he had alighted,” says the commentator: The feet of Gods       do not touch the ground.

  412 A name of Indra.

  413 Śachí is the consort of Indra.

  414 The spheres or mansions gained by those who have duly performed the       sacrifices required of them. Different situations are assigned to       these spheres, some placing them near the sun, others near the moon.

  415 Hermits who live upon roots which they dig out of the earth:       literally _diggers_, derived from the prefix _vi_ and _khan_ to dig.

  416 Generally, divine personages of the height of a man’s thumb,       produced from Brahmá’s hair: here, according to the commentator       followed by Gorresio, hermits who when they have obtained fresh food       throw away what they had laid up before.

  417 Sprung from the washings of Vishṇuu’s feet.

  418 Four fires burning round them, and the sun above.

  419 The tax allowed to the king by the Laws of Manu.

  420 Near the celebrated Rámagiri or Ráma’s Hill, now Rám-ṭek, near       Nagpore—the scene of the Yaksha’s exile in the _Messenger Cloud_.

  421 A hundred _Aśvamedhas_ or sacrifices of a horse raise the sacrificer       to the dignity of Indra.

  422 Indra.

  423 Gorresio observes that Daśaratha was dead and that Sítá had been       informed of his death. In his translation he substitutes for the       words of the text “thy relations and mine.” This is quite       superfluous. Daśaratha though in heaven still took a loving interest       in the fortunes of his son.

  424 One of the hermits who had followed Ráma.

  425 The lake of the five nymphs.

  426 The holy fig-tree.

  427 The bread-fruit tree, Artocarpus integrifolia.

  428 A fine timber tree, Shorea robusta.

  429 The God of fire.

  430 Kuvera, the God of riches.

  431 The Sun.

  432 Brahmá, the creator.

  433 Śiva.

  434 The Wind-God.

  435 The God of the sea.

  436 A class of demi-gods, eight in number.

  437 The holiest text of the Vedas, deified.

  438 Vásuki.

  439 Garuḍ.

  440 The War-God.

  441 One of the Pleiades generally regarded as the model of wifely       excellence.

  442 The Madhúka, or, as it is now called, Mahuwá, is the Bassia       latifolia, a tree from whose blossoms a spirit is extracted.

  443 “I should have doubted whether Manu could have been the right       reading here, but that it occurs again in verse 29, where it is in       like manner followed in verse 31 by Analá, so that it would       certainly seem that the name Manu is intended to stand for a female,       the daughter of Daksha. The Gauḍa recension, followed by Signor       Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely different reading at the       end of the line, viz. _Balám Atibalám api_, ‘Balá and Atibilá,’       instead of Manu and Analá. I see that Professor Roth s.v. adduces       the authority of the Amara Kosha and of the Commentator on Páṇini       for stating that the word sometimes means ‘the wife of Manu.’ In the       following text of the Mahábhárata I. 2553. also, Manu appears to be       the name of a female: ‘_Anaradyam_, _Manum_, _Vañsám_, _Asurám_,       _Márgaṇapriyám_, _Anúpám_, _Subhagám_, _Bhásím iti_, _Prádhá       vyajayata_. Prádhá (daughter of Daksha) bore Anavadyá, Manu, Vanśá,       Márgaṇapriyá, Anúpá, Subhagá. and Bhásí.’ ” _Muir’s Sanskrit Text_,       Vol. I. p. 116.

  444 The elephant of Indra.

_  445 Golángúlas_, described as a kind of monkey, of a black colour, and       having a tail like a cow.

  446 Eight elephants attached to the four quarters and intermediate       points of the compass, to support and guard the earth.

  447 Some scholars identify the centaurs with the Gandharvas.

  448 The hooded serpents, says the commentator Tírtha, were the offspring       of Surasá: all others of Kadrú.

  449 The text reads Kaśyapa, “a descendant of Kaśyapa,” who according to       Rám. II. l0, 6, ought to be Vivasvat. But as it is stated in the       preceding part of this passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one of       Kaśyapa’s eight wives, we must here read Kaśyap. The Ganda recension       reads (III, 20, 30) _Manur manushyáms cha tatha janayámása Rághana_,       instead of the corresponding line in the Bombay edition. _Muir’s       Sanskrit Text, Vol I, p. 117._

  450 The original verses merely name the trees. I have been obliged to       amplify slightly and to omit some quas versu dicere non est; _e.g._       the _tiniśa_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis), _punnága_ (Rottleria       tinctoria), _tilaka_ (not named), _syandana_ (Dalbergia ougeiniensis       again), _vandana_ (unknown), _nípa_ (Nauclea Kadamba), _lakucha_       (Artœarpus lacucha), _dhava_ (Grislea tomentosa), Aśvakarna (another       name for the Sál), _Śamí_ (Acacia Suma), _khadira_ (Mimosa catechu),       _kinśuka_ (Butea frondosa), _pátala_ (Bignonia suaveolens).

  451 Acacia Suma.

  452 The south is supposed to be the residence of the departed.

  453 The sun.

  454 The night is divided into three watches of four hours each.

  455 The chief chamberlain and attendant of Śiva or Rudra.

  456 Umá or Párvati, the consort of Śiva.

  457 A star, one of the favourites of the Moon.

  458 The God of love.

  459 A demon slain by Indra.

  460 Chitraratha, King of the Gandharvas.

  461 Titanic.

  462 The Sáriká is the Maina, a bird like a starling.

  463 Mahákapála, Sthúláksha, Pramátha, Triśiras.

  464 Vishṇu, who bears a _chakra_ or discus.

  465 Śiva.

  466 See _Additional Notes_—DAKSHA’S SACRIFICE.

  467 Himálaya.

  468 One of the mysterious weapons given to Ráma.

  469 A periphrasis for the body.

  470 Triśirás.

  471 The Three-headed.

  472 The demon who causes eclipses.

  473 “This Asura was a friend of Indra, and taking advantage of his       friend’s confidence, he drank up Indra’s strength along with a       draught of wine and Soma. Indra then told the Aśvins and Sarasvatí       that Namuchi had drunk up his strength. The Aśvins in consequence       gave Indra a thunderbolt in the form of a foam, with which he smote       off the head of Namuchi.” GARRETT’S _Classical Dictionary of India_.       See also Book I. p. 39.

  474 Indra.

  475 Popularly supposed to cause death.

  476 Garuḍ, the King of Birds, carried off the Amrit or drink of Paradise       from Indra’s custody.

  477 A demon, son of Kaśyap and Diti, slain by Rudra or Śiva when he       attempted to carry off the tree of Paradise.

  478 Namuchi and Vritra were two demons slain by Indra. Vritra       personifies drought, the enemy of Indra, who imprisons the rain in       the cloud.

  479 Another demon slain by Indra.

  480 The capital of the giant king Rávaṇ.

  481 Kuvera, the God of gold.

  482 In the great deluge.

  483 The giant Márícha, son of Táḍaká. Táḍaká was slain by Ráma. See p.       39.

  484 Indra’s elephant.

  485 Bhogavatí, in Pátála in the regions under the earth, is the capital       of the serpent race whose king is Vásuki.

  486 the grove of Indra.

  487 Pulastya is considered as the ancestor of the Rakshases or giants,       as he is the father of Viśravas, the father of Rávaṇ and his       brethren.

  488 Beings with the body of a man and the head of a horse.

  489 Ájas, Maríchipas, Vaikhánasas, Máshas, and Bálakhilyas are classes       of supernatural beings who lead the lives of hermits.

  490 “The younger brother of the giant Rávaṇ; when he and his brother had       practiced austerities for a long series of years, Brahmá appeared to       offer them boons: Vibhishaṇa asked that he might never meditate any       unrighteousness.… On the death of Rávaṇ Vibhishaṇa was installed as       Rája of Lanká.” GARRETT’S _Classical Dictionary of India_.

  491 Serpent-gods.

  492 See p. 33.

  493 The Sanskrit words for car and jewels begin with _ra_.

  494 A race of beings of human shape but with the heads of horses, like       centaurs reversed.

  495 The favourite wife of the Moon.

  496 The planet Saturn.

  497 Another favourite of the Moon; one of the lunar mansions.

  498 The Rudras, agents in creation, are eight in number; they sprang       from the forehead of Brahmá.

  499 Maruts, the attendants of Indra.

  500 Radiant demi-gods.

  501 The mountain which was used by the Gods as a churning stick at the       Churning of the Ocean.

  502 The story will be found in GARRETT’S _Classical Dictionary_. See       ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  503 Mercury: to be carefully distinguished from Buddha.

  504 The spirits of the good dwell in heaven until their store of       accumulated merit is exhausted. Then they redescend to earth in the       form of falling stars.

  505 See The Descent of Gangá, Book I Canto XLIV.

  506 See Book I Canto XXV.

_  507 Aśoka_ is compounded of _a_ not and _śoka_ grief.

  508 See Book I Canto XXXI.

  509 An Asur or demon, king of Tripura, the modern Tipperah.

  510 Śiva.

  511 See Book I, Canto LIX.

  512 The preceptor of the Gods.

  513 From the root _vid_, to find.

  514 Rávaṇ.

  515 Or Curlews’ Wood.

  516 Iron-faced.

  517 Kabandha means a trunk.

  518 A class of mythological giants. In the Epic period they were       probably personifications of the aborigines of India.

  519 Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing dissensions, and seeking       protection.

  520 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  521 Or as the commentator Tírtha says, Śilápidháná, rock-covered, may be       the name of the cavern.

  522 Pampá is said by the commentator to be the name both of a lake and a       brook which flows into it. The brook is said to rise in the hill       Rishyamúka.

  523 Who was acting as Regent for Ráma and leading an ascetic life while       he mourned for his absent brother.

  524 The Indian Cuckoo.

  525 The Cassia Fistula or Amaltás is a splendid tree like a giant       laburnum covered with a profusion of chains and tassels of gold. Dr.       Roxburgh well describes it as “uncommonly beautiful when in flower,       few trees surpassing it in the elegance of its numerous long       pendulous racemes of large bright-yellow flowers intermixed with the       young lively green foliage.” It is remarkable also for its curious       cylindrical black seed-pods about two feet long, which are called       monkeys’ walking-sticks.

  526 “The Jonesia Asoca is a tree of considerable size, native of       southern India. It blossoms in February and March with large erect       compact clusters of flowers, varying in colour from pale-orange to       scarlet, almost to be mistaken, on a hasty glance, for immense       trusses of bloom of an Ixora. Mr. Fortune considered this tree, when       in full bloom, superior in beauty even to the Amherstia.

      The first time I saw the Asoc in flower was on the hill where the       famous rock-cut temple of Kárlí is situated, and a large concourse       of natives had assembled for the celebration of some Hindoo       festival. Before proceeding to the temple the Mahratta women       gathered from two trees, which were flowering somewhat below, each a       fine truss of blossom, and inserted it in the hair at the back of       her head.… As they moved about in groups it is impossible to imagine       a more delightful effect than the rich scarlet bunches of flowers       presented on their fine glossy jet-black hair.” FIRMINGER,       _Gardening for India_.

  527 No other word can express the movements of peafowl under the       influence of pleasing excitement, especially when after the long       drought they hear the welcome roar of the thunder and feel that the       rain is near.

  528 The Dewy Season is one of the six ancient seasons of the Indian       year, lasting from the middle of January to the middle of March.

  529 Ráma appears to mean that on a former occasion a crow flying high       overhead was an omen that indicated his approaching separation from       Sítá; and that now the same bird’s perching on a tree near him may       be regarded as a happy augury that she will soon be restored to her       husband.

  530 A tree with beautiful and fragrant blossoms.

  531 A race of semi-divine musicians attached to the service of Kuvera,       represented as centaurs reversed with human figures and horses’       heads.

  532 Butea Frondosa. A tree that bears a profusion of brilliant red       flowers which appear before the leaves.

  533 I omit five _ślokas_ which contain nothing but a list of trees for       which, with one or two exceptions, there are no equivalent names in       English. The following is Gorresio’s translation of the       corresponding passage in the Bengal recension:—

      “Oh come risplendono in questa stagione di primavera i vitici, le       galedupe, le bassie, le dalbergie, i diospyri … le tile, le       michelie, le rottlerie, le pentaptere ed i pterospermi, i bombaci,       le grislee, gli abri, gli amaranti e le dalbergie; i sirii, le       galedupe, le barringtonie ed i palmizi, i xanthocymi, il pepebetel,       le verbosine e le ticaie, le nauclee le erythrine, gli asochi, e le       tapie fanno d’ogni intorno pompa de’ lor fiori.”

  534 A sacred stream often mentioned in the course of the poem. See Book       II, Canto XCV.

  535 A daughter of Daksha who became one of the wives of Kaśyapa and       mother of the Daityas. She is termed the general mother of Titans       and malignant beings. See Book I Cantos XLV, XLVI.

  536 Sugríva, the ex-king of the Vánars, foresters, or monkeys, an exile       from his home, wandering about the mountain Rishyamúka with his four       faithful ex-ministers.

  537 The hermitage of the Saint Matanga which his curse prevented Báli,       the present king of the Vánars, from entering. The story is told at       length in Canto XI of this Book.

  538 Hanumán, Sugríva’s chief general, was the son of the God of Wind.       See Book I, Canto XVI.

  539 A range of hills in Malabar; the Western Ghats in the Deccan.

  540 Válmíki makes the second vowel in this name long or short to suit       the exigencies of the verse. Other Indian poets have followed his       example, and the same licence will be used in this translation.

  541 I omit a recapitulatory and interpolated verse in a different metre,       which is as follows:—Reverencing with the words, So be it, the       speech of the greatly terrified and unequalled monkey king, the       magnanimous Hanumán then went where (stood) the very mighty Ráma       with Lakshmaṇ.

  542 The semi divine Hanumán possesses, like the Gods and demons, the       power of wearing all shapes at will. He is one of the _Kámarúpís_.

      Like Milton’s good and bad angels “as they please         They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size         Assume as likes them best, condense or rare.”

  543 Himálaya is of course _par excellence_ the Monarch of mountains, but       the complimentary title is frequently given to other hills as here       to Malaya.

  544 Twisted up in a matted coil as was the custom of ascetics.

  545 The sun and moon.

  546 The rainbow.

  547 The Vedas are four in number, the Rich or Rig-veda, the Yajush or       Yajur-veda; the Sáman or Sáma-veda, and the Atharvan or       Atharva-veda. See p. 3. Note.

  548 The chest, the throat, and the head.

  549 “In our own metrical romances, or wherever a poem is meant not for       readers but for chanters and oral reciters, these _formulæ_, to meet       the same recurring case, exist by scores. Thus every woman in these       metrical romances who happens to be young, is described as ‘so       bright of ble,’ or complexion; always a man goes ‘the mountenance of       a mile’ before he overtakes or is overtaken. And so on through a       vast bead-roll of cases. In the same spirit Homer has his eternal       τον δ’αρ’ ὑποδρα ιδων, or τον δ’απαμειβομενος προσφη, &c.

      To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences wear an air of       child-like simplicity, beautifully recalling the features of Homer’s       primitive age. But they would have appeared faults to all       commonplace critics in literary ages.”

      DE QUINCEY. _Homer and the Homeridæ_.

  550 Bráhmans the sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas the royal and military,       Vaiśyas the mercantile, and Śúdras the servile.

  551 A protracted sacrifice extending over several days. See Book I, p.       24 Note.

  552 Possessed of all the auspicious personal marks that indicate       capacity of universal sovereignty. See Book I. p. 2, and Note 3.

  553 Kabandha. See Book III. Canto LXXIII.

  554 Fire for sacred purposes is produced by the attrition of two pieces       of wood. In marriage and other solemn covenants fire is regarded as       the holy witness in whose presence the agreement is made. Spenser in       a description of a marriage, has borrowed from the Roman rite what       he calls the housling, or “matrimonial rite.”

      “His owne two hands the holy knots did knit       That none but death forever can divide.       His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,       The housling fire did kindle and provide.”

      Faery Queen, Book I. XII. 37.

  555 Indra.

  556 Báli the king _de facto_.

  557 With the Indians, as with the ancient Greeks, the throbbing of the       right eye in a man is an auspicious sign, the throbbing of the left       eye is the opposite. In a woman the significations of signs are       reversed.

  558 The Vedas stolen by the demons Madhu and Kaiṭabha.

      “The text has [Sanskrit text] which signifies literally ‘the lost       vedic tradition.’ It seems that allusion is here made to the Vedas       submerged in the depth of the sea, but promptly recovered by Vishṇu       in one of his incarnations, as the brahmanic legend relates, with       which the orthodoxy of the Bráhmans intended perhaps to allude to       the prompt restoration and uninterrupted continuity of the ancient       vedic tradition.”

      GORRESIO.

  559 Like the wife of a Nága or Serpent-God carried off by an eagle. The       enmity between the King of birds and the serpent is of very frequent       occurrence. It seems to be a modification of the strife between the       Vedic Indra and the Ahi, the serpent or drought-fiend; between       Apollôn and the Python, Adam and the Serpent.

  560 He means that he has never ventured to raise his eyes to her arms       and face, though he has ever been her devoted servant.

  561 The wood in which Skanda or Kártikeva was brought up:

                      “The Warrior-God       Whose infant steps amid the thickets strayed       Where the reeds wave over the holy sod.”

      See also Book I, Canto XXIX.

  562 “Sugríva’s story paints in vivid colours the manners, customs and       ideas of the wild mountain tribes which inhabited Kishkindhya or the       southern hills of the Deccan, of the people whom the poem calls       monkeys, tribes altogether different in origin and civilization from       the Indo-Sanskrit race.” GORRESIO.

  563 A fiend slain by Báli.

  564 Báli’s mountain city.

  565 The canopy or royal umbrella, one of the usual Indian regalia.

  566 Whisks made of the hair of the Yak or Bos grunniers, also regal       insignia.

  567 Righteous because he never transgresses his bounds, and

        “over his great tides         Fidelity presides.”

  568 Himálaya, the Lord of Snow, is the father of Umá the wife of Śiva or       Śankar.

  569 Indra’s celestial elephant.

  570 Báli was the son of Indra. See p. 28.

  571 An Asur slain by Indra. See p. 261 Note. He is, like Vritra, a form       of the demon of drought destroyed by the beneficent God of the       firmament.

  572 Another name of Indra or Mahendra.

  573 The Bengal recension makes it return in the form of a swan.

  574 Varuṇa is one of the oldest of the Vedic Gods, corresponding in name       and partly in character to the Οὐρανός of the Greeks and is often       regarded as the supreme deity. He upholds heaven and earth,       possesses extraordinary power and wisdom, sends his messengers       through both worlds, numbers the very winkings of men’s eyes,       punishes transgressors whom he seizes with his deadly noose, and       pardons the sins of those who are penitent. In later mythology he       has become the God of the sea.

  575 Budha, not to be confounded with the great reformer Buddha, is the       son of Soma or the Moon, and regent of the planet Mercury. Angára is       the regent of Mars who is called the red or the fiery planet. The       encounter between Michael and Satan is similarly said to have been       as if

      “Two planets rushing from aspect malign       Of fiercest opposition in midsky       Should combat, and their jarring spheres compound.”

      _Paradise Lost._ Book VI.

  576 The Aśvins or Heavenly Twins, the Dioskuri or Castor and Pollux of       the Hindus, have frequently been mentioned. See p. 36, Note.

  577 Called respectively Gárhapatya, Áhavaniya, and Dakshiṇa, household,       sacrificial, and southern.

  578 The store of merit accumulated by a holy or austere life secures       only a temporary seat in the mansion of bliss. When by the lapse of       time this store is exhausted, return to earth is unavoidable.

  579 The conflagration which destroys the world at the end of a Yuga or       age.

  580 Himálaya.

  581 Tárá means “star.” The poet plays upon the name by comparing her       beauty to that of the Lord of stars, the Moon.

  582 Suparṇa, the Well-winged, is another name of Garuḍa the King of       Birds. See p. 28, Note.

  583 The God of Death.

  584 The flag-staff erected in honour of the God Indra is lowered when       the festival is over. Aśvíní in astronomy is the head of Aries or       the first of the twenty-eight lunar mansions or asterisms.

  585 Indra the father of Báli.

  586 It is believed that every creature killed by Ráma obtained in       consequence immediate beatitude.

      “And blessed the hand that gave so dear a death.”

  587 “Yayáti was invited to heaven by Indra, and conveyed on the way       thither by Mátali, Indra’s charioteer. He afterwards returned to       earth where, by his virtuous administration he rendered all his       subjects exempt from passion and decay.” GARRETT’S C. D. OF INDIA.

  588 The ascetic’s dress which he wore during his exile.

  589 There is much inconsistency in the passages of the poem in which the       Vánars are spoken of, which seems to point to two widely different       legends. The Vánars are generally represented as semi-divine beings       with preternatural powers, living in houses and eating and drinking       like men sometimes as here, as monkeys pure and simple, living is       woods and eating fruit and roots.

  590 For a younger brother to marry before the elder is a gross violation       of Indian law and duty. The same law applied to daughters with the       Hebrews: “It must not be so done in our country to give the younger       before the first-born.” GENESIS xix. 26.

  591 “The hedgehog and porcupine, the lizard, the rhinoceros, the       tortoise, and the rabbit or hare, wise legislators declare lawful       food among five-toed animals.” MANU, v. 18.

        592 “He can not buckle his distempered cause       Within the belt of rule.”

      MACBETH.

  593 The _Ankuś_ or iron hook with which an elephant is driven and       guided.

  594 Hayagríva, Horse-necked, is a form of Vishṇu.

  595 “Aśvatara is the name of a chief of the Nágas or serpents which       inhabit the regions under the earth; it is also the name of a       Gandharva. Aśvatarí ought to be the wife of one of the two, but I am       not sure that this conjecture is right. The commentator does not say       who this Aśvatarí is, or what tradition or myth is alluded to.       Vimalabodha reads Aśvatarí in the nominative case, and explains,       Aśvatarí is the sun, and as the sun with his rays brings back the       moon which has been sunk in the ocean and the infernal regions, so       will I bring back Sítá.” GORRESIO.

  596 That is, “Consider what answer you can give to your accusers when       they charge you with injustice in killing me.”

  597 Manu, Book VIII. 318. “But men who have committed offences and have       received from kings the punishment due to them, go pure to heaven       and become as clear as those who have done well.”

  598 Mándhátá was one of the earlier descendants of Ikshváku. His name is       mentioned in Ráma’s genealogy, p. 81.

  599 I cannot understand how Válmíki could put such an excuse as this       into Ráma’s mouth. Ráma with all solemn ceremony, has made a league       of alliance with Báli’s younger brother whom he regards as a dear       friend and almost as an equal, and now he winds up his reasons for       killing Báli by coolly saying: “Besides you are only a monkey, you       know, after all, and as such I have every right to kill you how,       when, and where I like.”

  600 A name of Garuḍa the king of birds, the great enemy of the Serpents.

  601 Sugríva’s wife.

  602 “Our deeds still follow with us from afar. And what we have been       makes us what we are.”

  603 Sugríva and Angad.

  604 Angad himself, being too young to govern, would be Yuvarája or       heir-apparent.

  605 Susheṇa was the son of Varuṇa the God of the sea.

  606 A demon with the tail of a dragon, that causes eclipses by       endeavouring to swallow the sun and moon.

  607 The Lord of Stars is the Moon.

  608 Or the passage may be interpreted: “Be neither too obsequious or       affectionate, nor wanting in due respect or love.”

  609 Sacrifices and all religious rites begin and end with ablution, and       the wife of the officiating Bráhman takes an important part in the       performance of the holy ceremonies.

  610 Viśvarúpa, a son of Twashṭri or Viśvakarmá the heavenly architect,       was a three-headed monster slain by Indra.

  611 The Vánar chief, not to be confounded with Tárá.

  612 Śrávaṇ: July-August. But the rains begin a month earlier, and what       follows must not be taken literally. The text has _púrvo’ yam       várshiko másah Śrávaṇah salilágamdh_. The Bengal recension has the       same, and Gorresio translates: “Equesto ilmese Srâvana       (luglio-agosto) primo della stagione piovosa, in cui dilagano le       acque.”

  613 Kártik: October-November.

  614 “Indras, as the nocturnal sun, hides himself, transformed, in the       starry heavens: the stars are his eyes. The hundred-eyed or       all-seeing (panoptês) Argos placed as a spy over the actions of the       cow beloved by Zeus, in the Hellenic equivalent of this form of       Indras.” DE GUBERNATIS, _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. I, p. 418.

  615 Baudháyana and others.

  616 Sugríva appears to have been consecrated with all the ceremonies       that attended the _Abhisheka_ or coronation of an Indian prince of       the Aryan race. Compare the preparations made for Ráma’s       consecration, Book II, Canto III. Thus Homer frequently introduces       into Troy the rites of Hellenic worship.

  617 Vitex Negundo.

  618 Mályavat: “The name of this mountain appears to me to be erroneous,       and I think that instead of Mályavat should be read Malayavat,       Malaya is a group of mountains situated exactly in that southern       part of India where Ráma now was, while Mályavat is placed to the       north east.” GORRESIO.

  619 Mantles of the skin of the black antelope were the prescribed dress       of ascetics and religious students.

  620 The sacred cord worn as the badge of religious initiation by men of       the three twice-born castes.

  621 The hum with which students conduct their tasks.

  622 I omit here a long general description of the rainy season which is       not found in the Bengal recension and appears to have been       interpolated by a far inferior and much later hand than Valmiki’s.       It is composed in a metre different from that of the rest of the       Canto, and contains figures of poetical rhetoric and common-places       which are the delight of more recent poets.

  623 Praushthapada or Bhadra, the modern Bhadon, corresponds to half of       August and half of September.

  624 The Sáman or Sáma-veda, the third of the four Vedas, is really       merely a reproduction of parts of the Rig-veda, transposed and       scattered about piece-meal, only 78 verses in the whole being, it is       said, untraceable to the present recension of the Rig-veda.

  625 Áshádha is the month corresponding to parts of June and July.

  626 Bharat, who was regent during Ráma’s absence.

  627 Or with Gorresio, following the gloss of another commentary: “Has       completed every holy rite and accumulated stores of merit.”

  628 The river on which Ayodhyá was built.

  629 I omit a _śloka_ or four lines on gratitude and ingratitude repeated       word for word from the last Canto.

  630 The Indian crane; a magnificent bird easily domesticated.

  631 The troops who guard the frontiers on the north, south, east and       west.

  632 The Chátaka, Cuculus, Melanoleucus, is supposed to drink nothing but       the water for the clouds.

  633 The time for warlike expeditions began when the rains had ceased.

  634 The rainbow.

  635 Indra’s associates in arms, and musicians of his heaven.

  636 Maireya, a spirituous liquor from the blossoms of the Lythrum       fruticosum, with sugar, &c.

  637 Their names are as follows: Angad, Maínda, Dwida, Gavaya, Gaváksha,       Gaja, Śarabha, Vidyunmáli, Sampáti, Súryáksa, Hanumán, Vírabáhu,       Subáhu, Nala, Kúmuda, Susheṇa, Tára, Jámbuvatu, Dadhivakra, Níla,       Supátala, and Sunetra.

  638 The Kalpadruma or Wishing-tree is one of the trees of Svarga or       Indra’s Paradise: it has the power of granting all desires.

  639 The meaning is that if a man promises to give a horse and then       breaks his word he commits a sin as great as if he had killed a       hundred horses.

  640 The story is told in Book I, Canto LXIII, but the charmer there is       called Menaká.

  641 Rohiṇí is the name of the ninth Nakshatra or lunar asterism       personified as a daughter of Daksha, and the favourite wife of the       Moon. Aldebaran is the principal star in the constellation.

  642 Válmíki and succeeding poets make the second vowel in this name long       or short at their pleasure.

  643 Some of the mountains here mentioned are fabulous and others it is       impossible to identify. Sugríva means to include all the mountains       of India from Kailás the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded as       one of the loftiest peaks of the Himálayas, to Mahendra in the       extreme south, from the mountain in the east where the sun is said       to rise to Astáchal or the western mountain where he sets. The       commentators give little assistance: that Maháśaila, &c. are certain       mountains is about all the information they give.

  644 One of the celestial elephants of the Gods who protect the four       quarters and intermediate points of the compass.

  645 Váyu or the Wind was the father of Hanumán.

  646 The path or station of Vishṇu is the space between the seven Rishis       or Ursa Major, and Dhruva or the polar star.

  647 One of the seven seas which surround the earth in concentric       circles.

  648 The title of Maheśvar or Mighty Lord is sometimes given to Indra,       but more generally to Śiva whom it here denotes.

  649 See Book I, Canto XVI.

  650 The numbers are unmanageable in English verse. The poet speaks of       hundreds of _arbudas_; and an _arbuda_ is a hundred millions.

  651 Anuhláda or Anuhráda is one of the four sons of the mighty       Hiraṇyakaśipu, an Asur or a Daitya son of Kaśyapa and Diti and       killed by Vishṇu in his incarnation of the Man-Lion _Narasinha_.       According to the Bhágavata Puráṇa the Daitya or Asur Hiraṇyakaśipu       and Hiraṇyáksha his brother, both killed by Vishṇu, were born again       as Rávaṇ and Kumbhakarṇa his brother.

  652 Puloma, a demon, was the father-in-law of Indra who destroyed him in       order to avert an imprecation. Paulomí is a patronymic denoting       Śachí the daughter of Puloma.

  653 “Observe the variety of colours which the poem attributes to all       these inhabitants of the different mountainous regions, some white,       others yellow, &c. Such different colours were perhaps peculiar and       distinctive characteristics of those various races.” GORRESSIO.

  654 Susheṇ.

  655 Tára.

  656 Kesarí was the husband of Hanúmán’s mother, and is here called his       father.

  657 “I here unite under one heading two animals of very diverse nature       and race, but which from some gross resemblances, probably helped by       an equivoque in the language, are closely affiliated in the Hindoo       myth … a reddish colour of the skin, want of symmetry and       ungainliness of form, strength in hugging with the fore paws or       arms, the faculty of climbing, shortness of tail(?), sensuality,       capacity of instruction in dancing and in music, are all       characteristics which more or less distinguish and meet in bears as       well as in monkeys. In the _Rámáyaṇam_, the wise Jámnavant, the       Odysseus of the expedition of Lanká, is called now king of the bears       (rikshaparthivah), now great monkey (_Mahákapih_).” DE GUBERNATIS:       _Zoological Mythology_, Vol. II. p. 97.

  658 Gandhamádana, Angad, Tára, Indrajánu, Rambha, Durmukha, Hanumán,       Nala, Da mukha, Śarabha, Kumuda, Vahni.

  659 Daityas and Dánavas are fiends and enemies of the Gods, like the       Titans of Greek mythology.

  660 I reduce the unwieldy numbers of the original to more modest       figures.

  661 Sarayú now Sarjú is the river on which Ayodhyá was built.

  662 Kauśikí is a river which flows through Behar, commonly called Kosi.

  663 Bhagírath’s daughter is Gangá or the Ganges. The legend is told at       length in Book I Canto XLIV. _The Descent of Gangá_.

  664 A mountain not identified.

  665 The Jumna. The river is personified as the twin sister of Yáma, and       hence regarded as the daughter of the Sun.

  666 The Sarasvatí (corruptly called Sursooty, is supposed to join the       Ganges and Jumna at Prayág or Allahabad. It rises in the mountains       bounding the north-east part of the province of Delhi, and running       in a south-westerly direction becomes lost in the sands of the great       desert.

  667 The Sindhu is the Indus, the Sanskrit _s_ becoming _h_ in Persian       and being in this instance dropped by the Greeks.

  668 The Sone which rises in the district of Nagpore and falls into the       Ganges above Patna.

  669 Mahí is a river rising in Malwa and falling into the gulf of Cambay       after a westerly course of 280 miles.

  670 There is nothing to show what parts of the country the poet intended       to denote as silk-producing and silver-producing.

  671 Yavadwipa means the island of Yava, wherever that may be.

  672 Śiśir is said to be a mountain ridge projecting from the base of       Meru on the south. Wilson’s _Vishnu Puráṇa_, ed. Hall, Vol. II. p.       117.

  673 This appears to be some mythical stream and not the well-known Śone.       The name means red-coloured.

  674 A fabulous thorny rod of the cotton tree used for torturing the       wicked in hell. The tree gives its name, Śálmalí, to one of the       seven Dwípas, or great divisions of the known continent: and also to       a hell where the wicked are tormented with the pickles of the tree.

  675 The king of the feathered creation.

  676 Viśvakarmá, the Mulciber of the Indian heaven.

  677 “The terrific fiends named Mandehas attempt to devour the sun: for       Brahmá denounced this curse upon them, that without the power to       perish they should die every day (and revive by night) and therefore       a fierce contest occurs (daily) between them and the sun.” WILSON’S       Vishṇu Puráṇa. Vol. II. p. 250.

  678 Said in the _Vishṇu Puráṇa_ to be a ridge projecting from the base       of Meru to the north.

  679 Kinnars are centaurs reversed, beings with equine head and human       bodies.

  680 Yakshas are demi-gods attendant on Kuvera the God of wealth.

  681 Aurva was one of the descendants of Bhrigu. From his wrath proceeded       a flame that threatened to destroy the world, had not Aurva cast it       into the ocean where it remained concealed, and having the face of a       horse. The legend is told in the _Mahábhárat_. I. 6802.

  682 The word Játarúpa means gold.

  683 The celebrated mythological serpent king Sesha, called also Ananta       or the infinite, represented as bearing the earth on one of his       thousand heads.

  684 Jambudwípa is in the centre of the seven great _dwípas_ or       continents into which the world is divided, and in the centre of       Jambudwípa is the golden mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and       crowned by the great city of Brahmá. See WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_,       Vol. II. p. 110.

  685 Vaikhánases are a race of hermit saints said to have sprung from the       nails of Prajápati.

  686 “The wife of Kratu, Samnati, brought forth the sixty thousand       Válakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger than a joint of the thumb,       chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays of the Sun.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu       Puráṇa_.

  687 The continent in which Sudarśan or Meru stands, _i.e._ Jambudwíp.

  688 The names of some historical peoples which occur in this Canto and       in the Cantos describing the south and north will be found in the       ADDITIONAL NOTES. They are bare lists, not susceptible of a metrical       version.

  689 Suhotra, Śarári, Śaragulma, Gayá, Gaváksha, Gavaya, Susheṇa,       Gandhamádana, Ulkámukha, and Ananga.

  690 The modern Nerbudda.

  691 Krishṇaveṇí is mentioned in the _Vishṇu Puráṇa_ as “the deep       Krishṇaveṇí” but there appears to be no clue to its identification.

  692 The modern Godavery.

  693 The Mekhalas or Mekalas according to the Paráṇas live in the Vindhya       hills, but here they appear among the peoples of the south.

  694 Utkal is still the native name of Orissa.

  695 The land of the people of the “ten forts.” Professor Hall in a note       on WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 160 says: “The oral       traditions of the vicinity to this day assign the name of Daśárna to       a region lying to the east of the District of Chundeyree.”

  696 Avantí is one of the ancient names of the celebrated Ujjayin or       Oujein in Central India.

  697 Not identified.

  698 Ayomukh means iron faced. The mountain is not identified.

  699 The Káverí or modern Cauvery is well known and has always borne the       same appellation, being the Chaberis of Ptolemy.

  700 One of the seven principal mountain chains: the southern portion of       the Western Gháts.

  701 Agastya is the great sage who has already frequently appeared as       Ráma’s friend and benefactor.

  702 Támraparṇí is a river rising in Malaya.

  703 The Páṇḍyas are a people of the Deccan.

  704 Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from Orissa and the       northern Sircars to Gondwána, part of which near Ganjam is still       called Mahendra Malay or hills of Mahendra.

  705 Lanká, Sinhaladvípa, Sarandib, or Ceylon.

  706 The Flowery Hill of course is mythical.

  707 The whole of the geography south of Lanká is of course mythical.       Súryaván means Sunny.

  708 Vaidyut means connected with lightning.

  709 Agastya is here placed far to the south of Lanká. Earlier in this       Canto he was said to dwell on Malaya.

  710 Bhogavatí has been frequently mentioned: it is the capital of the       serpent Gods or demons, and usually represented as being in the       regions under the earth.

  711 Vásuki is according to some accounts the king of the Nágas or       serpent Gods.

  712 Śailúsha, Gramiṇi, Siksha, Suka, Babhru.

  713 The distant south beyond the confines of the earth is the home of       departed spirits and the city of Yáma the God of Death.

  714 Suráshṭra, the “good country,” is the modern Sura

  715 A country north-west of Afghanistan, Baíkh.

  716 The Moon-mountain here is mythical.

  717 Sindhu is the Indus.

  718 Páriyátra, or as more usually written Páripátra, is the central or       western portion of the Vindhya chain which skirts the province of       Malwa.

  719 Vajra means both diamond and thunderbolt, the two substances being       supposed to be identical.

  720 Chakraván means the discus-bearer.

  721 The discus is the favourite weapon of Vishṇu.

  722 The Indian Hephaistos or Vulcan.

  723 Panchajan was a demon who lived in the sea in the form of a conch       shell. WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, V. 21.

  724 Hayagríva, Horse-necked, is the name of a Daitya who at the       dissolution of the universe caused by Brahmá’s sleep, seized and       carried off the Vedas. Vishṇu slew him and recovered the sacred       treasures.

  725 Meru stands in the centre of Jambudwípa and consequently of the       earth. “The sun travels round the world, keeping Meru always on his       right. To the spectator who fronts him, therefore, as he rises Meru       must be always on the north; and as the sun’s rays do not penetrate       beyond the centre of the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the       north of it must be in darkness, whilst those on the south of it       must be in light: north and south being relative, not absolute,       terms, depending on the position of the spectator with regard to the       Sun and Meru.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 243. Note.

  726 The Viśvadevas are a class of deities to whom sacrifices should be       daily offered, as part of the ordinary worship of the householder.       According to the _Váyu Puráṇa_, this is a privilege conferred on       them by Brahmá and the Pitris as a reward for religious austerities       practised by them upon Himálaya.

  727 The eight Vasus were originally personifications like other Vedic       deities, of natural phenomena, such as Fire, Wind, &c. Their       appellations are variously given by different authorities.

  728 The Maruts or Storm-Gods, frequently addressed and worshipped as the       attendants and allies of Indra.

  729 The mountain behind which the sun sets.

  730 One of the oldest and mightiest of the Vedic deities; in later       mythology regarded as the God of the sea.

  731 The knotted noose with which he seizes and punishes transgressors.

  732 Sávarṇi is a Manu, offspring of the Sun by Chháyá.

  733 The poet has not said who the sons of Yáma are.

  734 The Lodhra or Lodh (Symplocos Racemosa) and the Devadáru or Deodar       are well known trees.

  735 The hills mentioned are not identifiable. Soma means the Moon. Kála,       black; Sudaraśan, fair to see; and Devasakhá friend of the Gods.

  736 The God of Wealth.

  737 The nymphs of Paradise.

  738 Kuvera the son of Viśravas.

  739 A class of demigods who, like the Yakshas, are the attendants of       Kuvera, and the guardians of his treasures.

  740 Situated in the eastern part of the Himálaya chain, on the north of       Assam. The mountain was torn asunder and the pass formed by the       War-God Kártikeya and Paraśuráma.

  741 “The Uttara Kurus, it should be remarked, may have been a real       people, as they are mentioned in the Aitareya Bráhmaṇa, VIII. 14.…       Wherefore the several nations who dwell in this northern quarter,       beyond the Himavat, the Uttara Kurus and the Uttara Madras are       consecrated to glorious dominion, and people term them the glorious.       In another passage of the same work, however, the Uttara Kurus are       treated as belonging to the domain of mythology.” MUIR’S _Sanskrit       Texts_. Vol. I. p. 494. See ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  742 The Moon-mountain.

  743 The Rudras are the same as the storm winds, more usually called       Maruts, and are often associated with Indra. In the later mythology       the Rudras are regarded as inferior manifestations of Śiva, and most       of their names are also names of Śiva.

  744 Canto IX.

  745 Udayagiri or the hill from which the sun rises.

  746 Asta is the mountain behind which the sun sets.

  747 Himálaya, the Hills of Snow.

  748 Canto XI.

  749 Hanumán was the leader of the army of the south which was under the       nominal command of Angad the heir apparent.

  750 The Bengal recension—Gorresio’s edition—calls this Asur or demon the       son of Márícha.

  751 The skin of the black antelope was the ascetic’s proper garb.

  752 Uśanas is the name of a sage mentioned in the Vedas. In the epic       poems he is identified with Śukra, the regent of the planet Venus,       and described as the preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and       possessor of vast knowledge.

  753 Hemá is one of the nymphs of Paradise.

  754 Merusávarṇi is a general name for the last four of the fourteen       Manus.

  755 Svayamprabhá, the “self-luminous,” is according to DE GUBERNATIS the       moon: “In the _Svayamprabhá_ too, we meet with the moon as a good       fairy who, from the golden palace which she reserves for her friend       Hemá (the golden one:) is during a month the guide, in the vast       cavern of Hanumant and his companions, who have lost their way in       the search of the dawn Sítá.” This is is not quite accurate: Hanumán       and his companions wander for a month in the cavern without a guide,       and then Svayamprabhá leads them out.

  756 Purandara, the destroyer of cities; the cities being the clouds       which the God of the firmament bursts open with his thunderbolts, to       release the waters imprisoned in these fortresses of the demons of       drought.

  757 Perceived that Angad had secured, through the love of the Vánars,       the reversion of Sugríva’s kingdom; or, as another commentator       explains it, perceived that Angad had obtained a new kingdom in the       enchanted cave which the Vánars, through love of him, would consent       to occupy.

  758 Vṛihaspati, Lord of Speech, the Preceptor of the Gods.

  759 Śukra is the regent of the planet Venus, and the preceptor of the       Daityas.

  760 The name of various kinds of grass used at sacrificial ceremonies,       especially, of the Kuśa grass, Poa cynosuroides, which was used to       strew the ground in preparing for a sacrifice, the officiating       Brahmans being purified by sitting on it.

  761 Sampáti is the eldest son of the celebrated Garuḍa the king of       birds.

  762 Vivasvat or the Sun is the father of Yáma the God of Death.

  763 Book III, Canto LI.

  764 Daśaratha’s rash oath and fatal promise to his wife Kaikeyí.

  765 Vritra, “the coverer, hider, obstructer (of rain)” is the name of       the Vedic personification of an imaginary malignant influence or       demon of darkness and drought supposed to take possession of the       clouds, causing them to obstruct the clearness of the sky and keep       back the waters. Indra is represented as battling with this evil       influence, and the pent-up clouds being practically represented as       mountains or castles are shattered by his thunderbolt and made to       open their receptacles.

  766 Frequent mention has been made of the three steps of Vishṇu       typifying the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun.

  767 For the _Churning of the Sea_, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  768 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

  769 The architect of the gods.

  770 Garuḍa, son of Vinatá, the sovereign of the birds.

  771 “The well winged one,” Garuḍa.

  772 The god of the sea.

  773 Mahendra is chain of mountains generally identified with part of the       Gháts of the Peninsula.

  774 Mátariśva is identified with Váyu, the wind.

  775 Of course not equal to the whole earth, says the Commentator, but       equal to Janasthán.

  776 This appears to be the Indian form of the stories of Phaethon and       Dædalus and Icarus.

  777 According to the promise, given him by Brahmá. See Book I, Canto       XIV.

  778 In the Bengal recension the fourth Book ends here, the remaining       Cantos being placed in the fifth.

  779 Each chief comes forward and says how far he can leap. Gaja says he       can leap ten yojans. Gavaksha can leap twenty. Gavaya thirty, and so       on up to ninety.

  780 Prahláda, the son of Hiraṇyakaśipu, was a pious Datya remarkable for       his devotion to Vishṇu, and was on this account persecuted by his       father.

  781 The Bengal recension calls him Aríshṭanemi’s brother. “The       commentator says ‘Aríshṭanemi is Aruṇa.’ Aruṇa the charioteer of the       sun is the son of Kaśyapa and Vinatá and by consequence brother of       Garuḍa, called Vainateya from Vinatá, his mother.” GORRESSIO.

  782 A nymph of Paradise.

  783 Hanu or Hanú means jaw. Hanumán or Hanúmán means properly one with a       large jaw.

  784 Vishṇu, the God of the Three Steps.

  785 Náráyaṇ, “He who moved upon the waters,” is Vishnu. The allusion is       to the famous three steps of that God.

  786 The Milky Way.

  787 This Book is called Sundar or the Beatiful. To a European taste it       is the most intolerably tedious of the whole poem, abounding in       repetition, overloaded description, and long and useless speeches       which impede the action of the poem. Manifest interpolations of       whole Cantos also occur. I have omitted none of the action of the       Book, but have occasionally omitted long passages of common-place       description, lamentation, and long stories which have been again and       again repeated.

  788 Brahmá the Self-Existent.

  789 Maináka was the son of Himálaya and Mená or Menaká.

  790 Thus Milton makes the hills of heaven self-moving at command:

      “At his command the uprooted hills retired       Each to his place, they heard his voice and went       Obsequious”

  791 The spirit of the mountain is separable from the mountain. Himalaya       has also been represented as standing in human form on one of his       own peaks.

  792 Ságar or the Sea is said to have derived its name from Sagar. The       story is fully told in Book I, Cantos XLII, XLIII, and XLIV.

  793 Kritu is the first of the four ages of the world, the golden age,       also called Satya.

_  794 Parvata_ means a mountain and in the Vedas a cloud. Hence in later       mythology the mountains have taken the place of the clouds as the       objects of the attacks of Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king is       Garuḍa.

  795 “The children of Surasá were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents,       traversing the sky.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 73.

  796 She means, says the Commentator, pursue thy journey if thou can.

  797 If Milton’s spirits are allowed the power of infinite self-extension       and compression the same must be conceded to Válmíki’s supernatural       beings. Given the power as in Milton the result in Válmíki is       perfectly consistent.

  798 “Daksha is the son of Brahmá and one of the Prajápatis or divine       progenitors. He had sixty daughters, twenty-seven of whom married to       Kaśyapa produced, according to one of the Indian cosmogonies, all       mundane beings. Does the epithet, Descendant of Daksha, given to       Surasá, mean that she is one of those daughters? I think not. This       epithet is perhaps an appellation common to all created beings as       having sprung from Daksha.” GORRESSIO.

  799 Sinhiká is the mother of Ráhu the dragon’s head or ascending node,       the chief agent in eclipses.

  800 According to De Gubernatis, the author of the very learned,       ingenious, and interesting though too fanciful _Zoological       Mythology_. Hanumán here represents the sun entering into and       escaping from a cloud. The biblical Jonah, according to him,       typifies the same phenomenon. Sá’dí, speaking of sunset, says _Yùnas       andar-i-dihán-imáhi shud_: Jonas was within the fish’s mouth. See       ADDITIONAL NOTES.

  801 The Buchanania Latifolia.

  802 The Bauhinia Variegata.

  803 Through the power that Rávaṇ’s stern mortifications had won for him       his trees bore flowers and fruit simultaneously.

  804 Viśvakarmá is the architect of the Gods.

  805 So in Paradise Lost Satan when he has stealthily entered the garden       of Eden assumes the form of a cormorant.

  806 Priests who fought only with the weapons of religion, the sacred       grass used like the verbena of the Romans at sacred rites and the       consecrated fire to consume the offering of ghee.

  807 One of the Rákshas lords.

  808 The brother Rávaṇ.

  809 Indra’s elephant.

  810 Rávaṇ’s palace appears to have occupied the whole extent of ground,       and to have contained within its outer walls the mansions of all the       great Rákshas chiefs. Rávaṇ’s own dwelling seems to have been       situated within the enchanted chariot Pushpak: but the description       is involved and confused, and it is difficult to say whether the       chariot was inside the palace or the palace inside the chariot.

  811 Pushpak from _pushpa_ a flower. The car has been mentioned before in       Rávaṇ’s expedition to carry off Sítá, Book III, Canto XXXV.

  812 Lakshmí is the wife of Vishṇu and the Goddess of Beauty and       Felicity. She rose, like Aphrodite, from the foam of the sea. For an       account of her birth and beauty, see Book I, Canto XLV.

  813 Viśvakarmá is the architect of the Gods, the Hephaestos or Mulciber       of the Indian heaven.

  814 Rávaṇ in the resistless power which his long austerities had endowed       him with, had conquered his brother Kuvera the God of Gold and taken       from him his greatest treasure this enchanted car.

  815 Like Milton’s heavenly car, “Itself instinct with spirit.”

  816 Women, says Válmíki. But the Commentator says that automatic figures       only are meant. Women would have seen Hanumán and given the alarm.

  817 Rávaṇ had fought against Indra and the Gods, and his body was still       scarred by the wounds inflicted by the tusks of Indra’s elephant and       by the fiery bolts of the Thunderer.

  818 The Vasus are a class of eight deities, originally personifications       of natural phenomena.

  819 The Maruts are the winds or Storm-Gods.

  820 The Ádityas originally seven deities of the heavenly sphere of whom       Varuṇa is the chief. The name Áditya was afterwards given to any       God, specially to Súrya the Sun.

  821 The Aśvins are the Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the       Hindus.

  822 The poet forgets that Hanumán has reduced himself to the size of a       cat.

  823 Sítá “not of woman born,” was found by King Janak as he was turning       up the ground in preparation for a sacrifice. See Book II, Canto       CXVIII.

  824 The six _Angas_ or subordinate branches of the Vedas are 1.       _Sikshá_, the science of proper articulation and pronunciation: 2.       _Chhandas_, metre: 3. _Vyákarana_, linguistic analysis or grammar:       4. _Nirukta_, explanation of difficult Vedic words: 5. _Jyotishṭom_,       Astronomy, or rather the Vedic Calendar: 6. _Kalpa_, ceremonial.

  825 There appears to be some confusion of time here. It was already       morning when Hanumán entered the grove, and the torches would be       needless.

  826 Rávaṇ is one of those beings who can “climb them as they will,” and       can of course assume the loveliest form to please human eyes as well       as the terrific shape that suits the king of the Rákshases.

  827 White and lovely as the Arant or nectar recovered from the depths of       the Milky Sea when churned by the assembled Gods. See Book I, Canto       XLV.

  828 Rávaṇ in his magic car carrying off the most beautiful women reminds       us of the magician in _Orlando Furioso_, possesor of the flying       horse.

      “Volando talor s’alza ne le stelle,       E poi quasi talor la terra rade;       E ne porta con lui tutte le belle       Donne che trova per quelle contrade.”

  829 Indian women twisted their long hair in a single braid as a sign of       mourning for their absent husbands.

  830 Janak, king of Míthilá, was Sítá’s father.

  831 Hiraṇyakaśipu was a king of the Daityas celebrated for his       blasphemous impieties. When his pious son Prahlada praised Vishṇu       the Daitya tried to kill him, when the God appeared in the       incarnation of the man-lion and tore the tyrant to pieces.

  832 Do unto others as thou wouldst they should do unto thee, is a       precept frequently occurring in the old Indian poems. This charity       is to embrace not human beings only, but bird and beast as well: “He       prayeth best who loveth best all things both great and small.”

  833 It was the custom of Indian warriors to mark their arrows with their       ciphers or names, and it seems to have been regarded as a point of       honour to give an enemy the satisfaction of knowing who had shot at       him. This passage however contains, if my memory serves me well, the       first mention in the poem of this practice, and as arrows have been       so frequently mentioned and described with almost every conceivable       epithet, its occurrence here seems suspicious. No mention of, or       allusion to writing has hitherto occurred in the poem.

  834 This threat in the same words occurs in Book III, Canto LVI.

  835 Rávaṇ carried off and kept in his palace not only earthly princesses       but the daughters of Gods and Gandharvas.

  836 The wife of Indra.

  837 These four lines have occurred before. Book III, Canto LVI.

  838 Prajápatis are the ten lords of created beings first created by       Brahmá; somewhat like the Demiurgi of the Gnostics.

  839 “This is the number of the Vedic divinities mentioned in the       Rig-veda. In Ashṭaka I. Súkta XXXIV, the Rishi Hiraṇyastúpa invoking       the Aśvins says: Á Násatyá tribhirekádaśairiha devebniryátam: ‘O       Násatyas (Aśvins) come hither with the thrice eleven Gods.’ And in       Súkta XLV, the Rishi Praskanva addressing his hymn to Agni (ignis,       fire), thus invokes him: ‘Lord of the red steeds, propitiated by our       prayers lead hither the thirty-three Gods.’ This number must       certainly have been the actual number in the early days of the Vedic       religion: although it appears probable enough that the thirty-three       Vedic divinities could not then be found co-ordinated in so       systematic a way as they were arranged more recently by the authors       of the Upanishads. In the later ages of Bramanism the number went on       increasing without measure by successive mythical and religious       creations which peopled the Indian Olympus with abstract beings of       every kind. But through lasting veneration of the word of the Veda       the custom regained of giving the name of ‘the thirty-three Gods’ to       the immense phalanx of the multiplied deities.” GORRESIO.

  840 Serpent-Gods who dwell in the regions under the earth.

  841 In the mythology of the epics the Gandharvas are the heavenly       singers or musicians who form the orchestra at the banquets of the       Gods, and they belong to the heaven of India in whose battles they       share.

  842 The mother of Ráma.

  843 The mother of Lakshmaṇ.

  844 In the south is the region of Yáma the God of Death, the place of       departed spirits.

  845 Kumbhakarṇa was one of Rávaṇ’s brothers.

  846 The guards are still in the grove, but they are asleep; and Sítá has       crept to a tree at some distance from them.

  847 “As the reason assigned in these passages for not addressing Sítá in       Sanskrit such as a Bráhman would use is not that she would not       understand it, but that it would alarm her and be unsuitable to the       speaker, we must take them as indicating that Sanskrit, if not       spoken by women of the upper classes at the time when the Rámáyaṇa       was written (whenever that may have been), was at least understood       by them, and was commonly spoken by men of the priestly class, and       other educated persons. By the Sanskrit proper to an [ordinary] man,       alluded to in the second passage, may perhaps be understood not a       language in which words different from Sanskrit were used, but the       employment of formal and elaborate diction.” MUIR’S _Sanskrit       Texts_, Part II. p. 166.

  848 Svayambhu, the Self-existent, Brahmá.

  849 Vṛihaspati or Váchaspati, the Lord of Speech and preceptor of the       Gods.

  850 The Asurs were the fierce enemies of the Gods.

  851 The Rudras are manifestations of Śiva.

  852 The Maruts or Storm Gods.

  853 Rohiṇí is an asterism personified as the daughter of Daksha and the       favourite wife of the Moon. The chief star in the constellation is       Aldebaran.

  854 Arundhatí was the wife of the great sage Vaśishṭha, and regarded as       the pattern of conjugal excellence. She was raised to the heavens as       one of the Pleiades.

  855 The Gods do not shed tears; nor do they touch the ground when they       walk or stand. Similarly Milton’s angels marched above the ground       and “the passive air upbore their nimble tread.” Virgil’s “vera       incessu patuit dea” may refer to the same belief.

  856 That a friend of Ráma would praise him as he should be praised, and       that if the stranger were Rávaṇ in disguise he would avoid the       subject.

  857 Kuvera the God of Gold.

  858 Sítá of course knows nothing of what has happened to Ráma since the       time when she was carried away by Rávaṇ. The poet therefore thinks       it necessary to repeat the whole story of the meeting between Ráma       and Sugríva, the defeat of Bálí, and subsequent events. I give the       briefest possible outline of the story.

  859 DE GUBERNATIS thinks that this ring which the Sun Ráma sends to the       Dawn Sítá is a symbol of the sun’s disc.

  860 Śachí is the loved and lovely wife of Indra, and she is taken as the       type of a woman protected by a jealous and all-powerful husband.

  861 The mountain near Kishkindhá.

  862 Airávat is the mighty elephant on which Indra delights to ride.

  863 Vibhishaṇ is the wicked Rávaṇ’s good brother.

  864 Her name is Kalá, or in the Bengal recension Nandá.

  865 One of Rávaṇ’s chief councillors.

  866 Hanumán when he entered the city had in order to escape observation       condensed himself to the size of a cat.

  867 The brook Mandákiní, not far from Chitrakúṭa where Ráma sojourned       for a time.

  868 The poet here changes from the second person to the third.

  869 The whole long story is repeated with some slight variations and       additions from Book II, Canto XCVI. I give here only the outline.

  870 The expedients to vanquish an enemy or to make him come to terms are       said to be four: conciliation, gifts, disunion, and force or       punishment. Hanumán considers it useless to employ the first three       and resolves to punish Rávaṇ by destroying his pleasure-grounds.

  871 Kinkar means the special servant of a sovereign, who receives his       orders immediately from his master. The Bengal recension gives these       Rákshases an epithet which the Commentator explains “as generated in       the mind of Brahmá.”

  872 Ráma _de jure_ King of Kośal of which Ayodhyá was the capital.

_  873 Chaityaprásáda_ is explained by the Commentator as the place where       the Gods of the Rákshases were kept. Gorresio translates it by “un       grande edificio.”

  874 The bow of Indra is the rainbow.

  875 We were told a few lines before that the chariot of Jambumáli was       drawn by asses. Here horses are spoken of. The Commentator notices       the discrepancy and says that by horses asses are meant.

  876 Armed with the bow of Indra, the rainbow.

  877 Rávaṇ’s son.

  878 Conqueror of Indra, another of Rávaṇ’s sons.

  879 The _śloka_ which follows is probably an interpolation, as it is       inconsistent with the questioning in Canto L.:

      He looked on Rávaṇ in his pride,       And boldly to the monarch cried:       “I came an envoy to this place       From him who rules the Vánar race.”

  880 The ten heads of Rávaṇ have provoked much ridicule from European       critics. It should be remembered that Spenser tells us of “two       brethren giants, the one of which had two heads, the other three;”       and Milton speaks of the “four-fold visaged Four,” the four Cherubic       shapes each of whom had four faces.

  881 Durdhar, or as the Bengal recension reads Mahodara, Prahasta,       Mahápárśva, and Nikumbha.

  882 The chief attendant of Śiva.

  883 Bali, not to be confounded with Báli the Vánar, was a celebrated       Daitya or demon who had usurped the empire of the three worlds, and       who was deprived of two thirds of his dominions by Vishṇu in the       Dwarf-incarnation.

  884 When Hanumán was bound with cords, Indrajít released his captive       from the spell laid upon him by the magic weapon.

  885 “One who murders an ambassador (_rája bhata_) goes to Taptakumbha,       the hell of heated caldrons.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puraṇa_, Vol. II. p.       217.

  886 The fire which is supposed to burn beneath the sea.

  887 Sítá is likened to the fire which is an emblem of purity.

  888 I omit two stanzas which continue the metaphor of the sea or lake of       air. The moon is its lotus, the sun its wild-duck, the clouds are       its water-weeds, Mars is its shark and so on. Gorresio remarks:       “This comparison of a great lake to the sky and of celestial to       aquatic objects is one of those ideas which the view and qualities       of natural scenery awake in lively fancies. Imagine one of those       grand and splendid lakes of India covered with lotus blossoms,       furrowed by wild-ducks of the most vivid colours, mantled over here       and there with flowers and water weeds &c. and it will be understood       how the fancy of the poet could readily compare to the sky radiant       with celestial azure the blue expanse of the water, to the soft       light of the moon the inner hue of the lotus, to the splendour of       the sun the brilliant colours of the wild-fowl, to the stars the       flowers, to the cloud the weeds that float upon the water &c.”

  889 Sunábha is the mountain that rose from the sea when Hanumán passed       over to Lanká.

  890 Three Cantos of repetition are omitted.

_  891 Madhuvan_ the “honey-wood.”

  892 Indra’s pleasure-ground or elysium.

  893 Janak was king of Videha or Mithilá in Behar.

  894 The original contains two more Cantos which end the Book. Canto       LXVII begins thus: “Hanumán thus addressed by the great-souled son       of Raghu related to the son of Raghu all that Sítá had said.” And       the two Cantos contain nothing but Hanumán’s account of his       interview with Sítá, and the report of his own speeches as well as       of hers.

  895 The Sixth Book is called in Sanskrit _Yuddha-Káṇḍa_ or _The War_,       and _Lanká-Káṇda_. It is generally known at the present day by the       latter title.

  896 Váyu is the God of Wind.

  897 Garuḍa the King of Birds.

  898 Serpent-Gods.

  899 The God of the sea.

  900 Indra’s elephant.

  901 Kuvera, God of wealth.

  902 Kuvera’s elephant.

  903 The planet Venus, or its regent who is regarded as the son of Bhrigu       and preceptor of the Daityas.

  904 The seven _rishis_ or saints who form the constellation of the Great       Bear.

  905 Triśanku was raised to the skies to form a constellation in the       southern hemisphere. The story in told in Book I, Canto LX.

  906 The sage Viśvámitra, who performed for Triśanku the great sacrifice       which raised him to the heavens.

  907 One of the lunar asterisms containing four or originally two stars       under the regency of a dual divinity Indrágni, Indra and Agni.

  908 The lunar asterism Múla, belonging to the Rákshases.

  909 The Asurs or demons dwell imprisoned in the depths beneath the sea.

  910 The God of Riches, brother and enemy of Rávaṇ and first possessor of       Pushpak the flying car.

  911 King of the Serpents. Śankha and Takshak are two of the eight       Serpent Chiefs.

  912 The God of Death, the Pluto of the Hindus.

  913 Literally Indra’s conqueror, so called from his victory over that       God.

  914 Their names are Nikumbha, Rabhasa, Súryaśatru, Suptaghna, Yajnakopa,       Mahápárśva, Mahodara, Agniketu, Raśmiketu, Durdharsha, Indraśatru,       Prahasta, Virúpáksha, Vajradanshṭra, Dhúmráksha, Durmukha, Mahábala.

  915 Similarly Antenor urges the restoration of Helen:

      “Let Sparta’s treasures be this hour restored,       And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.       As this advice ye practise or reject,       So hope success, or dread the dire effect,”

      POPE’S _Homer’s Iliad_, Book VII.

  916 The _Agnisálá_ or room where the sacrificial fire was kept.

  917 The exudation of a fragrant fluid from the male elephant’s temples,       especially at certain seasons, is frequently spoken of in Sanskrit       poetry. It is said to deceive and attract the bees, and is regarded       as a sign of health and masculine vigour.

  918 Consisting of warriors on elephants, warriors in chariots,       charioteers, and infantry.

  919 Indra, generally represented as surrounded by the Maruts or       Storm-Gods.

  920 Janasthán, where Ráma lived as an ascetic.

  921 Máyá, regarded as the paragon of female beauty, was the creation of       Maya the chief artificer of the Daityas or Dánavs.

  922 One of the Nymphs of Indra’s heaven.

  923 The Lotus River, a branch of the heavenly Gangá.

_  924 Trilokanátha_, Lord of the Three Worlds, is a title of Indra.

  925 The celestial elephant that carries Indra.

  926 As producers of the _ghi_, clarified butter or sacrificial oil, used       in fire-offerings.

  927 This desertion to the enemy is somewhat abrupt, and is narrated with       brevity not usual with Válmíki. In the Bengal recension the       preceding speakers and speeches differ considerably from those given       in the text which I follow. Vibhishaṇ is kicked from his seat by       Rávaṇ, and then, after telling his mother what has happened, he       flies to Mount Kailása where he has an interview with Śiva, and by       his advice seeks Ráma and the Vánar army.

  928 Vṛihaspati the preceptor of the Gods.

  929 In Book II, Canto XXI, Kaṇdu is mentioned by Ráma as an example of       filial obedience. At the command of his father he is said to have       killed a cow.

  930 A King of the Yakshas, or Kuvera himself, the God of Gold.

  931 The brace protects the left arm from injury from the bow-string, and       the guard protects the fingers of the right hand.

  932 The story is told in Book I, Cantos XL, XLI, XLII.

  933 Fiends and enemies of the Gods.

  934 The Indus.

  935 Cowherds, sprung from a Bráhman and a woman of the medical tribe,       the modern Ahírs.

  936 Barbarians or outcasts.

_  937 Vraṇa_ means wound or rent.

  938 Here in the Bengal recension (Gorresio’s edition), begins Book VI.

  939 The Goomtee.

  940 The Anglicized Nerbudda.

  941 According to a Pauranik legend Keśarí Hanumán’s putative father had       killed an Asur or demon who appeared in the form of an elephant, and       hence arose the hostility between Vánars and elephants.

  942 Here follows the enumeration of Sugríva’s forces which I do not       attempt to follow. It soon reaches a hundred thousand billions.

  943 I omit the rest of this canto, which is mere repetition. Rávaṇ gives       in the same words his former answer that the Gods, Gandharvas and       fiends combined shall not force him to give up Sítá. He then orders       Śárdúla to tell him the names of the Vánar chieftains whom he has       seen in Ráma’s army. These have already been mentioned by Śuka and       Sáraṇ.

  944 Lakshmí is the Goddess both of beauty and fortune, and is       represented with a lotus in her hand.

  945 The poet appears to have forgotten that Śuka and Sáraṇ were       dismissed with ignominy in Canto XXIX, and have not been reinstated.

  946 The four who fled with him. Their names are Anala, Panasa, Sampáti,       and Pramati.

  947 The numbers here are comparatively moderate: ten thousand elephants,       ten thousand chariots, twenty thousand horses and ten million       giants.

  948 The Kinśuk, also called Paláśa, is Butea Frondosa, a tree that bears       beautiful red crescent shaped blossoms and is deservedly a favorite       with poets. The Seemal or Śálmalí is the silk cotton tree which also       bears red blossoms.

  949 Varuṇa.

  950 The duty of a king to save the lives of his people and avoid       bloodshed until milder methods have been tried in vain.

  951 I have omitted several of these single combats, as there is little       variety in the details and each duel results in the victory of the       Vánar or his ally.

  952 Yajnaśatru, Mahápárśva, Mahodar, Vajradanshṭra, Śuka, and Sáraṇ.

  953 Angad.

  954 A mysterious weapon consisting of serpents transformed to arrows       which deprived the wounded object of all sense and power of motion.

  955 On each foot, and at the root of each finger.

  956 Varuṇ.

  957 The name of one of the mystical weapons the command over which was       given by Viśvámitra to Ráma, as related in Book I.

  958 One of Sítá’s guard, and her comforter on a former occasion also.

  959 The preceptor of the Gods.

  960 Ráma’s grandfather.

  961 The Gandharvas are warriors and Minstrels of Indra’s heaven.

  962 “It is to be understood,” says the commentator, “that this is not       the Akampan who has already been slain.”

  963 Rávaṇ’s son, whom Hanumán killed when he first visited Lanká.

  964 Níla was the son of Agni the God of Fire, and possessed, like       Milton’s demons, the power of dilating and condensing his form at       pleasure.

  965 An ancient king of Ayodhyá said by some to have been Prithu’s       father.

  966 The daughter of King Kuśadhwaja. She became an ascetic, and being       insulted by Rávaṇ in the woods where she was performing penance,       destroyed herself by entering fire, but was born again as Sítá to be       in turn the destruction of him who had insulted her.

  967 Nandíśvara was Śiva’s chief attendant. Rávaṇ had despised and       laughed at him for appearing in the form of a monkey and the       irritated Nandíśvara cursed him and foretold his destruction by       monkeys.

  968 Rávaṇ once upheaved and shook Mount Kailása the favourite dwelling       place of Śiva the consort of Umá, and was cursed in consequence by       the offended Goddess.

  969 Rambhá, who has several times been mentioned in the course of the       poem, was one of the nymphs of heaven, and had been insulted by       Rávaṇ.

  970 Punjikasthalá was the daughter of Varuṇ. Rávaṇ himself has mentioned       in this book his insult to her, and the curse pronounced in       consequence by Brahmá.

  971 Pulastya was the son of Brahmá and father of Viśravas or Paulastya       the father of Rávaṇ and Kumbhakarṇa.

  972 I omit a tedious sermon on the danger of rashness and the advantages       of prudence, sufficient to irritate a less passionate hearer than       Rávaṇ.

  973 The Bengal recension assigns a very different speech to Kumbhakarṇa       and makes him say that Nárad the messenger of the Gods had formerly       told him that Vishṇu himself incarnate as Daśaratha’s son should       come to destroy Rávaṇ.

  974 Mahodar, Dwijihva, Sanhráda, and Vitardan.

  975 A name of Vishṇu.

  976 There is so much commonplace repetition in these Sallies of the       Rákshas chieftains that omissions are frequently necessary. The       usual ill omens attend the sally of Kumbhakarṇa, and the Canto ends       with a description of the terrified Vánars’ flight which is briefly       repeated in different words at the beginning of the next Canto.

  977 Kártikeya the God of War, and the hero and incarnation Paraśuráma       are said to have cut a passage through the mountain Krauncha, a part       of the Himálayan range, in the same way as the immense gorge that       splits the Pyrenees under the towers of Marboré was cloven at one       blow of Roland’s sword Durandal.

  978 Rishabh, Śarabh, Níla, Gaváksha, and Gandhamádan.

  979 Angad. The text calls him the son of the son of him who holds the       thunderbolt, _i.e._ the grandson of Indra.

  980 Literally, weighing a thousand _bháras_. The _bhára_ is a weight       equal to 2000 _palas_, the _pala_ is equal to four _karśas_, and the       _karśa_ to 11375 French grammes or about 176 grains troy. The spear       seems very light for a warrior of Kumbhakarṇa’s strength and stature       and the work performed with it.

  981 The custom of throwing parched or roasted grain, with wreaths and       flowers, on the heads of kings and conquerors when they go forth to       battle and return is frequently mentioned by Indian poets.

  982 Lakshmaṇ.

  983 I have abridged this long Canto by omitting some vain repetitions,       commonplace epithets and similes and other unimportant matter. There       are many verses in this Canto which European scholars would rigidly       exclude as unmistakeably the work of later rhapsodists. Even the       reverent Commentator whom I follow ventures to remark once or twice:       _Ayam śloka prak shipta iti bahavah_, “This _śloka_ or verse is in       the opinion of many interpolated.”

  984 Narak was a demon, son of Bhúmi or Earth, who haunted the city       Prágjyotisha.

  985 Śambar was a demon of drought.

  986 Indra.

  987 Devántak (Slayer of Gods) Narántak (Slayer of Men) Atikáya (Huge of       Frame) and Triśirás (Three Headed) were all sons of Rávaṇ.

  988 The demon of eclipse who seizes the Sun and Moon.

  989 Lakshmaṇ.

  990 In such cases as this I am not careful to reproduce the numbers of       the poet, which in the text which I follow are 670000000; the Bengal       recension being content with thirty million less.

  991 The discus or quoit, a sharp-edged circular missile is the favourite       weapon of Vishṇu.

  992 To destroy Tripura the triple city in the sky, air and earth, built       by Maya for a celebrated Asur or demon, or as another commentator       explains, to destroy Kandarpa or Love.

  993 The Lokapálas are sometimes regarded as deities appointed by Brahmá       at the creation of the word to act as guardians of different orders       of beings, but more commonly they are identified with the deities       presiding over the four cardinal and four intermediate points of the       compass, which, according to Manu V. 96, are 1, Indra, guardian of       the East; 2, Agni, of the South-east; 3, Yáma, of the South; 4,       Súrya, of the South-west; 5, Varuṇa, of the West; 6, Pavana or Váyu,       of the North-west; 7, Kuvera, of the North; 8, Soma or Chandra, of       the North-east.

  994 The chariots of Rávaṇ’s present army are said to have been one       hundred and fifty million in number with three hundred million       elephants, and twelve hundred million horses and asses. The footmen       are merely said to have been “unnumbered.”

  995 It is not very easy to see the advantage of having arrows headed in       the way mentioned. Fanciful names for war-engines and weapons       derived from their resemblance to various animals are not confined       to India. The “War-wolf” was used by Edward I. at the siege of       Brechin, the “Cat-house” and the “Sow” were used by Edward III. at       the siege of Dunbar.

  996 Apparently a peak of the Himalaya chain.

  997 This exploit of Hanumán is related with inordinate prolixity in the       Bengal recension (Gortesio’s text). Among other adventures he       narrowly escapes being shot by Bharat as he passes over Nandigrama       near Ayodhyá. Hanumán stays Bharat in time, and gives him an account       of what has befallen Ráma and Sítá in the forest and in Lanká.

  998 As Garuḍ the king of birds is the mortal enemy of serpents the       weapon sacred to him is of course best calculated to destroy the       serpent arrows of Rávaṇ.

  999 The celebrated saint who has on former occasions assisted Ráma with       his gifts and counsel.

 1000 Indra.

 1001 Yáma.

 1002 Kártikeya.

 1003 Kubera.

 1004 Varuṇ.

 1005 The Pitris, forefathers or spirits of the dead, are of two kinds,       either the spirits of the father, grandfathers and       great-grandfathers of an individual or the progenitors of mankind       generally, to both of whom obsequial worship is paid and oblations       of food are presented.

 1006 The Maruts or Storm-Gods.

 1007 The Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the Hindus.

 1008 The Man _par excellence_, the representative man and father of the       human race regarded also as God.

 1009 The Vasus, a class of deities originally personifications of natural       phenomena.

 1010 A class of celestial beings who dwell between the earth and the sun.

 1011 The seven horses are supposed to symbolize the seven days of the       week.

 1012 One for each month in the year.

 1013 The garden of Kuvera, the God of Riches.

 1014 The consort of Indra.

 1015 The Swayamvara, Self-choice or election of a husband by a princess       or daughter of a Kshatriya at a public assembly of suitors held for       the purpose. For a description of the ceremony see _Nala and       Damayantí_ an episode of the Mahábhárat translated by the late Dean       Milman, and _Idylls from the Sanskrit_.

 1016 The Pitris or Manes, the spirits of the dead.

 1017 Kuvera, the God of Wealth.

 1018 Varuṇ, God of the sea.

 1019 Mahádeva or Śiva whose ensign is a bull.

 1020 The Address to Ráma, both text and commentary, will be found       literally translated in the Additional Notes. A paraphrase of a       portion is all that I have attempted here.

 1021 Rávaṇ’s queen.

 1022 Or Maináka.

 1023 Here, in the North-west recension, Sítá expresses a wish that Tárá       and the wives of the Vánar chiefs should be invited to accompany her       to Ayodhyá. The car decends, and the Vánar matrons are added to the       party. The Bengal recension ignores this palpable interruption.

 1024 The _arghya_, a respectful offering to Gods and venerable men       consisting of rice, dúivá grass, flowers etc., with water.

 1025 I have abridged Hanumán’s outline of Ráma’s adventures, with the       details of which we are already sufficiently acquainted.

 1026 In these respectful salutations the person who salutes his superior       mentions his own name even when it is well known to the person whom       he salutes.

 1027 I have omitted the chieftains’ names as they could not be introduced       without padding. They are Mainda, Dwivid, Níla, Rishabh, Susheṇ,       Nala, Gaváksha, Gandhamádan, Śarabh, and Panas.

 1028 The following addition is found in the Bengal recension: But       Vaiśravaṇ (Kuvera) when he beheld his chariot said unto it: “Go, and       carry Ráma, and come unto me when my thought shall call thee, And       the chariot returned unto Ráma;” and he honoured it when he had       heard what had passed.

 1029 Here follows in the original an enumeration of the chief blessings       which will attend the man or woman who reads or hears read this tale       of Ráma. These blessings are briefly mentioned at the end of the       first Canto of the first book, and it appears unnecessary to repeat       them here in their amplified form. The Bengal recension (Gorresio’s       edition) gives them more concisely as follows: “This is the great       first poem blessed and glorious, which gives long life to men and       victory to kings, the poem which Válmíki made. He who listens to       this wondrous tale of Ráma unwearied in action shall be absolved       from all his sins. By listening to the deeds of Ráma he who wishes       for sons shall obtain his heart’s desire, and to him who longs for       riches shall riches be given. The virgin who asks for a husband       shall obtain a husband suited to her mind, and shall meet again her       dear kinsfolk who are far away. They who hear this poem which       Válmíki made shall obtain all their desires and all their prayers       shall be fulfilled.”

_ 1030 The Academy_, Vol. III., No 43, contains an able and interesting       notice of this work from the pen of the Professor of Sanskrit in the       University of Cambridge: “The _Uttarakáṇḍa_,” Mr. Cowell remarks,       “bears the same relation to the _Rámáyaṇa_ as the Cyclic poems to       the _Iliad_. Just as the _Cypria_ of Stasinus, the _Æthiopis_ of       Arctinus, and the little _Iliad_ of Lesches completed the story of       the _Iliad_, and not only added the series of events which preceded       and followed it, but also founded episodes of their own on isolated       allusions in Homer, so the _Uttarakáṇḍa_ is intended to complete the       _Rámáyaṇa_, and at the same time to supplement it by intervening       episodes to explain casual allusions or isolated incidents which       occur in it. Thus the early history of the giant Rávaṇa and his       family fills nearly forty Chapters, and we have a full account of       his wars with the gods and his conquest of Lanká, which all happened       long before the action of the poem commences, just as the _Cypria_       narrated the birth and early history of Helen, and the two       expeditions of the Greeks against Troy; and the latter chapters       continue the history of the hero Ráma after his triumphant return to       his paternal kingdom, and the poem closes with his death and that of       his brothers, and the founding by their descendants of various       kingdoms in different parts of India.”

 1031 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts,_ Part IV., pp. 414 ff.

 1032 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV., 391, 392.

 1033 See _Academy_, III., 43.

_ 1034 Academy_, Vol. III., No. 43.

 1035 E. B. Cowell. _Academy_, No. 43. The story of Sítá’s banishment will       be found roughly translated from the _Raghuvaṇśa_, in the Additional       Notes.

 1036 E. B. Cowell. _Academy_, Vol, III, No. 43.

 1037 MUIR, _Sanskrit Texts_, Part IV., Appendix.

 1038 Ghí: clarified butter. Gur: molasses.

 1039 Haridwar (Anglicè Hurdwar) where the Ganges enters the plain       country.

 1040 Campbell in “Journ. As. Soc. Bengal,” 1866, Part ii. p. 132; Latham,       “Descr. Eth.” Vol. ii. p. 456; Tod, “Annals of Rajasthan,” Vol. i.       p. 114.

 1041 Said by the commentator to be an eastern people between the       Himálayan and Vindhyan chains.

 1042 Videha was a district in the province of Behar, the ancient Mithilá       or the modern Tirhoot.

 1043 The people of Malwa.

 1044 “The Káśikośalas are a central nation in the Váyu Puráṇa. The       Rámáyaṇa places them in the east. The combination indicates the       country between Benares and Oude.… Kośala is a name variously       applied. Its earliest and most celebrated application is to the       country on the banks of the Sarayú, the kingdom of Ráma, of which       Ayodhyá was the capital.… In the Mahábhárata we have one Kośala in       the east and another in the south, besides the Prák-Kośalas and       Uttara Kośalas in the east and north. The Puráṇas place the Kośalas       amongst the people on the back of Vindhya; and it would appear from       the Váyu that Kuśa the son of Ráma transferred his kingdom to a more       central position; he ruled over Kośala at his capital of Kúśasthali       of Kuśavatí, built upon the Vindhyan precipices.” WILSON’S _Vishnṇu       Púraṇa_, Vol. II. pp. 157, 172.

 1045 The people of south Behar.

 1046 The Puṇḍras are said to be the inhabitants of the western provinces       of Bengal. “In the _Aitareyabráhmaṇa_, VII. 18, it is said that the       elder sons of Viśvamitra were cursed to become progenitors of most       abject races, such as Andhras, Puṇḍras, Śabaras, Pulindas, and       Mútibas.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_ Vol. II. 170.

 1047 Anga is the country about Bhagulpore, of which Champá was the       capital.

 1048 A fabulous people, “men who use their ears as a covering.” So Sir       John Maundevile says: “And in another Yle ben folk that han gret       Eres and long, that hangen down to here knees,” and Pliny, lib. iv.       c. 13: “In quibus nuda alioquin corpora prægrandes ipsorum aures       tota contegunt.” Isidore calls them Panotii.

 1049 “Those whose ears hang down to their lips.”

 1050 “The Iron-faces.”

 1051 “The One-footed.”

      “In that Contree,” says Sir John Maundevile, “ben folk, that han but       o foot and thei gon so fast that it is marvaylle: and the foot is so       large that it schadeweth alle the Body azen the Sonne, when thei       wole lye and rest hem.” So Pliny, Natural History, lib. vii. c. 2:       speaks of “Hominumn gens … singulis cruribus, miræ pernicitatis ad       saltum; eosdemque Sciopodas vocari, quod in majori æstu, humi       jacentes resupini, umbrâ se pedum protegant.”

      These epithets are, as Professor Wilson remarks, “exaggerations of       national ugliness, or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not       literally intended, although they may have furnished the Mandevilles       of ancient and modern times.”

      _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. p. 162.

 1052 The Kirrhadæ of Arrian: a general name for savage tribes living in       woods and mountains.

 1053 Said by the commentator to be half tigers half men.

 1054 The kingdom seems to have corresponded with the greater part of       Berar and Khandesh.

 1055 The Bengal recension has Kishikas, and places them both in the south       and the north.

 1056 The people of Mysore.

 1057 “There are two Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra       Samráj, is identifiable with Jeypoor. In the Digvijaya of Nakula he       subdues the Matsyas further to the west, or Gujerat.” WILSON’S       _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. 158. Dr. Hall observes: “In the       _Mahábhárata Sabhá-parwan_, 1105 and 1108, notice is taken of the       king of Matsya and of the Aparamatsyas; and, at 1082, the Matsyas       figure as an eastern people. They are placed among the nations of       the south in the _Rámáyaṇa Kishkindhá-káṇda_, XLI., II, while the       Bengal recension, _Kishkindhá-káṇḍa_, XLIV., 12, locates them in the       north.”

 1058 The Kalingas were the people of the upper part of the Coromandel       Coast, well known, in the traditions of the Eastern Archipelago, as       Kling. Ptolemy has a city in that part, called Caliga; and Pliny       Calingæ proximi mari. WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_, Vol. II. 156, Note.

 1059 The Kauśikas do not appear to be identifiable.

 1060 The Andhras probably occupied the modern Telingana.

 1061 The Puṇḍras have already been mentioned in Canto XL.

 1062 The inhabitants of the lower part of the Coromandel Coast; so       called, after them, Cholamaṇdala.

 1063 A people in the Deccan.

 1064 The Keralas were the people of Malabar proper.

 1065 A generic term for persons speaking any language but Sanskrit and       not conforming to the usual Hindu institutions.

 1066 “Pulinda is applied to any wild or barbarous tribe. Those here named       are some of the people of the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas       are met with in many other positions, especially in the mountains       and forests across Central India, the haunts of the Bheels and       Gonds. So Ptolemy places the Pulindas along the banks of the       Narmadá, to the frontiers of Larice, the Látá or Lár of the       Hindus,—Khandesh and part of Gujerat.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_,       Vol. II. 159, Note.

      Dr. Hall observes that “in the Bengal recension of the _Rámáyaṇa_       the Pulindas appear both in the south and in the north. The real       _Rámáyaṇa_ K.-k., XLIII., speaks of the northern Pulindas.”

 1067 The Śúrasenas were the inhabitants of Mathurá, the Suraseni of       Arrian.

 1068 These the Mardi of the Greeks and the two preceding tribes appear to       have dwelt in the north-west of Hindustan.

 1069 The Kámbojas are said to be the people of Arachosia. They are always       mentioned with the north-western tribes.

 1070 “The term Yavanas, although, in later times, applied to the       Mohammedans, designated formerly the Greeks.… The Greeks were known       throughout Western Asia by the term Yavan, or Ion. That the       Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks were most usually intended is not only       probable from their position and relations with India, but from       their being usually named in concurrence with the north-western       tribes, Kámbojas, Daradas, Páradas, Báhlíkas, Śakas &c., in the       Rámáyaṇa. Mahábhárata, Puránas, Manu, and in various poems and       plays.” WILSON’S _Vishṇu Puráṇa_ Vol. II. p. 181, Note.

 1071 These people, the Sakai and Sacæ of classical writers, the       Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended, about the commencement of our       era, along the west of India, from the Hindu Kosh to the mouths of       the Indus.

 1072 The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has instead of       Varadas Daradas the Dards or inhabitants of the modern Dardistan       along the course of the Indus, above the Himálayas, just before it       descends to India.

 1073 From the word yonder it would appear that the prayer is to be       repeated at the rising of the Sun.

 1074 The creator of the world and the first of the Hindu triad.

 1075 He who pervades all beings; or the second of the Hindu triad who       preserves the world.

 1076 The bestower of blessings; the third of the Hindu triad and the       destroyer of the world.

 1077 A name of the War-God; also one who urges the senses to action.

 1078 The lord of creatures; or the God of sacrifices.

 1079 A name of the King of Gods; also all-powerful.

 1080 The giver of wealth. A name of the God of riches.

 1081 One who directly urges the mental faculties to action.

 1082 One who moderates the senses, also the God of the regions of the       dead.

 1083 One who produces nectar (amrita) or one who is always possessed of       light; or one together with Umá (Ardhanáríśvara).

 1084 The names or spirits of departed ancestors.

 1085 Name of a class of eight Gods, also wealthy.

 1086 They who are to be served by Yogís; or a class of Gods named       Sádhyas.

 1087 The two physicians of the Gods: or they who pervade all beings.

 1088 They who are immortal; or a class of Gods forty-nine in number.

 1089 Omniscient; or the first king of the world.

 1090 He that moves; life; or the God of wind.

 1091 The God of fire.

 1092 Lord of creatures.

 1093 One who prolongs our lives.

 1094 The material cause of knowledge and of the seasons.

 1095 One who shines. The giver of light.

 1096 The hymn entitled the Ádityahridaya begins from this verse and the       words, thou art, are understood in the beginning of this verse.

 1097 One who enjoys all (pleasurable) objects; The son of Aditi, the lord       of the solar disk.

 1098 One who creates the world, i.e., endows beings with life or soul,       and by his rays causes rain and thereby produces corn.

 1099 One who urges the world to action or puts the world in motion, who       is omnipresent.

 1100 One who walks through the sky; or pervades the soul.

 1101 One who nourishes the world, i.e., is the supporter.

 1102 One having rays (Gabhasti) or he who is possessed of the       all-pervading goddess Lakshmí.

 1103 One resembling gold.

 1104 One who is resplendent or who gives light to other objects.

 1105 One whose seed (Retas) is gold; or quicksilver, the material cause       of gold.

 1106 One who is the cause of day.

 1107 One whose horses are of tawny colour; or one who pervades the whole       space or quarters.

 1108 One whose knowledge is boundless or who has a thousand rays.

 1109 One who urges the seven (Práṇas) that is the two eyes, the two ears,       the nostrils and the organ of speech, or whose chariot, is drawn by       seven horses.

 1110 Vide Gabhastimán.

 1111 One who destroys darkness, or ignorance.

 1112 One from whom our blessings or the enjoyments of Paradise come.

 1113 The architect of the gods; or one who lessens the miseries of our       birth and death.

 1114 One who gives life to the lifeless world.

 1115 One who pervades the internal and external worlds; or one who is       resplendent.

 1116 He who is identified with the Hindu triad, i.e. the creator (Brahmá)       the supporter (Vishnu) and the destroyer (Śiva).

 1117 Cold or good natured. He is so called because he allays the three       sorts of pain.

 1118 One who is the lord of all.

 1119 Vide Divákara.

 1120 One who teaches Brahmá and others the Vedas.

 1121 One from whom Rudra the destroyer or the third of the Hindu triad       springs.

 1122 One who is knowable through Aditi, i.e., the eternal Brahmavidyá.

 1123 Great happiness or the sky.

 1124 The destroyer of cold or stupidity.

 1125 The Lord of the sky.

 1126 Vide Timironmathana.

 1127 One who is known through the Upanishads.

 1128 He who is the cause of heavy rain.

 1129 He who is a friend to the good, or who is the cause of water.

 1130 One who moves in the solar orbit.

 1131 One who determines the creation of the world; or who is possessed of       heat.

 1132 One who has a mass of rays; or who has Kaustubha and other precious       stones as his ornaments.

 1133 He who urges all to action; or who is yellow in colour.

 1134 One who is the destroyer of all.

 1135 One who is omniscient; or a poet.

 1136 One who is identified with the whole world.

 1137 One who is of huge form.

 1138 One who pleases all by giving nourishment; or who is red in colour.

 1139 One who is the cause of the whole world.

 1140 One who protects the whole world.

 1141 The most glorious of all that are glorious.

 1142 One who is identical with the twelve months.

 1143 One who gives victory over all the worlds to those who are       faithfully devoted to him; or the porter of Brahmá, named Jaya.

 1144 One who is identical with the blessing which can be obtained by       conquering all the worlds; or with the porter of Brahmá named       Jayabhadra.

 1145 One who has Hanúmán as his conveyance.

 1146 One who controls the senses; or is furious with those who are not       his devotees.

 1147 He who is free in moving the senses; or urges all beings to action.

 1148 He who can be known through the Pranava (the mystical Om-kára.)

 1149 One who is the knowledge of Brahmá.

 1150 One who devours all things.

 1151 He who is the destroyer of all pains; and of love, and hate, the       causes of pain; and ignorance which is the cause of love and hate.

 1152 One who is bliss; or the mover.

 1153 One who destroys ignorance and its effects.

 1154 The doer of all actions.

 1155 One who beholds the universe; who is a witness of good and bad       actions.

 1156 Sacrifice of the five sensual fires.

 1157 According to Ápastamba (says the commentator) “it should have been       placed on the nose: this must therefore have been done in conformity       with some other Sútras.”

 1158 A class of eight gods.

 1159 A class of eleven gods called Rudras.

 1160 Named Víryaván.

 1161 A class of divine devotees named Sádhyas.

 1162 One who resides in the water.

 1163 The third incarnation of Vishṇu, that bore the earth on his tusk.

 1164 One whose armies are everywhere.

 1165 One who controls the senses.

 1166 He who resides in the heart, or who is full, or all-pervading.

 1167 Vámana, or the Dwarf incarnation of Vishṇu.

 1168 The killer of Madhu, a demon.

 1169 He from whose navel, the lotus, from which Brahmá was born, springs.

 1170 He who has a thousand horns. The horns are here the Sákhás of the       Sáma-veda.

 1171 One who has a hundred heads. The heads are here meant to devote a       hundred commandments of the Vedas.

 1172 Siddhas are those who have already gained the summit of their       desires.

 1173 Sádhyas are those that are still trying to gain the summit.

 1174 A mystic syllable uttered in Mantras.

 1175 A mystic syllable made of the letters which respectively denote       Brahmá, Vishṇu, and Śiva.

 1176 A class of divine gods.

 1177 Sanskáras are those sacred writings through which the divine       commands and prohibitions are known.

 1178 Bali, a demon whom Vámana confined in Pátála.

 1179 Vishṇu, the second of the Hindu triad.

 1180 Krishṇa, (black coloured) one of the ten incarnations of Vishṇu.

 1181 A. Weber, _Akademische Vorlesungen_, p. 181.

 1182 Systema brahmanicum, liturgicum, mythologicum, civile, exmonumentis       Indicis, etc.

 1183 Not only have the races of India translated or epitomized it, but       foreign nations have appropriated it wholly or in part, Persia,       Java, and Japan itself.

 1184 In the third century B.C.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RÁMÁYAN OF VÁLMÍKI, TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms     of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online     at www.gutenberg.org. If you     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from         the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in         Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg         Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™         works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of         receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free         distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516, Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


