[ADA-ramayana  —  part 4 of 12, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

flood wherein she lies. In righteous wrath my single arm Could, with my bow, protect from harm Ayodhyá’s town and all the earth: But what is hero prowess worth? Lest breaking duty’s law I sin, And lose the heaven I strive to win, The forest life today I choose, And kingly state and power refuse.”

  Thus mourning in that lonely spot The troubled chief bewailed his lot, And filled with tears, his eyes ran o’er; Then silent sat, and spake no more. To him, when ceased his loud lament, Like fire whose brilliant might is spent, Or the great sea when sleeps the wave, Thus Lakshmaṇ consolation gave: “Chief of the brave who bear the bow, E’en now Ayodhyá, sunk in woe, By thy departure reft of light Is gloomy as the moonless night. Unfit it seems that thou, O chief, Shouldst so afflict thy soul with grief, So with thou Sítá’s heart consign To deep despair as well as mine. Not I, O Raghu’s son, nor she Could live one hour deprived of thee: We were, without thine arm to save, Like fish deserted by the wave. Although my mother dear to meet, Śatrughna, and the king, were sweet, On them, or heaven, to feed mine eye Were nothing, if thou wert not by.”

  Sitting at ease, their glances fell Upon the beds, constructed well, And there the sons of virtue laid Their limbs beneath the fig tree’s shade.




Canto LIV. Bharadvája’s Hermitage.


So there that night the heroes spent Under the boughs that o’er them bent, And when the sun his glory spread, Upstarting, from the place they sped. On to that spot they made their way, Through the dense wood that round them lay, Where Yamuná’s(326) swift waters glide To blend with Gangá’s holy tide. Charmed with the prospect ever new The glorious heroes wandered through Full many a spot of pleasant ground, Rejoicing as they gazed around, With eager eye and heart at ease, On countless sorts of flowery trees. And now the day was half-way sped When thus to Lakshmaṇ Ráma said: “There, there, dear brother, turn thine eyes; See near Prayág(327) that smoke arise: The banner of our Lord of Flames The dwelling of some saint proclaims. Near to the place our steps we bend Where Yamuná and Gangá blend. I hear and mark the deafening roar When chafing floods together pour. See, near us on the ground are left Dry logs, by labouring woodmen cleft, And the tall trees, that blossom near Saint Bharadvája’s home, appear.”

  The bow-armed princes onward passed, And as the sun was sinking fast They reached the hermit’s dwelling, set Near where the rushing waters met. The presence of the warrior scared The deer and birds as on he fared, And struck them with unwonted awe: Then Bharadvája’s cot they saw. The high-souled hermit soon they found Girt by his dear disciples round: Calm saint, whose vows had well been wrought, Whose fervent rites keen sight had bought. Duly had flames of worship blazed When Ráma on the hermit gazed: His suppliant hands the hero raised, Drew nearer to the holy man With his companions, and began, Declaring both his name and race And why they sought that distant place: “Saint, Daśaratha’s children we, Ráma and Lakshmaṇ, come to thee. This my good wife from Janak springs, The best of fair Videha’s kings; Through lonely wilds, a faultless dame, To this pure grove with me she came. My younger brother follows still Me banished by my father’s will: Sumitrá’s son, bound by a vow,— He roams the wood beside me now. Sent by my father forth to rove, We seek, O Saint, some holy grove, Where lives of hermits we may lead, And upon fruits and berries feed.”

  When Bharadvája, prudent-souled, Had heard the prince his tale unfold, Water he bade them bring, a bull, And honour-gifts in dishes full, And drink and food of varied taste, Berries and roots, before him placed, And then the great ascetic showed A cottage for the guests’ abode. The saint these honours gladly paid To Ráma who had thither strayed, Then compassed sat by birds and deer And many a hermit resting near. The prince received the service kind, And sat him down rejoiced in mind. Then Bharadvája silence broke, And thus the words of duty spoke: “Kakutstha’s royal son, that thou Hadst sought this grove I knew ere now. Mine ears have heard thy story, sent Without a sin to banishment. Behold, O Prince, this ample space Near where the mingling floods embrace, Holy, and beautiful, and clear: Dwell with us, and be happy here.”

  By Bharadvája thus addressed, Ráma whose kind and tender breast All living things would bless and save, In gracious words his answer gave:

  “My honoured lord, this tranquil spot, Fair home of hermits, suits me not: For all the neighbouring people here Will seek us when they know me near: With eager wish to look on me, And the Videhan dame to see, A crowd of rustics will intrude Upon the holy solitude. Provide, O gracious lord, I pray, Some quiet home that lies away, Where my Videhan spouse may dwell Tasting the bliss deserved so well.”

  The hermit heard the prayer he made: A while in earnest thought he stayed, And then in words like these expressed His answer to the chief’s request: “Ten leagues away there stands a hill Where thou mayst live, if such thy will: A holy mount, exceeding fair; Great saints have made their dwelling there: There great Langúrs(328) in thousands play, And bears amid the thickets stray; Wide-known by Chitrakúṭa’s name, It rivals Gandhamádan’s(329) fame. Long as the man that hill who seeks Gazes upon its sacred peaks, To holy things his soul he gives And pure from thought of evil lives. There, while a hundred autumns fled, Has many a saint with hoary head Spent his pure life, and won the prize, By deep devotion, in the skies: Best home, I ween, if such retreat, Far from the ways of men, be sweet: Or let thy years of exile flee Here in this hermitage with me.”

  Thus Bharadvája spake, and trained In lore of duty, entertained The princes and the dame, and pressed His friendly gifts on every guest.

  Thus to Prayág the hero went, Thus saw the saint preëminent, And varied speeches heard and said: Then holy night o’er heaven was spread. And Ráma took, by toil oppressed, With Sítá and his brother, rest; And so the night, with sweet content, In Bharadvája’s grove was spent. But when the dawn dispelled the night, Ráma approached the anchorite, And thus addressed the holy sire Whose glory shone like kindled fire: “Well have we spent, O truthful Sage, The night within thy hermitage: Now let my lord his guests permit For their new home his grove to quit.”

  Then, as he saw the morning break, In answer Bharadvája spake: “Go forth to Chitrakúṭa’s hill, Where berries grow, and sweets distil: Full well, I deem, that home will suit Thee, Ráma, strong and resolute. Go forth, and Chitrakúṭa seek, Famed mountain of the Varied Peak. In the wild woods that gird him round All creatures of the chase are found: Thou in the glades shalt see appear Vast herds of elephants and deer. With Sítá there shalt thou delight To gaze upon the woody height; There with expanding heart to look On river, table-land, and brook, And see the foaming torrent rave Impetuous from the mountain cave. Auspicious hill! where all day long The lapwing’s cry, the Koïl’s song   Make all who listen gay: Where all is fresh and fair to see, Where elephants and deer roam free,   There, as a hermit, stay.”




Canto LV. The Passage Of Yamuná.


The princely tamers of their foes Thus passed the night in calm repose, Then to the hermit having bent With reverence, on their way they went. High favour Bharadvája showed, And blessed them ready for the road. With such fond looks as fathers throw On their own sons, before they go. Then spake the saint with glory bright To Ráma peerless in his might: “First, lords of men, direct your feet Where Yamuná and Gangá meet; Then to the swift Kálindí(330) go, Whose westward waves to Gangá flow. When thou shalt see her lovely shore Worn by their feet who hasten o’er, Then, Raghu’s son, a raft prepare, And cross the Sun born river there. Upon her farther bank a tree, Near to the landing wilt thou see. The blessed source of varied gifts, There her green boughs that Fig-tree lifts: A tree where countless birds abide, By Śyáma’s name known far and wide. Sítá, revere that holy shade: There be thy prayers for blessing prayed. Thence for a league your way pursue, And a dark wood shall meet your view, Where tall bamboos their foliage show, The Gum-tree and the Jujube grow. To Chitrakúṭa have I oft Trodden that path so smooth and soft, Where burning woods no traveller scare, But all is pleasant, green, and fair.”

  When thus the guests their road had learned, Back to his cot the hermit turned, And Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, Sítá paid Their reverent thanks for courteous aid. Thus Ráma spake to Lakshmaṇ, when The saint had left the lords of men: “Great store of bliss in sooth is ours On whom his love the hermit showers.” As each to other wisely talked, The lion lords together walked On to Kálindí’s woody shore; And gentle Sítá went before. They reached that flood, whose waters flee With rapid current to the sea; Their minds a while to thought they gave And counselled how to cross the wave. At length, with logs together laid, A mighty raft the brothers made. Then dry bamboos across were tied, And grass was spread from side to side. And the great hero Lakshmaṇ brought Cane and Rose-Apple boughs and wrought, Trimming the branches smooth and neat, For Sítá’s use a pleasant seat. And Ráma placed thereon his dame Touched with a momentary shame, Resembling in her glorious mien All-thought-surpassing Fortune’s Queen. Then Ráma hastened to dispose, Each in its place, the skins and bows, And by the fair Videhan laid The coats, the ornaments, and spade. When Sítá thus was set on board, And all their gear was duly stored, The heroes each with vigorous hand, Pushed off the raft and left the land. When half its way the raft had made, Thus Sítá to Kálindí prayed: “Goddess, whose flood I traverse now, Grant that my lord may keep his vow. For thee shall bleed a thousand kine, A hundred jars shall pour their wine, When Ráma sees that town again Where old Ikshváku’s children reign.”

  Thus to Kálindí’s stream she sued And prayed in suppliant attitude. Then to the river’s bank the dame, Fervent in supplication, came. They left the raft that brought them o’er, And the thick wood that clothed the shore, And to the Fig-tree Śyáma made Their way, so cool with verdant shade. Then Sítá viewed that best of trees, And reverent spake in words like these: “Hail, hail, O mighty tree! Allow My husband to complete his vow; Let us returning, I entreat, Kauśalyá and Sumitrá meet.” Then with her hands together placed Around the tree she duly paced. When Ráma saw his blameless spouse A suppliant under holy boughs, The gentle darling of his heart, He thus to Lakshmaṇ spake apart: “Brother, by thee our way be led; Let Sítá close behind thee tread: I, best of men, will grasp my bow, And hindmost of the three will go. What fruits soe’er her fancy take, Or flowers half hidden in the brake, For Janak’s child forget not thou To gather from the brake or bough.”

  Thus on they fared. The tender dame Asked Ráma, as they walked, the name Of every shrub that blossoms bore, Creeper, and tree unseen before: And Lakshmaṇ fetched, at Sítá’s prayer, Boughs of each tree with clusters fair. Then Janak’s daughter joyed to see The sand-discoloured river flee, Where the glad cry of many a bird, The sáras and the swan, was heard. A league the brothers travelled through The forest noble game they slew: Beneath the trees their meal they dressed And sat them down to eat and rest. A while in that delightful shade Where elephants unnumbered strayed, Where peacocks screamed and monkeys played, They wandered with delight. Then by the river’s side they found A pleasant spot of level ground, Where all was smooth and fair around,   Their lodging for the night.




Canto LVI. Chitrakúta


Then Ráma, when the morning rose, Called Lakshmaṇ gently from repose: “Awake, the pleasant voices hear Of forest birds that warble near. Scourge of thy foes, no longer stay; The hour is come to speed away.”

  The slumbering prince unclosed his eyes When thus his brother bade him rise, Compelling, at the timely cry, Fatigue, and sleep, and rest to fly. The brothers rose and Sítá too; Pure water from the stream they drew, Paid morning rites, then followed still The road to Chitrakúṭa’s hill. Then Ráma as he took the road With Lakshmaṇ, while the morning, glowed, To the Videhan lady cried, Sítá the fair, the lotus-eyed: “Look round thee, dear; each flowery tree Touched with the fire of morning see: The Kinśuk, now the Frosts are fled,— How glorious with his wreaths of red! The Bel-trees see, so loved of men, Hanging their boughs in every glen. O’erburthened with their fruit and flowers: A plenteous store of food is ours.   See, Lakshmaṇ, in the leafy trees,     Where’er they make their home.   Down hangs, the work of labouring bees     The ponderous honeycomb.   In the fair wood before us spread     The startled wild-cock cries:   Hark, where the flowers are soft to tread,     The peacock’s voice replies.   Where elephants are roaming free,     And sweet birds’ songs are loud,   The glorious Chitrakúṭa see:     His peaks are in the cloud.   On fair smooth ground he stands displayed,     Begirt by many a tree:   O brother, in that holy shade     How happy shall we be!”(331) Then Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, Sítá, each Spoke raising suppliant hands this speech To him, in woodland dwelling met, Válmíki, ancient anchoret: “O Saint, this mountain takes the mind, With creepers, trees of every kind, With fruit and roots abounding thus, A pleasant life it offers us: Here for a while we fain would stay, And pass a season blithe and gay.”

  Then the great saint, in duty trained, With honour gladly entertained: He gave his guests a welcome fair, And bade them sit and rest them there, Ráma of mighty arm and chest His faithful Lakshmaṇ then addressed: “Brother, bring hither from the wood Selected timber strong and good, And build therewith a little cot; My heart rejoices in the spot That lies beneath the mountain’s side, Remote, with water well supplied.”

  Sumitrá’s son his words obeyed, Brought many a tree, and deftly made, With branches in the forest cut, As Ráma bade, a leafy hut. Then Ráma, when the cottage stood Fair, firmly built, and walled with wood, To Lakshmaṇ spake, whose eager mind To do his brother’s will inclined: “Now, Lakshmaṇ as our cot is made, Must sacrifice be duly paid By us, for lengthened life who hope, With venison of the antelope. Away, O bright-eyed Lakshmaṇ, speed: Struck by thy bow a deer must bleed: As Scripture bids, we must not slight The duty that commands the rite.”

  Lakshmaṇ, the chief whose arrows laid His foemen low, his word obeyed; And Ráma thus again addressed The swift performer of his hest: “Prepare the venison thou hast shot, To sacrifice for this our cot. Haste, brother dear, for this the hour, And this the day of certain power.” Then glorious Lakshmaṇ took the buck His arrow in the wood had struck; Bearing his mighty load he came, And laid it in the kindled flame. Soon as he saw the meat was done, And that the juices ceased to run From the broiled carcass, Lakshmaṇ then Spoke thus to Ráma best of men: “The carcass of the buck, entire, Is ready dressed upon the fire. Now be the sacred rites begun To please the God, thou godlike one.”

  Ráma the good, in ritual trained, Pure from the bath, with thoughts restrained, Hasted those verses to repeat Which make the sacrifice complete. The hosts celestial came in view, And Ráma to the cot withdrew, While a sweet sense of rapture stole Through the unequalled hero’s soul. He paid the Viśvedevas(332) due. And Rudra’s right, and Vishṇu’s too, Nor wonted blessings, to protect Their new-built home, did he neglect. With voice repressed he breathed the prayer, Bathed duly in the river fair, And gave good offerings that remove The stain of sin, as texts approve. And many an altar there he made, And shrines, to suit the holy shade, All decked with woodland chaplets sweet, And fruit and roots and roasted meat, With muttered prayer, as texts require, Water, and grass and wood and fire. So Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, Sítá paid Their offerings to each God and shade, And entered then their pleasant cot That bore fair signs of happy lot. They entered, the illustrious three, The well-set cottage, fair to see, Roofed with the leaves of many a tree,   And fenced from wind and rain: So, at their Father Brahmá’s call, The Gods of heaven, assembling all, To their own glorious council hall   Advance in shining train. So, resting on that lovely hill, Near the fair lily-covered rill,   The happy prince forgot, Surrounded by the birds and deer, The woe, the longing, and the fear   That gloom the exile’s lot.




Canto LVII. Sumantra’s Return.


When Ráma reached the southern bank, King Guha’s heart with sorrow sank: He with Sumantra talked, and spent With his deep sorrow, homeward went. Sumantra, as the king decreed, Yoked to the car each noble steed, And to Ayodhyá’s city sped With his sad heart disquieted. On lake and brook and scented grove His glances fell, as on he drove: City and village came in view As o’er the road his coursers flew. On the third day the charioteer, When now the hour of night was near, Came to Ayodhyá’s gate, and found The city all in sorrow drowned. To him, in spirit quite cast down, Forsaken seemed the silent town, And by the rush of grief oppressed He pondered in his mournful breast: “Is all Ayodhyá burnt with grief, Steed, elephant, and man, and chief? Does her loved Ráma’s exile so Afflict her with the fires of woe?” Thus as he mused, his steeds flew fast, And swiftly through the gate he passed. On drove the charioteer, and then In hundreds, yea in thousands, men Ran to the car from every side, And, “Ráma, where is Ráma?” cried. Sumantra said: “My chariot bore The duteous prince to Gangá’s shore; I left him there at his behest, And homeward to Ayodhyá pressed.” Soon as the anxious people knew That he was o’er the flood they drew Deep sighs, and crying, Ráma! all Wailed, and big tears began to fall. He heard the mournful words prolonged, As here and there the people thronged: “Woe, woe for us, forlorn, undone, No more to look on Raghu’s son! His like again we ne’er shall see, Of heart so true, of hand so free, In gifts, in gatherings for debate, When marriage pomps we celebrate, What should we do? What earthly thing Can rest, or hope, or pleasure bring?”

  Thus the sad town, which Ráma kept As a kind father, wailed and wept. Each mansion, as the car went by, Sent forth a loud and bitter cry, As to the window every dame, Mourning for banished Ráma, came. As his sad eyes with tears o’erflowed, He sped along the royal road To Daśaratha’s high abode. There leaping down his car he stayed; Within the gates his way he made; Through seven broad courts he onward hied Where people thronged on every side. From each high terrace, wild with woe, The royal ladies flocked below: He heard them talk in gentle tone, As each for Ráma made her moan: “What will the charioteer reply To Queen Kauśalyá’s eager cry? With Ráma from the gates he went; Homeward alone, his steps are bent. Hard is a life with woe distressed, But difficult to win is rest, If, when her son is banished, still She lives beneath her load of ill.”

  Such was the speech Sumantra heard From them whom grief unfeigned had stirred. As fires of anguish burnt him through, Swift to the monarch’s hall he drew, Past the eighth court; there met his sight, The sovereign in his palace bright, Still weeping for his son, forlorn, Pale, faint, and all with sorrow worn. As there he sat, Sumantra bent And did obeisance reverent, And to the king repeated o’er The message he from Ráma bore. The monarch heard, and well-nigh brake His heart, but yet no word he spake: Fainting to earth he fell, and dumb, By grief for Ráma overcome. Rang through the hall a startling cry, And women’s arms were tossed on high, When, with his senses all astray, Upon the ground the monarch lay. Kauśalyá, with Sumitrá’s aid, Raised from the ground her lord dismayed: “Sire, of high fate,” she cried, “O, why Dost thou no single word reply To Ráma’s messenger who brings News of his painful wanderings? The great injustice done, art thou Shame-stricken for thy conduct now? Rise up, and do thy part: bestow Comfort and help in this our woe. Speak freely, King; dismiss thy fear, For Queen Kaikeyí stands not near, Afraid of whom thou wouldst not seek Tidings of Ráma: freely speak.”

  When the sad queen had ended so, She sank, insatiate in her woe, And prostrate lay upon the ground, While her faint voice by sobs was drowned. When all the ladies in despair Saw Queen Kauśalyá wailing there, And the poor king oppressed with pain, They flocked around and wept again.




Canto LVIII. Ráma’s Message.


The king a while had senseless lain, When care brought memory back again. Then straight he called, the news to hear Of Ráma, for the charioteer, With reverent hand to hand applied He waited by the old man’s side, Whose mind with anguish was distraught Like a great elephant newly caught. The king with bitter pain distressed The faithful charioteer addressed, Who, sad of mien, with flooded eye, And dust upon his limbs, stood by: “Where will be Ráma’s dwelling now At some tree’s foot, beneath the bough; Ah, what will be the exile’s food, Bred up with kind solicitude? Can he, long lapped in pleasant rest, Unmeet for pain, by pain oppressed, Son of earth’s king, his sad night spend Earth-couched, as one that has no friend? Behind him, when abroad he sped, Cars, elephant, and foot were led: Then how shall Ráma dwell afar In the wild woods where no men are? How, tell me, did the princes there, With Sítá good and soft and fair, Alighting from the chariot, tread The forest wilds around them spread? A happy lot is thine, I ween, Whose eyes my two dear sons have seen Seeking on foot the forest shade, Like the bright Twins to view displayed, The heavenly Aśvins, when they seek The woods that hang ’neath Mandar’s peak. What words, Sumantra, quickly tell, From Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, Sítá fell? How in the wood did Ráma eat? What was his bed, and what his seat? Full answer to my questions give, For I on thy replies shall live, As with the saints Yayáti held Sweet converse, from the skies expelled.”

  Urged by the lord of men to speak, Whose sobbing voice came faint and weak, Thus he, while tears his utterance broke, In answer to the monarch spoke: “Hear then the words that Ráma said, Resolved in duty’s path to tread. Joining his hands, his head he bent, And gave this message, reverent: “Sumantra, to my father go, Whose lofty mind all people know: Bow down before him, as is meet, And in my stead salute his feet. Then to the queen my mother bend, And give the greeting that I send: Ne’er may her steps from duty err, And may it still be well with her. And add this word: “O Queen, pursue Thy vows with faithful heart and true; And ever at due season turn Where holy fires of worship burn. And, lady, on our lord bestow Such honour as to Gods we owe. Be kind to every queen: let pride And thought of self be cast aside. In the king’s fond opinion raise Kaikeyí, by respect and praise. Let the young Bharat ever be Loved, honoured as the king by thee: Thy king-ward duty ne’er forget: High over all are monarchs set.”

  And Bharat, too, for me address: Pray that all health his life may bless. Let every royal lady share, As justice bids, his love and care. Say to the strong-armed chief who brings Joy to Iksváku’s line of kings: “As ruling prince thy care be shown Of him, our sire, who holds the throne. Stricken in years he feels their weight; But leave him in his royal state. As regent heir content thee still, Submissive to thy father’s will.’ ” Ráma again his charge renewed, As the hot flood his cheek bedewed: “Hold as thine own my mother dear Who drops for me the longing tear.” Then Lakshmaṇ, with his soul on fire, Spake breathing fast these words of ire: “Say, for what sin, for what offence Was royal Ráma banished thence? He is the cause, the king: poor slave To the light charge Kaikeyí gave. Let right or wrong the motive be, The author of our woe is he. Whether the exile were decreed Through foolish faith or guilty greed, For promises or empire, still The king has wrought a grievous ill. Grant that the Lord of all saw fit To prompt the deed and sanction it, In Ráma’s life no cause I see For which the king should bid him flee. His blinded eyes refused to scan The guilt and folly of the plan, And from the weakness of the king Here and hereafter woe shall spring. No more my sire: the ties that used To bind me to the king are loosed. My brother Ráma, Raghu’s son, To me is lord, friend, sire in one. The love of men how can he win, Deserting, by the cruel sin, Their joy, whose heart is swift to feel A pleasure in the people’s weal? Shall he whose mandate could expel The virtuous Ráma, loved so well, To whom his subjects’ fond hearts cling— Shall he in spite of them be king?”

  But Janak’s child, my lord, stood by, And oft the votaress heaved a sigh. She seemed with dull and wandering sense, Beneath a spirit’s influence. The noble princess, pained with woe Which till that hour she ne’er could know, Tears in her heavy trouble shed, But not a word to me she said. She raised her face which grief had dried And tenderly her husband eyed, Gazed on him as he turned to go While tear chased tear in rapid flow.”




Canto LIX. Dasaratha’s Lament.


As thus Sumantra, best of peers, Told his sad tale with many tears, The monarch cried, “I pray thee, tell At length again what there befell.” Sumantra, at the king’s behest, Striving with sobs he scarce repressed, His trembling voice at last controlled, And thus his further tidings told: “Their locks in votive coils they wound, Their coats of bark upon them bound, To Gangá’s farther shore they went, Thence to Prayág their steps were bent. I saw that Lakshmaṇ walked ahead To guard the path the two should tread. So far I saw, no more could learn, Forced by the hero to return. Retracing slow my homeward course, Scarce could I move each stubborn horse: Shedding hot tears of grief he stood When Ráma turned him to the wood.(333) As the two princes parted thence I raised my hands in reverence, Mounted my ready car, and bore The grief that stung me to the core. With Guha all that day I stayed, Still by the earnest hope delayed That Ráma, ere the time should end, Some message from the wood might send. Thy realms, great Monarch, mourn the blow, And sympathize with Ráma’s woe. Each withering tree hangs low his head, And shoot, and bud, and flower are dead. Dried are the floods that wont to fill The lake, the river, and the rill. Drear is each grove and garden now, Dry every blossom on the bough. Each beast is still, no serpents crawl: A lethargy of woe on all. The very wood is silent: crushed With grief for Ráma, all is hushed. Fair blossoms from the water born, Gay garlands that the earth adorn, And every fruit that gleams like gold, Have lost the scent that charmed of old. Empty is every grove I see, Or birds sit pensive on the tree. Where’er I look, its beauty o’er, The pleasance charms not as before. I drove through fair Ayodhyá’s street: None flew with joy the car to meet. They saw that Ráma was not there, And turned them sighing in despair. The people in the royal way Wept tears of bitter grief, when they Beheld me coming, from afar, No Ráma with me in the car. From palace roof and turret high Each woman bent her eager eye; She looked for Ráma, but in vain; Gazed on the car and shrieked for pain. Their long clear eyes with sorrow drowned They, when this common grief was found, Looked each on other, friend and foe, In sympathy of levelling woe: No shade of difference between Foe, friend, or neutral, there was seen. Without a joy, her bosom rent With grief for Ráma’s banishment, Ayodhyá like the queen appears Who mourns her son with many tears.”

  He ended: and the king, distressed. With sobbing voice that lord addressed: “Ah me, by false Kaikeyí led, Of evil race, to evil bred, I took no counsel of the sage, Nor sought advice from skill and age, I asked no lord his aid to lend, I called no citizen or friend. Rash was my deed, bereft of sense Slave to a woman’s influence. Surely, my lord, a woe so great Falls on us by the will of Fate; It lays the house of Raghu low, For Destiny will have it so. I pray thee, if I e’er have done An act to please thee, yea, but one, Fly, fly, and Ráma homeward lead: My life, departing, counsels speed. Fly, ere the power to bid I lack, Fly to the wood: bring Ráma back. I cannot live for even one Short hour bereaved of my son. But ah, the prince, whose arms are strong, Has journeyed far: the way is long: Me, me upon the chariot place, And let me look on Ráma’s face. Ah me, my son, mine eldest-born, Where roams he in the wood forlorn, The wielder of the mighty bow, Whose shoulders like the lion’s show? O, ere the light of life be dim, Take me to Sítá and to him. O Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, and O thou Dear Sítá, constant to thy vow, Beloved ones, you cannot know That I am dying of my woe.”

  The king to bitter grief a prey, That drove each wandering sense away, Sunk in affliction’s sea, too wide To traverse, in his anguish cried: “Hard, hard to pass, my Queen, this sea Of sorrow raging over me: No Ráma near to soothe mine eye, Plunged in its lowest deeps I lie. Sorrow for Ráma swells the tide, And Sítá’s absence makes it wide: My tears its foamy flood distain, Made billowy by my sighs of pain: My cries its roar, the arms I throw About me are the fish below, Kaikeyí is the fire that feeds Beneath: my hair the tangled weeds: Its source the tears for Ráma shed: The hump-back’s words its monsters dread: The boon I gave the wretch its shore, Till Ráma’s banishment be o’er.(334)   Ah me, that I should long to set     My eager eyes to-day   On Raghu’s son, and he be yet     With Lakshmaṇ far away!”   Thus he of lofty glory wailed,     And sank upon the bed.   Beneath the woe his spirit failed,     And all his senses fled.




Canto LX. Kausalyá Consoled.


As Queen Kauśalyá, trembling much, As blighted by a goblin’s touch, Still lying prostrate, half awoke To consciousness, ’twas thus she spoke: “Bear me away, Sumantra, far, Where Ráma, Sítá, Lakshmaṇ are. Bereft of them I have no power To linger on a single hour. Again, I pray, thy steps retrace, And me in Daṇḍak forest place, For after them I needs must go, Or sink to Yama’s realms below.”

  His utterance choked by tears that rolled Down from their fountains uncontrolled, With suppliant hands the charioteer Thus spake, the lady’s heart to cheer: “Dismiss thy grief, despair, and dread That fills thy soul, of sorrow bred, For pain and anguish thrown aside, Will Ráma in the wood abide. And Lakshmaṇ, with unfailing care Will guard the feet of Ráma there, Earning, with governed sense, the prize That waits on duty in the skies. And Sítá in the wild as well As in her own dear home will dwell; To Ráma all her heart she gives, And free from doubt and terror lives. No faintest sign of care or woe The features of the lady show: Methinks Videha’s pride was made For exile in the forest shade. E’en as of old she used to rove Delighted in the city’s grove, Thus, even thus she joys to tread The woodlands uninhabited. Like a young child, her face as fair As the young moon, she wanders there. What though in lonely woods she stray Still Ráma is her joy and stay: All his the heart no sorrow bends, Her very life on him depends. For, if her lord she might not see, Ayodhyá like the wood would be. She bids him, as she roams, declare The names of towns and hamlets there, Marks various trees that meet her eye, And many a brook that hurries by, And Janak’s daughter seems to roam One little league away from home When Ráma or his brother speaks And gives the answer that she seeks. This, Lady, I remember well, Nor angry words have I to tell: Reproaches at Kaikeyí shot, Such, Queen, my mind remembers not.” The speech when Sítá’s wrath was high, Sumantra passed in silence by, That so his pleasant words might cheer With sweet report Kauśalyá’s ear. “Her moonlike beauty suffers not Though winds be rude and suns be hot: The way, the danger, and the toil Her gentle lustre may not soil. Like the red lily’s leafy crown Or as the fair full moon looks down, So the Videhan lady’s face Still shines with undiminished grace. What if the borrowed colours throw O’er her fine feet no rosy glow, Still with their natural tints they spread A lotus glory where they tread. In sportive grace she walks the ground And sweet her chiming anklets sound. No jewels clasp the faultless limb: She leaves them all for love of him. If in the woods her gentle eye A lion sees, or tiger nigh, Or elephant, she fears no ill For Ráma’s arm supports her still. No longer be their fate deplored, Nor thine, nor that of Kośal’s lord, For conduct such as theirs shall buy Wide glory that can never die. For casting grief and care away, Delighting in the forest, they With joyful spirits, blithe and gay, Set forward on the ancient way   Where mighty saints have led: Their highest aim, their dearest care To keep their father’s honour fair, Observing still the oath he sware,   They roam, on wild fruit fed.” Thus with persuasive art he tried To turn her from her grief aside,   By soothing fancies won. But still she gave her sorrow vent: “Ah Ráma,” was her shrill lament,   “My love, my son, my son!”




Canto LXI. Kausalyá’s Lament.


When, best of all who give delight, Her Ráma wandered far from sight, Kauśalyá weeping, sore distressed, The king her husband thus addressed: “Thy name, O Monarch, far and wide Through the three worlds is glorified: Yet Ráma’s is the pitying mind, His speed is true, his heart is kind. How will thy sons, good lord, sustain With Sítá, all their care and pain? How in the wild endure distress, Nursed in the lap of tenderness? How will the dear Videhan bear The heat and cold when wandering there Bred in the bliss of princely state, So young and fair and delicate? The large-eyed lady, wont to eat The best of finely seasoned meat— How will she now her life sustain With woodland fare of self-sown grain? Will she, with joys encompassed long, Who loved the music and the song, In the wild wood endure to hear The ravening lion’s voice of fear? Where sleeps my strong-armed hero, where, Like Lord Mahendra’s standard, fair? Where is, by Lakshmaṇ’s side, his bed, His club-like arm beneath his head? When shall I see his flower-like eyes, And face that with the lotus vies, Feel his sweet lily breath, and view His glorious hair and lotus hue? The heart within my breast, I feel, Is adamant or hardest steel, Or, in a thousand fragments split, The loss of him had shattered it, When those I love, who should be blest, Are wandering in the wood distressed, Condemned their wretched lives to lead In exile, by thy ruthless deed. If, when the fourteen years are past, Ráma reseeks his home at last, I think not Bharat will consent To yield the wealth and government. At funeral feasts some mourners deal To kith and kin the solemn meal, And having duly fed them all Some Bráhmans to the banquet call. The best of Bráhmans, good and wise, The tardy summoning despise, And, equal to the Gods, disdain Cups, e’en of Amrit, thus to drain. Nay e’en when Bráhmans first have fed, They loathe the meal for others spread, And from the leavings turn with scorn, As bulls avoid a fractured horn. So Ráma, sovereign lord of men, Will spurn the sullied kingship then: He born the eldest and the best, His younger’s leavings will detest, Turning from tasted food away, As tigers scorn another’s prey. The sacred post is used not twice, Nor elements, in sacrifice. But once the sacred grass is spread, But once with oil the flame is fed: So Ráma’s pride will ne’er receive The royal power which others leave, Like wine when tasteless dregs are left, Or rites of Soma juice bereft. Be sure the pride of Raghu’s race Will never stoop to such disgrace: The lordly lion will not bear That man should beard him in his lair. Were all the worlds against him ranged His dauntless soul were still unchanged: He, dutiful, in duty strong, Would purge the impious world from wrong. Could not the hero, brave and bold, The archer, with his shafts of gold, Burn up the very seas, as doom Will in the end all life consume? Of lion’s might, eyed like a bull, A prince so brave and beautiful, Thou hast with wicked hate pursued, Like sea-born tribes who eat their brood. If thou, O Monarch, hadst but known The duty all the Twice-born own, If the good laws had touched thy mind, Which sages in the Scriptures find, Thou ne’er hadst driven forth to pine This brave, this duteous son of thine. First on her lord the wife depends, Next on her son and last on friends: These three supports in life has she, And not a fourth for her may be. Thy heart, O King, I have not won; In wild woods roams my banished son; Far are my friends: ah, hapless me, Quite ruined and destroyed by thee.”




Canto LXII. Dasaratha Consoled.


The queen’s stern speech the monarch heard, As rage and grief her bosom stirred, And by his anguish sore oppressed Reflected in his secret breast. Fainting and sad, with woe distraught, He wandered in a maze of thought; At length the queller of the foe Grew conscious, rallying from his woe. When consciousness returned anew Long burning sighs the monarch drew, Again immersed in thought he eyed Kauśalyá standing by his side. Back to his pondering soul was brought The direful deed his hand had wrought, When, guiltless of the wrong intent, His arrow at a sound was sent. Distracted by his memory’s sting, And mourning for his son, the king To two consuming griefs a prey, A miserable victim lay. The double woe devoured him fast, As on the ground his eyes he cast, Joined suppliant hands, her heart to touch, And spake in the answer, trembling much: “Kauśalyá, for thy grace I sue, Joining these hands as suppliants do. Thou e’en to foes hast ever been A gentle, good, and loving queen. Her lord, with noble virtues graced, Her lord, by lack of all debased, Is still a God in woman’s eyes, If duty’s law she hold and prize. Thou, who the right hast aye pursued, Life’s changes and its chances viewed, Shouldst never launch, though sorrow-stirred, At me distressed, one bitter word.”

  She listened, as with sorrow faint He murmured forth his sad complaint: Her brimming eyes with tears ran o’er, As spouts the new fallen water pour; His suppliant hands, with fear dismayed She gently clasped in hers, and laid, Like a fair lotus, on her head, And faltering in her trouble said: “Forgive me; at thy feet I lie, With low bent head to thee I cry. By thee besought, thy guilty dame Pardon from thee can scarcely claim. She merits not the name of wife Who cherishes perpetual strife With her own husband good and wise, Her lord both here and in the skies. I know the claims of duty well, I know thy lips the truth must tell. All the wild words I rashly spoke, Forth from my heart, through anguish, broke; For sorrow bends the stoutest soul, And cancels Scripture’s high control. Yea, sorrow’s might all else o’erthrows The strongest and the worst of foes. ’Tis thus with all: we keenly feel, Yet bear the blows our foemen deal, But when a slender woe assails The manliest spirit bends and quails. The fifth long night has now begun Since the wild woods have lodged my son: To me whose joy is drowned in tears, Each day a dreary year appears. While all my thoughts on him are set Grief at my heart swells wilder yet: With doubled might thus Ocean raves When rushing floods increase his waves.”

  As from Kauśalyá reasoning well The gentle words of wisdom fell, The sun went down with dying flame, And darkness o’er the landscape came. His lady’s soothing words in part Relieved the monarch’s aching heart, Who, wearied out by all his woes, Yielded to sleep and took repose.




Canto LXIII. The Hermit’s Son.


But soon by rankling grief oppressed The king awoke from troubled rest, And his sad heart was tried again With anxious thought where all was pain. Ráma and Lakshmaṇ’s mournful fate On Daśaratha, good and great As Indra, pressed with crushing weight, As when the demon’s might assails The Sun-God, and his glory pales. Ere yet the sixth long night was spent, Since Ráma to the woods was sent, The king at midnight sadly thought Of the old crime his hand had wrought, And thus to Queen Kauśalyá cried Who still for Ráma moaned and sighed: “If thou art waking, give, I pray, Attention to the words I say. Whate’er the conduct men pursue, Be good or ill the acts they do, Be sure, dear Queen, they find the meed Of wicked or of virtuous deed. A heedless child we call the man Whose feeble judgment fails to scan The weight of what his hands may do, Its lightness, fault, and merit too. One lays the Mango garden low, And bids the gay Paláśas grow: Longing for fruit their bloom he sees, But grieves when fruit should bend the trees. Cut by my hand, my fruit-trees fell, Paláśa trees I watered well. My hopes this foolish heart deceive, And for my banished son I grieve. Kauśalyá, in my youthful prime Armed with my bow I wrought the crime, Proud of my skill, my name renowned, An archer prince who shoots by sound. The deed this hand unwitting wrought This misery on my soul has brought, As children seize the deadly cup And blindly drink the poison up. As the unreasoning man may be Charmed with the gay Paláśa tree, I unaware have reaped the fruit Of joying at a sound to shoot. As regent prince I shared the throne, Thou wast a maid to me unknown, The early Rain-time duly came, And strengthened love’s delicious flame. The sun had drained the earth that lay All glowing ’neath the summer day, And to the gloomy clime had fled Where dwell the spirits of the dead.(335) The fervent heat that moment ceased, The darkening clouds each hour increased And frogs and deer and peacocks all Rejoiced to see the torrents fall. Their bright wings heavy from the shower, The birds, new-bathed, had scarce the power To reach the branches of the trees Whose high tops swayed beneath the breeze. The fallen rain, and falling still, Hung like a sheet on every hill, Till, with glad deer, each flooded steep Showed glorious as the mighty deep. The torrents down its wooded side Poured, some unstained, while others dyed Gold, ashy, silver, ochre, bore The tints of every mountain ore. In that sweet time, when all are pleased, My arrows and my bow I seized; Keen for the chase, in field or grove, Down Sarjú’s bank my car I drove. I longed with all my lawless will Some elephant by night to kill, Some buffalo that came to drink, Or tiger, at the river’s brink. When all around was dark and still, I heard a pitcher slowly fill, And thought, obscured in deepest shade, An elephant the sound had made. I drew a shaft that glittered bright, Fell as a serpent’s venomed bite; I longed to lay the monster dead, And to the mark my arrow sped. Then in the calm of morning, clear A hermit’s wailing smote my ear: “Ah me, ah me,” he cried, and sank, Pierced by my arrow, on the bank. E’en as the weapon smote his side, I heard a human voice that cried: “Why lights this shaft on one like me, A poor and harmless devotee? I came by night to fill my jar From this lone stream where no men are. Ah, who this deadly shaft has shot? Whom have I wronged, and knew it not? Why should a boy so harmless feel The vengeance of the winged steel? Or who should slay the guiltless son Of hermit sire who injures none, Who dwells retired in woods, and there Supports his life on woodland fare? Ah me, ah me, why am I slain, What booty will the murderer gain? In hermit coils I bind my hair, Coats made of skin and bark I wear. Ah, who the cruel deed can praise Whose idle toil no fruit repays, As impious as the wretch’s crime Who dares his master’s bed to climb? Nor does my parting spirit grieve But for the life which thus I leave: Alas, my mother and my sire,— I mourn for them when I expire. Ah me, that aged, helpless pair, Long cherished by my watchful care, How will it be with them this day When to the Five(336) I pass away? Pierced by the self-same dart we die, Mine aged mother, sire, and I. Whose mighty hand, whose lawless mind Has all the three to death consigned?”

  When I, by love of duty stirred, That touching lamentation heard, Pierced to the heart by sudden woe, I threw to earth my shafts and bow. My heart was full of grief and dread As swiftly to the place I sped, Where, by my arrow wounded sore, A hermit lay on Sarjú’s shore. His matted hair was all unbound, His pitcher empty on the ground, And by the fatal arrow pained, He lay with dust and gore distained. I stood confounded and amazed: His dying eyes to mine he raised, And spoke this speech in accents stern, As though his light my soul would burn: “How have I wronged thee, King, that I Struck by thy mortal arrow die? The wood my home, this jar I brought, And water for my parents sought. This one keen shaft that strikes me through Slays sire and aged mother too. Feeble and blind, in helpless pain, They wait for me and thirst in vain. They with parched lips their pangs must bear, And hope will end in blank despair. Ah me, there seems no fruit in store For holy zeal or Scripture lore, Or else ere now my sire would know That his dear son is lying low. Yet, if my mournful fate he knew, What could his arm so feeble do? The tree, firm-rooted, ne’er may be The guardian of a stricken tree. Haste to my father, and relate While time allows, my sudden fate, Lest he consume thee as the fire Burns up the forest, in his ire. This little path, O King, pursue: My father’s cot thou soon wilt view. There sue for pardon to the sage, Lest he should curse thee in his rage. First from the wound extract the dart That kills me with its deadly smart, E’en as the flushed impetuous tide Eats through the river’s yielding side.”

  I feared to draw the arrow out, And pondered thus in painful doubt: “Now tortured by the shaft he lies, But if I draw it forth he dies.” Helpless I stood, faint, sorely grieved: The hermit’s son my thought perceived; As one o’ercome by direst pain He scarce had strength to speak again. With writhing limb and struggling breath, Nearer and ever nearer death “My senses undisturbed remain, And fortitude has conquered pain: Now from one tear thy soul be freed. Thy hand has made a Bráhman bleed. Let not this pang thy bosom wring: No twice-born youth am I, O King, For of a Vaiśya sire I came, Who wedded with a Śúdra dame.”

  These words the boy could scarcely say, As tortured by the shaft he lay, Twisting his helpless body round, Then trembling senseless on the ground. Then from his bleeding side I drew The rankling shaft that pierced him through. With death’s last fear my face he eyed, And, rich in store of penance, died.”




Canto LXIV. Dasaratha’s Death.


The son of Raghu to his queen Thus far described the unequalled scene, And, as the hermit’s death he rued, The mournful story thus renewed: “The deed my heedless hand had wrought Perplexed me with remorseful thought, And all alone I pondered still How kindly deed might salve the ill. The pitcher from the ground I took, And filled it from that fairest brook, Then, by the path the hermit showed, I reached his sainted sire’s abode. I came, I saw: the aged pair, Feeble and blind, were sitting there, Like birds with clipped wings, side by side, With none their helpless steps to guide. Their idle hours the twain beguiled With talk of their returning child, And still the cheering hope enjoyed, The hope, alas, by me destroyed. Then spoke the sage, as drawing near The sound of footsteps reached his ear: “Dear son, the water quickly bring; Why hast thou made this tarrying? Thy mother thirsts, and thou hast played, And bathing in the brook delayed. She weeps because thou camest not; Haste, O my son, within the cot. If she or I have ever done A thing to pain thee, dearest son, Dismiss the memory from thy mind: A hermit thou, be good and kind. On thee our lives, our all, depend: Thou art thy friendless parents’ friend. The eyeless couple’s eye art thou: Then why so cold and silent now?”

  With sobbing voice and bosom wrung I scarce could move my faltering tongue, And with my spirit filled with dread I looked upon the sage, and said, While mind, and sense, and nerve I strung To fortify my trembling tongue, And let the aged hermit know His son’s sad fate, my fear and woe: “High-minded Saint, not I thy child, A warrior, Daśaratha styled. I bear a grievous sorrow’s weight Born of a deed which good men hate. My lord, I came to Sarjú’s shore, And in my hand my bow I bore For elephant or beast of chase That seeks by night his drinking place. There from the stream a sound I heard As if a jar the water stirred. An elephant, I thought, was nigh: I aimed, and let an arrow fly. Swift to the place I made my way, And there a wounded hermit lay Gasping for breath: the deadly dart Stood quivering in his youthful heart. I hastened near with pain oppressed; He faltered out his last behest. And quickly, as he bade me do, From his pierced side the shaft I drew. I drew the arrow from the rent, And up to heaven the hermit went, Lamenting, as from earth he passed, His aged parents to the last. Thus, unaware, the deed was done: My hand, unwitting, killed thy son. For what remains, O, let me win Thy pardon for my heedless sin.”

  As the sad tale of sin I told The hermit’s grief was uncontrolled. With flooded eyes, and sorrow-faint, Thus spake the venerable saint: I stood with hand to hand applied, And listened as he spoke and sighed: “If thou, O King, hadst left unsaid By thine own tongue this tale of dread, Thy head for hideous guilt accursed Had in a thousand pieces burst. A hermit’s blood by warrior spilt, In such a case, with purposed guilt, Down from his high estate would bring Even the thunder’s mighty King. And he a dart who conscious sends Against the devotee who spends His pure life by the law of Heaven— That sinner’s head will split in seven. Thou livest, for thy heedless hand Has wrought a deed thou hast not planned, Else thou and all of Raghu’s line Had perished by this act of thine. Now guide us,” thus the hermit said, “Forth to the spot where he lies dead. Guide us, this day, O Monarch, we For the last time our son would see: The hermit dress of skin he wore Rent from his limbs distained with gore; His senseless body lying slain, His soul in Yama’s dark domain.”

  Alone the mourning pair I led, Their souls with woe disquieted, And let the dame and hermit lay Their hands upon the breathless clay. The father touched his son, and pressed The body to his aged breast; Then falling by the dead boy’s side, He lifted up his voice, and cried:

  “Hast thou no word, my child, to say? No greeting for thy sire to-day? Why art thou angry, darling? why Wilt thou upon the cold earth lie? If thou, my son, art wroth with me, Here, duteous child, thy mother see. What! no embrace for me, my son? No word of tender love—not one? Whose gentle voice, so soft and clear, Soothing my spirit, shall I hear When evening comes, with accents sweet Scripture or ancient lore repeat? Who, having fed the sacred fire, And duly bathed, as texts require, Will cheer, when evening rites are done, The father mourning for his son? Who will the daily meal provide For the poor wretch who lacks a guide, Feeding the helpless with the best Berries and roots, like some dear guest? How can these hands subsistence find For thy poor mother, old and blind? The wretched votaress how sustain, Who mourns her child in ceaseless pain? Stay yet a while, my darling, stay, Nor fly to Yama’s realm to-day. To-morrow I thy sire and she Who bare thee, child, will go with, thee.(337) Then when I look on Yama, I To great Vivasvat’s son will cry: “Hear, King of justice, and restore Our child to feed us, I implore. Lord of the world, of mighty fame, Faithful and just, admit my claim, And grant this single boon to free My soul from fear, to one like me.” Because, my son, untouched by stain, By sinful hands thou fallest slain, Win, through thy truth, the sphere where those Who die by hostile darts repose. Seek the blest home prepared for all The valiant who in battle fall, Who face the foe and scorn to yield, In glory dying on the field. Rise to the heaven where Dhundhumár And Nahush, mighty heroes, are, Where Janamejay and the blest Dilípa, Sagar, Saivya, rest: Home of all virtuous spirits, earned By fervent rites and Scripture learned: By those whose sacred fires have glowed, Whose liberal hands have fields bestowed: By givers of a thousand cows, By lovers of one faithful spouse: By those who serve their masters well, And cast away this earthly shell. None of my race can ever know The bitter pain of lasting woe. But doomed to that dire fate is he Whose guilty hand has slaughtered thee.”

  Thus with wild tears the aged saint Made many a time his piteous plaint, Then with his wife began to shed The funeral water for the dead. But in a shape celestial clad, Won by the merits of the lad, The spirit from the body brake And to the mourning parents spake: “A glorious home in realms above Rewards my care and filial love. You, honoured parents, soon shall be Partakers of that home with me.”

  He spake, and swiftly mounting high, With Indra near him, to the sky On a bright car, with flame that glowed, Sublime the duteous hermit rode.

  The father, with his consort’s aid, The funeral rites with water paid, And thus his speech to me renewed Who stood in suppliant attitude: “Slay me this day, O, slay me, King, For death no longer has a sting. Childless am I: thy dart has done To death my dear, my only son. Because the boy I loved so well Slain by thy heedless arrow fell, My curse upon thy soul shall press With bitter woe and heaviness. I mourn a slaughtered child, and thou Shalt feel the pangs that kill me now. Bereft and suffering e’en as I, So shalt thou mourn thy son, and die. Thy hand unwitting dealt the blow That laid a holy hermit low, And distant, therefore, is the time When thou shalt suffer for the crime. The hour shall come when, crushed by woes Like these I feel, thy life shall close: A debt to pay in after days Like his the priestly fee who pays.”

  This curse on me the hermit laid, Nor yet his tears and groans were stayed. Then on the pyre their bodies cast The pair; and straight to heaven they passed. As in sad thought I pondered long Back to my memory came the wrong Done in wild youth, O lady dear, When ’twas my boast to shoot by ear. The deed has borne the fruit, which now Hangs ripe upon the bending bough: Thus dainty meats the palate please, And lure the weak to swift disease. Now on my soul return with dread The words that noble hermit said, That I for a dear son should grieve, And of the woe my life should leave.”

  Thus spake the king with many a tear; Then to his wife he cried in fear: “I cannot see thee, love; but lay Thy gentle hand in mine, I pray. Ah me, if Ráma touched me thus, If once, returning home to us, He bade me wealth and lordship give, Then, so I think, my soul would live. Unlike myself, unjust and mean Have been my ways with him, my Queen, But like himself is all that he, My noble son, has done to me. His son, though far from right he stray, What prudent sire would cast away? What banished son would check his ire, Nor speak reproaches of his sire? I see thee not: these eyes grow blind, And memory quits my troubled mind. Angels of Death are round me: they Summon my soul with speed away. What woe more grievous can there be, That, when from light and life I flee, I may not, ere I part, behold My virtuous Ráma, true and bold? Grief for my son, the brave and true, Whose joy it was my will to do, Dries up my breath, as summer dries The last drop in the pool that lies. Not men, but blessed Gods, are they Whose eyes shall see his face that day; See him, when fourteen years are past, With earrings decked return at last. My fainting mind forgets to think: Low and more low my spirits sink. Each from its seat, my senses steal: I cannot hear, or taste, or feel. This lethargy of soul o’ercomes Each organ, and its function numbs: So when the oil begins to fail, The torch’s rays grow faint and pale. This flood of woe caused by this hand Destroys me helpless and unmanned, Resistless as the floods that bore A passage through the river shore. Ah Raghu’s son, ah mighty-armed, By whom my cares were soothed and charmed, My son in whom I took delight, Now vanished from thy father’s sight! Kauśalyá, ah, I cannot see; Sumitrá, gentle devotee! Alas, Kaikeyí, cruel dame, My bitter foe, thy father’s shame!”

  Kauśalyá and Sumitrá kept Their watch beside him as he wept. And Daśaratha moaned and sighed, And grieving for his darling died.




Canto LXV. The Women’s Lament.


And now the night had past away, And brightly dawned another day; The minstrels, trained to play and sing, Flocked to the chamber of the king: Bards, who their gayest raiment wore, And heralds famed for ancient lore: And singers, with their songs of praise, Made music in their several ways. There as they poured their blessings choice And hailed their king with hand and voice, Their praises with a swelling roar Echoed through court and corridor. Then as the bards his glory sang, From beaten palms loud answer rang, As glad applauders clapped their hands, And told his deeds in distant lands. The swelling concert woke a throng Of sleeping birds to life and song: Some in the branches of the trees, Some caged in halls and galleries. Nor was the soft string music mute; The gentle whisper of the lute, And blessings sung by singers skilled The palace of the monarch filled. Eunuchs and dames of life unstained, Each in the arts of waiting trained, Drew near attentive as before, And crowded to the chamber door: These skilful when and how to shed The lustral stream o’er limb and head, Others with golden ewers stood Of water stained with sandal wood. And many a maid, pure, young, and fair, Her load of early offerings bare, Cups of the flood which all revere, And sacred things, and toilet gear. Each several thing was duly brought As rule of old observance taught, And lucky signs on each impressed Stamped it the fairest and the best. There anxious, in their long array, All waited till the shine of day: But when the king nor rose nor spoke, Doubt and alarm within them woke. Forthwith the dames, by duty led, Attendants on the monarch’s bed, Within the royal chamber pressed To wake their master from his rest. Skilled in the lore of dreaming, they First touched the bed on which he lay. But none replied; no sound was heard, Nor hand, nor head, nor body stirred. They trembled, and their dread increased, Fearing his breath of life had ceased, And bending low their heads, they shook Like the tall reeds that fringe the brook. In doubt and terror down they knelt, Looked on his face, his cold hand felt, And then the gloomy truth appeared Of all their hearts had darkly feared. Kauśalyá and Sumitrá, worn With weeping for their sons, forlorn, Woke not, but lay in slumber deep And still as death’s unending sleep. Bowed down by grief, her colour fled, Her wonted lustre dull and dead, Kauśalyá shone not, like a star Obscured behind a cloudy bar. Beside the king’s her couch was spread, And next was Queen Sumitrá’s bed, Who shone no more with beauty’s glow, Her face bedewed with tears of woe. There lapped in sleep each wearied queen, There as in sleep, the king was seen; And swift the troubling thought came o’er Their spirits that he breathed no more. At once with wailing loud and high The matrons shrieked a bitter cry, As widowed elephants bewail Their dead lord in the woody vale. At the loud shriek that round them rang, Kauśalyá and Sumitrá sprang Awakened from their beds, with eyes Wide open in their first surprise. Quick to the monarch’s side they came, And saw and touched his lifeless frame; One cry, O husband! forth they sent, And prostrate to the ground they went. The king of Kośal’s daughter(338) there Writhed, with the dust on limb and hair Lustreless, as a star might lie Hurled downward from the glorious sky. When the king’s voice in death was stilled, The women who the chamber filled Saw, like a widow elephant slain, Kauśalyá prostrate in her pain. Then all the monarch’s ladies led By Queen Kaikeyí at their head, Poured forth their tears, and weeping so, Sank on the ground, consumed by woe. The cry of grief so long and loud Went up from all the royal crowd, That, doubled by the matron train, It made the palace ring again. Filled with dark fear and eager eyes, Anxiety and wild surmise; Echoing with the cries of grief Of sorrowing friends who mourned their chief, Dejected, pale with deep distress, Hurled from their height of happiness: Such was the look the palace wore Where lay the king who breathed no more.




Canto LXVI. The Embalming.


Kauśalyá’s eyes with tears o’erflowed, Weighed down by varied sorrows’ load; On her dead lord her gaze she bent, Who lay like fire whose might is spent, Like the great deep with waters dry, Or like the clouded sun on high. Then on her lap she laid his head. And on Kaikeyí looked and said: “Triumphant now enjoy thy reign Without a thorn thy side to pain. Thou hast pursued thy single aim, And killed the king, O wicked dame. Far from my sight my Ráma flies, My perished lord has sought the skies. No friend, no hope my life to cheer, I cannot tread the dark path here. Who would forsake her husband, who That God to whom her love is due, And wish to live one hour, but she Whose heart no duty owns, like thee? The ravenous sees no fault: his greed Will e’en on poison blindly feed. Kaikeyí, through a hump-back maid, This royal house in death has laid. King Janak, with his queen, will hear Heart rent like me the tidings drear Of Ráma banished by the king, Urged by her impious counselling. No son has he, his age is great, And sinking with the double weight, He for his darling child will pine, And pierced with woe his life resign. Sprung from Videha’s monarch, she A sad and lovely devotee, Roaming the wood, unmeet for woe, Will toil and trouble undergo. She in the gloomy night with fear The cries of beast and bird will hear, And trembling in her wild alarm Will cling to Ráma’s sheltering arm. Ah, little knows my duteous son That I am widowed and undone— My Ráma of the lotus eye, Gone hence, gone hence, alas, to die. Now, as a living wife and true, I, e’en this day, will perish too: Around his form these arms will throw And to the fire with him will go.”

  Clasping her husband’s lifeless clay A while the weeping votaress lay, Till chamberlains removed her thence O’ercome by sorrow’s violence. Then in a cask of oil they laid Him who in life the world had swayed, And finished, as the lords desired, All rites for parted souls required. The lords, all-wise, refused to burn The monarch ere his son’s return; So for a while the corpse they set Embalmed in oil, and waited yet. The women heard: no doubt remained, And wildly for the king they plained. With gushing tears that drowned each eye Wildly they waved their arms on high, And each her mangling nails impressed Deep in her head and knee and breast: “Of Ráma reft,—who ever spake The sweetest words the heart to take, Who firmly to the truth would cling,— Why dost thou leave us, mighty King? How can the consorts thou hast left Widowed, of Raghu’s son bereft, Live with our foe Kaikeyí near, The wicked queen we hate and fear? She threw away the king, her spite Drove Ráma forth and Lakshmaṇ’s might, And gentle Sítá: how will she Spare any, whosoe’er it be?”

  Oppressed with sorrow, tear-distained, The royal women thus complained. Like night when not a star appears, Like a sad widow drowned in tears, Ayodhyá’s city, dark and dim, Reft of her lord was sad for him. When thus for woe the king to heaven had fled,   And still on earth his lovely wives remained. With dying light the sun to rest had sped,   And night triumphant o’er the landscape reigned.




Canto LXVII. The Praise Of Kings.


That night of sorrow passed away, And rose again the God of Day. Then all the twice-born peers of state Together met for high debate. Jáválí, lord of mighty fame. And Gautam, and Kátyáyan came, And Márkandeya’s reverend age, And Vámadeva, glorious sage: Sprung from Mudgalya’s seed the one, The other ancient Kaśyap’s son. With lesser lords these Bráhmans each Spoke in his turn his several speech, And turning to Vaśishṭha, best Of household priests him thus addressed: “The night of bitter woe has past, Which seemed a hundred years to last, Our king, in sorrow for his son, Reunion with the Five has won. His soul is where the blessed are, While Ráma roams in woods afar, And Lakshmaṇ, bright in glorious deeds, Goes where his well-loved brother leads. And Bharat and Śatrughna, they Who smite their foes in battle fray, Far in the realm of Kekaya stay, Where their maternal grandsire’s care Keeps Rájagriha’s city fair. Let one of old Ikshváku’s race Obtain this day the sovereign’s place, Or havoc and destruction straight Our kingless land will devastate. In kingless lands no thunder’s voice, No lightning wreaths the heart rejoice, Nor does Parjanya’s heavenly rain Descend upon the burning plain. Where none is king, the sower’s hand Casts not the seed upon the land; The son against the father strives. And husbands fail to rule their wives. In kingless realms no princes call Their friends to meet in crowded hall; No joyful citizens resort To garden trim or sacred court. In kingless realms no Twice-born care To sacrifice with text and prayer, Nor Bráhmans, who their vows maintain, The great solemnities ordain. The joys of happier days have ceased: No gathering, festival, or feast Together calls the merry throng Delighted with the play and song. In kingless lands it ne’er is well With sons of trade who buy and sell: No men who pleasant tales repeat Delight the crowd with stories sweet. In kingless realms we ne’er behold Young maidens decked with gems and gold, Flock to the gardens blithe and gay To spend their evening hours in play. No lover in the flying car Rides with his love to woods afar. In kingless lands no wealthy swain Who keeps the herd and reaps the grain, Lies sleeping, blest with ample store, Securely near his open door. Upon the royal roads we see No tusked elephant roaming free, Of three-score years, whose head and neck Sweet tinkling bells of silver deck. We hear no more the glad applause When his strong bow each rival draws, No clap of hands, no eager cries That cheer each martial exercise. In kingless realms no merchant bands Who travel forth to distant lands, With precious wares their wagons load, And fear no danger on the road. No sage secure in self-control, Brooding on God with mind and soul, In lonely wanderings finds his home Where’er at eve his feet may roam. In kingless realms no man is sure He holds his life and wealth secure. In kingless lands no warriors smite The foeman’s host in glorious fight. In kingless lands the wise no more, Well trained in Scripture’s holy lore, In shady groves and gardens meet To argue in their calm retreat. No longer, in religious fear, Do they who pious vows revere, Bring dainty cates and wreaths of flowers As offerings to the heavenly powers. No longer, bright as trees in spring, Shine forth the children of the king Resplendent in the people’s eyes With aloe wood and sandal dyes. A brook where water once has been, A grove where grass no more is green, Kine with no herdsman’s guiding hand— So wretched is a kingless land. The car its waving banner rears, Banner of fire the smoke appears: Our king, the banner of our pride, A God with Gods is glorified. In kingless lands no law is known, And none may call his wealth his own, Each preys on each from hour to hour, As fish the weaker fish devour. Then fearless, atheists overleap The bounds of right the godly keep, And when no royal powers restrain, Preëminence and lordship gain. As in the frame of man the eye Keeps watch and ward, a careful spy, The monarch in his wide domains Protects the truth, the right maintains. He is the right, the truth is he, Their hopes in him the well-born see. On him his people’s lives depend, Mother is he, and sire, and friend. The world were veiled in blinding night, And none could see or know aright, Ruled there no king in any state The good and ill to separate. We will obey thy word and will As if our king were living still: As keeps his bounds the faithful sea, So we observe thy high decree. O best of Bráhmans, first in place,   Our kingless land lies desolate: Some scion of Ikshváku’s race   Do thou as monarch consecrate.”




Canto LXVIII. The Envoys.


Vaśishṭha heard their speech and prayer, And thus addressed the concourse there, Friends, Bráhmans, counsellors, and all Assembled in the palace hall: “Ye know that Bharat, free from care, Still lives in Rájagriha(339) where The father of his mother reigns: Śatrughna by his side remains. Let active envoys, good at need, Thither on fleetest horses speed, To bring the hero youths away: Why waste the time in dull delay?”

  Quick came from all the glad reply: “Vaśishṭha, let the envoys fly!” He heard their speech, and thus renewed His charge before the multitude: “Nandan, Aśok, Siddhárth, attend, Your ears, Jayanta, Vijay, lend: Be yours, what need requires, to do: I speak these words to all of you. With coursers of the fleetest breed To Rájagriha’s city speed. Then rid your bosoms of distress, And Bharat thus from me address: “The household priest and peers by us Send health to thee and greet thee thus: Come to thy father’s home with haste: Thine absent time no longer waste.” But speak no word of Ráma fled, Tell not the prince his sire is dead, Nor to the royal youth the fate That ruins Raghu’s race relate. Go quickly hence, and with you bear Fine silken vestures rich and rare, And gems and many a precious thing As gifts to Bharat and the king.”

  With ample stores of food supplied, Each to his home the envoys hied, Prepared, with steeds of swiftest race, To Kekaya’s land(340) their way to trace. They made all due provision there, And every need arranged with care, Then ordered by Vaśishṭha, they Went forth with speed upon their way. Then northward of Pralamba, west Of Apartála, on they pressed, Crossing the Máliní that flowed With gentle stream athwart the road. They traversed Gangá’s holy waves Where she Hástinapura(341) laves, Thence to Panchála(342) westward fast Through Kurujángal’s land(343) they passed. On, on their course the envoys held By urgency of task impelled. Quick glancing at each lucid flood And sweet lake gay with flower and bud. Beyond, they passed unwearied o’er, Where glad birds fill the flood and shore Of Śaradaṇḍá racing fleet With heavenly water clear and sweet, Thereby a tree celestial grows Which every boon on prayer bestows: To its blest shade they humbly bent, Then to Kulingá’s town they went. Then, having passed the Warrior’s Wood, In Abhikála next they stood, O’er sacred Ikshumatí(344) came, Their ancient kings’ ancestral claim. They saw the learned Bráhmans stand, Each drinking from his hollowed hand, And through Báhíka(345) journeying still They reached at length Sudáman’s hill: There Vishṇu’s footstep turned to see, Vipáśá(346) viewed, and Śálmalí, And many a lake and river met, Tank, pool, and pond, and rivulet. And lions saw, and tigers near, And elephants and herds of deer, And still, by prompt obedience led, Along the ample road they sped. Then when their course so swift and long, Had worn their steeds though fleet and strong, To Girivraja’s splendid town They came by night, and lighted down. To please their master, and to guard     The royal race, the lineal right,   The envoys, spent with riding hard,     To that fair city came by night.(347)




Canto LXIX. Bharat’s Dream.


The night those messengers of state Had past within the city’s gate, In dreams the slumbering Bharat saw A sight that chilled his soul with awe. The dream that dire events foretold Left Bharat’s heart with horror cold, And with consuming woes distraught, Upon his aged sire he thought. His dear companions, swift to trace The signs of anguish on his face, Drew near, his sorrow to expel, And pleasant tales began to tell. Some woke sweet music’s cheering sound, And others danced in lively round. With joke and jest they strove to raise His spirits, quoting ancient plays; But Bharat still, the lofty-souled, Deaf to sweet tales his fellows told, Unmoved by music, dance, and jest, Sat silent, by his woe oppressed. To him, begirt by comrades near, Thus spoke the friend he held most dear: “Why ringed around by friends, art thou So silent and so mournful now?” “Hear thou,” thus Bharat made reply, “What chills my heart and dims mine eye. I dreamt I saw the king my sire Sink headlong in a lake of mire Down from a mountain high in air, His body soiled, and loose his hair. Upon the miry lake he seemed To lie and welter, as I dreamed; With hollowed hands full many a draught Of oil he took, and loudly laughed. With head cast down I saw him make A meal on sesamum and cake; The oil from every member dripped, And in its clammy flood he dipped. The ocean’s bed was bare and dry, The moon had fallen from the sky, And all the world lay still and dead, With whelming darkness overspread. The earth was rent and opened wide, The leafy trees were scorched, and died; I saw the seated mountains split, And wreaths of rising smoke emit. The stately beast the monarch rode His long tusks rent and splintered showed; And flames that quenched and cold had lain Blazed forth with kindled light again. I looked, and many a handsome dame, Arrayed in brown and sable came And bore about the monarch, dressed, On iron stool, in sable vest. And then the king, of virtuous mind, A blood-red wreath around him twined, Forth on an ass-drawn chariot sped, As southward still he bent his head. Then, crimson-clad, a dame appeared Who at the monarch laughed and jeered; And a she-monster, dire to view, Her hand upon his body threw. Such is the dream I dreamt by night, Which chills me yet with wild affright: Either the king or Ráma, I Or Lakshmaṇ now must surely die. For when an ass-drawn chariot seems To bear away a man in dreams, Be sure above his funeral pyre The smoke soon rears its cloudy spire. This makes my spirit low and weak, My tongue is slow and loth to speak: My lips and throat are dry for dread, And all my soul disquieted. My lips, relaxed, can hardly speak, And chilling dread has changed my cheek I blame myself in aimless fears, And still no cause of blame appears. I dwell upon this dream of ill     Whose changing scenes I viewed,   And on the startling horror still     My troubled thoughts will brood.   Still to my soul these terrors cling,     Reluctant to depart,   And the strange vision of the king     Still weighs upon my heart.”




Canto LXX. Bharat’s Departure.


While thus he spoke, the envoys borne On horses faint and travel-worn Had gained the city fenced around With a deep moat’s protecting bound. An audience of the king they gained, And honours from the prince obtained; The monarch’s feet they humbly pressed, To Bharat next these words addressed: “The household priest and peers by us Send health to thee and greet thee thus: “Come to thy father’s house with haste: Thine absent time no longer waste.” Receive these vestures rich and rare, These costly gems and jewels fair, And to thy uncle here present Each precious robe and ornament. These for the king and him suffice— Two hundred millions is their price— These, worth a hundred millions, be Reserved, O large-eyed Prince, for thee.”

  Loving his friends with heart and soul, The joyful prince received the whole, Due honour to the envoys paid, And thus in turn his answer made: “Of Daśaratha tidings tell: Is the old king my father well? Is Ráma, and is Lakshmaṇ, he Of the high-soul, from sickness free? And she who walks where duty leads, Kauśalyá, known for gracious deeds, Mother of Ráma, loving spouse, Bound to her lord by well kept vows? And Lakshmaṇ’s mother too, the dame Sumitrá skilled in duty’s claim, Who brave Śatrughna also bare, Second in age,—her health declare. And she, in self-conceit most sage, With selfish heart most prone to rage, My mother, fares she well? has she Sent message or command to me?”

  Thus Bharat spake, the mighty-souled, And they in brief their tidings told: “All they of whom thou askest dwell, O lion lord, secure and well: Thine all the smiles of fortune are: Make ready; let them yoke the car.”

  Thus by the royal envoys pressed, Bharat again the band addressed: “I go with you: no long delay, A single hour I bid you stay.” Thus Bharat, son of him who swayed Ayodhyás realm, his answer made, And then bespoke, his heart to please, His mother’s sire in words like these: “I go to see my father, King, Urged by the envoys’ summoning; And when thy soul desires to see Thy grandson, will return to thee.”

  The king his grandsire kissed his head, And in reply to Bharat said: “Go forth, dear child: how blest is she, The mother of a son like thee! Greet well thy sire, thy mother greet, O thou whose arms the foe defeat; The household priest, and all the rest Amid the Twice-born chief and best; And Ráma and brave Lakshmaṇ, who Shoot the long shaft with aim so true.”

  To him the king high honour showed, And store of wealth and gifts bestowed, The choicest elephants to ride, And skins and blankets deftly dyed, A thousand strings of golden beads, And sixteen hundred mettled steeds: And boundless wealth before him piled Gave Kekaya to Kaikeyí’s child. And men of counsel, good and tried, On whose firm truth he aye relied, King Aśvapati gave with speed Prince Bharat on his way to lead. And noble elephants, strong and young, From sires of Indraśira sprung, And others tall and fair to view Of great Airávat’s lineage true: And well yoked asses fleet of limb The prince his uncle gave to him. And dogs within the palace bred, Of body vast and massive head, With mighty fangs for battle, brave, The tiger’s match in strength, he gave. Yet Bharat’s bosom hardly glowed To see the wealth the king bestowed; For he would speed that hour away, Such care upon his bosom lay: Those eager envoys urged him thence, And that sad vision’s influence. He left his court-yard, crowded then With elephants and steeds and men, And, peerless in immortal fame, To the great royal street he came. He saw, as farther still he went, The inner rooms most excellent, And passed the doors, to him unclosed, Where check nor bar his way oppossd. There Bharat stayed to bid adieu To grandsire and to uncle too, Then, with Śatrughna by his side, Mounting his car, away he hied. The strong-wheeled cars were yoked, and they More than a hundred, rolled away: Servants, with horses, asses, kine, Followed their lord in endless line. So, guarded by his own right hand,   Forth high-souled Bharat hied, Surrounded by a lordly band   On whom the king relied. Beside him sat Śatrughna dear,   The scourge of trembling foes: Thus from the light of Indra’s sphere   A saint made perfect goes.




Canto LXXI. Bharat’s Return.


Then Bharat’s face was eastward bent As from the royal town he went. He reached Sudámá’s farther side, And glorious, gazed upon the tide; Passed Hládiní, and saw her toss Her westering billows hard to cross. Then old Ikshváku’s famous son O’er Śatadrú(348) his passage won, Near Ailadhána on the strand, And came to Aparparyat’s land. O’er Śilá’s flood he hurried fast, Akurvatí’s fair stream he passed, Crossed o’er Ágneya’s rapid rill, And Śalyakartan onward still. Śilávahá’s swift stream he eyed, True to his vows and purified, Then crossed the lofty hills, and stood In Chaitraratha’s mighty wood. He reached the confluence where meet Sarasvatí(349) and Gangá fleet, And through Bháruṇḍa forest, spread Northward of Viramatsya, sped. He sought Kálinda’s child, who fills The soul with joy, begirt by hills, Reached Yamuná, and passing o’er, Rested his army on the shore: He gave his horses food and rest, Bathed reeking limb and drooping crest. They drank their fill and bathed them there, And water for their journey bare. Thence through a mighty wood he sped All wild and uninhabited, As in fair chariot through the skies, Most fair in shape a Storm-God flies. At Anśudhána Gangá, hard To cross, his onward journey barred, So turning quickly thence he came To Prágvaṭ’s city dear to fame. There having gained the farther side To Kuṭikoshṭiká he hied: The stream he crossed, and onward then To Dharmavardhan brought his men. Thence, leaving Toraṇ on the north, To Jambuprastha journeyed forth. Then onward to a pleasant grove By fair Varútha’s town he drove, And when a while he there had stayed, Went eastward from the friendly shade. Eastward of Ujjiháná where The Priyak trees are tall and fair, He passed, and rested there each steed Exhausted with the journey’s speed. There orders to his men addressed, With quickened pace he onward pressed, A while at Sarvatírtha spent, Then o’er Uttániká he went. O’er many a stream beside he sped With coursers on the mountains bred, And passing Hastiprishṭhak, took The road o’er Kuṭiká’s fair brook. Then, at Lohitya’s village, he Crossed o’er the swift Kapívatí, Then passed, where Ekaśála stands, The Stháṇumatí’s flood and sands, And Gomatí of fair renown By Vinata’s delightful town. When to Kalinga near he drew, A wood of Sal trees charmed the view; That passed, the sun began to rise, And Bharat saw with happy eyes, Ayodhyá’s city, built and planned By ancient Manu’s royal hand. Seven nights upon the road had passed, And when he saw the town at last Before him in her beauty spread, Thus Bharat to the driver said: “This glorious city from afar, Wherein pure groves and gardens are, Seems to my eager eyes to-day A lifeless pile of yellow clay. Through all her streets where erst a throng Of men and women streamed along, Uprose the multitudinous roar: To-day I hear that sound no more. No longer do mine eyes behold The leading people, as of old, On elephants, cars, horses, go Abroad and homeward, to and fro. The brilliant gardens, where we heard The wild note of each rapturous bird, Where men and women loved to meet, In pleasant shades, for pastime sweet,— These to my eyes this day appear Joyless, and desolate, and drear: Each tree that graced the garden grieves, And every path is spread with leaves. The merry cry of bird and beast, That spake aloud their joy, has ceased: Still is the long melodious note That charmed us from each warbling throat. Why blows the blessed air no more, The incense-breathing air that bore Its sweet incomparable scent Of sandal and of aloe blent? Why are the drum and tabour mute? Why is the music of the lute That woke responsive to the quill, Loved by the happy, hushed and still? My boding spirit gathers hence Dire sins of awful consequence, And omens, crowding on my sight, Weigh down my soul with wild affright. Scarce shall I find my friends who dwell Here in Ayodhyá safe and well: For surely not without a cause This crushing dread my soul o’erawes.”

  Heart sick, dejected, every sense Confused by terror’s influence, On to the town he quickly swept Which King Ikshváku’s children kept. He passed through Vaijayanta’s gate, With weary steeds, disconsolate, And all who near their station held, His escort, crying Victory, swelled, With heart distracted still he bowed Farewell to all the following crowd, Turned to the driver and began To question thus the weary man: “Why was I brought, O free from blame, So fast, unknown for what I came? Yet fear of ill my heart appals, And all my wonted courage falls. For I have heard in days gone by The changes seen when monarchs die; And all those signs, O charioteer, I see to-day surround me here: Each kinsman’s house looks dark and grim, No hand delights to keep it trim: The beauty vanished, and the pride, The doors, unkept, stand open wide. No morning rites are offered there, No grateful incense loads the air, And all therein, with brows o’ercast, Sit joyless on the ground and fast. Their lovely chaplets dry and dead, Their courts unswept, with dust o’erspread, The temples of the Gods to-day No more look beautiful and gay. Neglected stands each holy shrine, Each image of a Lord divine. No shop where flowery wreaths are sold Is bright and busy as of old. The women and the men I mark Absorbed in fancies dull and dark, Their gloomy eyes with tears bedewed, A poor afflicted multitude.”

  His mind oppressed with woe and dread, Thus Bharat to his driver said, Viewed the dire signs Ayodhyá showed, And onward to the palace rode.




Canto LXXII. Bharat’s Inquiry.


He entered in, he looked around, Nor in the house his father found; Then to his mother’s dwelling, bent To see her face, he quickly went. She saw her son, so long away, Returning after many a day, And from her golden seat in joy Sprung forward to her darling boy. Within the bower, no longer bright, Came Bharat lover of the right, And bending with observance sweet Clasped his dear mother’s lovely feet. Long kisses on his brow she pressed, And held her hero to her breast, Then fondly drew him to her knees, And questioned him in words like these: “How many nights have fled, since thou Leftest thy grandsire’s home, till now? By flying steeds so swiftly borne, Art thou not weak and travel-worn? How fares the king my father, tell: Is Yudhájit thine uncle well? And now, my son, at length declare The pleasure of the visit there.”

  Thus to the offspring of the king She spake with tender questioning, And to his mother made reply Young Bharat of the lotus eye: “The seventh night has come and fled Since from my grandsire’s home I sped: My mother’s sire is well, and he, Yudhájit, from all trouble free. The gold and every precious thing Presented by the conqueror king, The slower guards behind convey: I left them weary on the way. Urged by the men my father sent, My hasty course I hither bent: Now, I implore, an answer deign, And all I wish to know, explain. Unoccupied I now behold This couch of thine adorned with gold, And each of King Ikshváku’s race Appears with dark and gloomy face. The king is aye, my mother dear, Most constant in his visits here. To meet my sire I sought this spot: How is it that I find him not? I long to clasp my father’s feet: Say where he lingers, I entreat. Perchance the monarch may be seen Where dwells Kauśalyá, eldest queen.”

  His father’s fate, from him concealed, Kaikeyí to her son revealed: Told as glad news the story sad, For lust of sway had made her mad: “Thy father, O my darling, know, Has gone the way all life must go: Devout and famed, of lofty thought, In whom the good their refuge sought.”

  When Bharat pious, pure, and true, Heard the sad words which pierced him through, Grieved for the sire he loved so well Prostrate upon the ground he fell: Down fell the strong-armed hero, high Tossing his arms, and a sad cry, “Ah, woe is me, unhappy, slain!” Burst from his lips again, again, Afflicted for his father’s fate By grief’s intolerable weight, With every sense amazed and cowed The splendid hero wailed aloud: “Ah me, my royal father’s bed Of old a gentle radiance shed, Like the pure sky when clouds are past, And the moon’s light is o’er it cast: Ah, of its wisest lord bereft, It shows to-day faint radiance left, As when the moon has left the sky. Or mighty Ocean’s depths are dry.”

  With choking sobs, with many a tear, Pierced to the heart with grief sincere, The best of conquerors poured his sighs, And with his robe veiled face and eyes. Kaikeyí saw him fallen there, Godlike, afflicted, in despair, Used every art to move him thence, And tried him thus with eloquence: “Arise, arise, my dearest; why Wilt thou, famed Prince, so lowly lie? Not by such grief as this are moved Good men like thee, by all approved. The earth thy father nobly swayed, And rites to Heaven he duly paid. At length his race of life was run: Thou shouldst not mourn for him, my son.”

  Long on the ground he wept, and rolled From side to side, still unconsoled, And then, with bitter grief oppressed, His mother with these words addressed: “This joyful hope my bosom fed When from my grandsire’s halls I sped— “The king will throne his eldest son, And sacrifice, as should be done.” But all is changed, my hope was vain, And this sad heart is rent in twain, For my dear father’s face I miss, Who ever sought his loved ones’ bliss. But in my absence, mother, say, What sickness took my sire away? Ah, happy Ráma, happy they Allowed his funeral rites to pay! The glorious monarch has not learned That I his darling have returned, Or quickly had he hither sped, And pressed his kisses on my head. Where is that hand whose gentle touch, Most soft and kind I loved so much, The hand that loved to brush away The dust that on his darling lay? Quick, bear the news to Ráma’s ear; Tell the great chief that I am here: Brother, and sire, and friend, and all Is he, and I his trusty thrall. For noble hearts, to virtue true, Their sires in elder brothers view. To clasp his feet I fain would bow: He is my hope and refuge now. What said my glorious sire, who knew Virtue and vice, so brave and true? Firm in his vows, dear lady, say, What said he ere he passed away? What was his rede to me? I crave To hear the last advice he gave.”

  Thus closely questioned by the youth, Kaikeyí spoke the mournful truth: “The high-souled monarch wept and sighed, For Ráma, Sítá, Lakshmaṇ, cried, Then, best of all who go to bliss, Passed to the world which follows this. “Ah, blessed are the people who Shall Ráma and his Sítá view, And Lakshmaṇ of the mighty arm, Returning free from scathe and harm.” Such were the words, the last of all, Thy father, ere he died, let fall, By Fate and Death’s dread coils enwound, As some great elephant is bound.”

  He heard, yet deeper in despair, Her lips this double woe declare, And with sad brow that showed his pain Questioned his mother thus again: “But where is he, of virtue tried, Who fills Kauśalyá’s heart with pride, Where is the noble Ráma? where Is Lakshmaṇ brave, and Sítá fair?”

  Thus pressed, the queen began to tell The story as each thing befell, And gave her son in words like these, The mournful news she meant to please: “The prince is gone in hermit dress To Daṇḍak’s mighty wilderness, And Lakshmaṇ brave and Sítá share The wanderings of the exile there.”

  Then Bharat’s soul with fear was stirred Lest Ráma from the right had erred, And jealous for ancestral fame, He put this question to the dame: “Has Ráma grasped with lawless hold A Bráhman’s house, or land, or gold? Has Ráma harmed with ill intent Some poor or wealthy innocent? Was Ráma, faithless to his vows, Enamoured of anothers spouse? Why was he sent to Daṇḍak’s wild, Like one who kills an unborn child?”

  He questioned thus: and she began To tell her deeds and crafty plan. Deceitful-hearted, fond, and blind As is the way of womankind: “No Bráhman’s wealth has Ráma seized, No dame his wandering fancy pleased; His very eyes he ne’er allows To gaze upon a neighbour’s spouse. But when I heard the monarch planned To give the realm to Ráma’s hand, I prayed that Ráma hence might flee, And claimed the throne, my son, for thee. The king maintained the name he bare, And did according to my prayer, And Ráma, with his brother, sent, And Sítá, forth to banishment. When his dear son was seen no more, The lord of earth was troubled sore: Too feeble with his grief to strive, He joined the elemental Five. Up then, most dutiful! maintain The royal state, arise, and reign. For thee, my darling son, for thee All this was planned and wrought by me. Come, cast thy grief and pain aside, With manly courage fortified. This town and realm are all thine own, And fear and grief are here unknown. Come, with Vaśishṭha’s guiding aid,   And priests in ritual skilled Let the king’s funeral dues be paid,   And every claim fulfilled. Perform his obsequies with all   That suits his rank and worth, Then give the mandate to install   Thyself as lord of earth.”




Canto LXXIII. Kaikeyí Reproached.


But when he heard the queen relate His brothers’ doom, his father’s fate, Thus Bharat to his mother said With burning grief disquieted: “Alas, what boots it now to reign, Struck down by grief and well-nigh slain? Ah, both are gone, my sire, and he Who was a second sire to me. Grief upon grief thy hand has made, And salt upon gashes laid: For my dear sire has died through thee, And Ráma roams a devotee. Thou camest like the night of Fate This royal house to devastate. Unwitting ill, my hapless sire Placed in his bosom coals of fire, And through thy crimes his death he met, O thou whose heart on sin is set. Shame of thy house! thy senseless deed Has reft all joy from Raghu’s seed. The truthful monarch, dear to fame, Received thee as his wedded dame, And by thy act to misery doomed Has died by flames of grief consumed. Kauśalyá and Sumitrá too The coming of my mother rue, And if they live oppressed by woe, For their dear sons their sad tears flow. Was he not ever good and kind,— That hero of the duteous mind? Skilled in all filial duties, he As a dear mother treated thee. Kauśalyá too, the eldest queen, Who far foresees with insight keen, Did she not ever show thee all A sister’s love at duty’s call? And hast thou from the kingdom chased Her son, with bark around his waist, To the wild wood, to dwell therein, And dost not sorrow for thy sin? The love I bare to Raghu’s son Thou knewest not, ambitious one, If thou hast wrought this impious deed For royal sway, in lawless greed. With him and Lakshmaṇ far away, What power have I the realm to sway? What hope will fire my bosom when I see no more these lords of men? The holy king, who loved the right Relied on Ráma’s power and might, His guardian and his glory, so Joys Meru in his woods below. How can I bear, a steer untrained, The load his mightier strength sustained? What power have I to brook alone This weight on feeble shoulders thrown? But if the needful power were bought By strength of mind and brooding thought, No triumph shall attend the dame Who dooms her son to lasting shame. Now should no doubt that son prevent From quitting thee on evil bent. But Ráma’s love o’erpowers my will, Who holds thee as his mother still. Whence did the thought, O thou whose eyes Are turned to sinful deeds, arise— A plan our ancient sires would hate, O fallen from thy virtuous state? For in the line from which we spring The eldest is anointed king: No monarchs from the rule decline, And, least of all, Ikshváku’s line. Our holy sires, to virtue true, Upon our race a lustre threw, But with subversive frenzy thou Hast marred our lineal honour now, Of lofty birth, a noble line Of previous kings is also thine: Then whence this hated folly? whence This sudden change that steals thy sense? Thou shalt not gain thine impious will, O thou whose thoughts are bent on ill, Thou from whose guilty hand descend These sinful blows my life to end. Now to the forest will I go, Thy cherished plans to overthrow, And bring my brother, free from stain, His people’s darling, home again. And Ráma, when again he turns, Whose glory like a beacon burns, In me a faithful slave shall find To serve him with contented mind.”




Canto LXXIV. Bharat’s Lament.


When Bharat’s anger-sharpened tongue Reproaches on the queen had flung, Again, with mighty rage possessed, The guilty dame he thus addressed: “Flee, cruel, wicked sinner, flee, Let not this kingdom harbour thee. Thou who hast thrown all right aside, Weep thou for me when I have died. Canst thou one charge against the king, Or the most duteous Ráma bring? The one thy sin to death has sent, The other chased to banishment. Our line’s destroyer, sin defiled Like one who kills an unborn child, Ne’er with thy lord in heaven to dwell, Thy portion shall be down in hell Because thy hand, that stayed for naught, This awful wickedness has wrought, And ruined him whom all held dear, My bosom too is stirred with fear. My father by thy sin is dead, And Ráma to the wood is fled; And of thy deed I bear the stain, And fameless in the world remain. Ambitious, evil-souled, in show My mother, yet my direst foe. My throning ne’er thine eyes shall bless, Thy husband’s wicked murderess. Thou art not Aśvapati’s child, That righteous king most sage and mild, But thou wast born a fiend, a foe My father’s house to overthrow. Thou who hast made Kauśalyá, pure, Gentle, affectionate, endure The loss of him who was her bliss,— What worlds await thee, Queen, for this? Was it not patent to thy sense That Ráma was his friends’ defence, Kauśalyá’s own true child most dear, The eldest and his father’s peer? Men in the son not only trace The father’s figure, form, and face, But in his heart they also find The offspring of the father’s mind; And hence, though dear their kinsmen are, To mothers sons are dearer far. There goes an ancient legend how Good Surabhí, the God-loved cow, Saw two of her dear children strain, Drawing a plough and faint with pain. She saw them on the earth outworn, Toiling till noon from early morn, And as she viewed her children’s woe, A flood of tears began to flow. As through the air beneath her swept The Lord of Gods, the drops she wept, Fine, laden with delicious smell, Upon his heavenly body fell. And Indra lifted up his eyes And saw her standing in the skies, Afflicted with her sorrow’s weight, Sad, weeping, all disconsolate. The Lord of Gods in anxious mood Thus spoke in suppliant attitude: “No fear disturbs our rest, and how Come this great dread upon thee now? Whence can this woe upon thee fall, Say, gentle one who lovest all?”

  Thus spake the God who rules the skies, Indra, the Lord supremely wise; And gentle Surabhí, well learned In eloquence, this speech returned: “Not thine the fault, great God, not thine And guiltless are the Lords divine: I mourn two children faint with toil, Labouring hard in stubborn soil. Wasted and sad I see them now, While the sun beats on neck and brow, Still goaded by the cruel hind,— No pity in his savage mind. O Indra, from this body sprang These children, worn with many a pang. For this sad sight I mourn, for none Is to the mother like her son.”

  He saw her weep whose offspring feed In thousands over hill and mead, And knew that in a mother’s eye Naught with a son, for love, can vie. He deemed her, when the tears that came From her sad eyes bedewed his frame, Laden with their celestial scent, Of living things most excellent. If she these tears of sorrow shed Who many a thousand children bred, Think what a life of woe is left Kauśalyá, of her Ráma reft. An only son was hers and she Is rendered childless now by thee. Here and hereafter, for thy crime, Woe is thy lot through endless time. And now, O Queen, without delay, With all due honour will I pay Both to my brother and my sire The rites their several fates require. Back to Ayodhyá will I bring The long-armed chief, her lord and king, And to the wood myself betake Where hermit saints their dwelling make. For, sinner both in deed and thought! This hideous crime which thou hast wrought I cannot bear, or live to see The people’s sad eyes bent on me. Begone, to Daṇḍak wood retire, Or cast thy body to the fire, Or bind around thy neck the rope: No other refuge mayst thou hope. When Ráma, lord of valour true, Has gained the earth, his right and due, Then, free from duty’s binding debt, My vanished sin shall I forget.”

  Thus like an elephant forced to brook The goading of the driver’s hook, Quick panting like a serpent maimed, He fell to earth with rage inflamed.




Canto LXXV. The Abjuration.


A while he lay: he rose at length, And slowly gathering sense and strength, With angry eyes which tears bedewed, The miserable queen he viewed, And spake with keen reproach to her Before each lord and minister: “No lust have I for kingly sway, My mother I no more obey: Naught of this consecration knew Which Daśaratha kept in view. I with Śatrughna all the time Was dwelling in a distant clime: I knew of Ráma’s exile naught, That hero of the noble thought: I knew not how fair Sítá went, And Lakshmaṇ, forth to banishment.”

  Thus high-souled Bharat, mid the crowd, Lifted his voice and cried aloud. Kauśalyá heard, she raised her head, And quickly to Sumitrá said: “Bharat, Kaikeyí’s son is here,— Hers whose fell deeds I loathe and fear: That youth of foresight keen I fain Would meet and see his face again.” Thus to Sumitrá spake the dame, And straight to Bharat’s presence came With altered mien, neglected dress, Trembling and faint with sore distress. Bharat, Śatrughna by his side, To meet her, toward her palace hied. And when the royal dame they viewed Distressed with dire solicitude, Sad, fallen senseless on the ground, About her neck their arms they wound. The noble matron prostrate there, Embraced, with tears, the weeping pair, And with her load of grief oppressed, To Bharat then these words addressed: “Now all is thine, without a foe, This realm for which thou longest so. Ah, soon Kaikeyí’s ruthless hand Has won the empire of the land, And made my guiltless Ráma flee Dressed like some lonely devotee. Herein what profit has the queen, Whose eye delights in havoc, seen? Me also, me ’twere surely good To banish to the distant wood, To dwell amid the shades that hold My famous son with limbs like gold. Nay, with the sacred fire to guide, Will I, Sumitrá by my side, Myself to the drear wood repair And seek the son of Raghu there. This land which rice and golden corn And wealth of every kind adorn, Car, elephant, and steed, and gem,— She makes thee lord of it and them.”

  With taunts like these her bitter tongue The heart of blameless Bharat wrung And direr pangs his bosom tore Than when the lancet probes a sore. With troubled senses all astray Prone at her feet he fell and lay. With loud lament a while he plained, And slowly strength and sense regained. With suppliant hand to hand applied He turned to her who wept and sighed, And thus bespake the queen, whose breast With sundry woes was sore distressed: “Why these reproaches, noble dame? I, knowing naught, am free from blame. Thou knowest well what love was mine For Ráma, chief of Raghu’s line. O, never be his darkened mind To Scripture’s guiding lore inclined, By whose consent the prince who led The good, the truthful hero, fled. May he obey the vilest lord, Offend the sun with act abhorred,(350) And strike a sleeping cow, who lent His voice to Ráma’s banishment. May the good king who all befriends, And, like his sons, the people tends, Be wronged by him who gave consent To noble Ráma’s banishment. On him that king’s injustice fall, Who takes, as lord, a sixth of all, Nor guards, neglectful of his trust, His people, as a ruler must. The crime of those who swear to fee, At holy rites, some devotee, And then the promised gift deny, Be his who willed the prince should fly. When weapons clash and heroes bleed, With elephant and harnessed steed, Ne’er, like the good, be his to fight Whose heart allowed the prince’s flight. Though taught with care by one expert May he the Veda’s text pervert, With impious mind on evil bent, Whose voice approved the banishment. May he with traitor lips reveal Whate’er he promised to conceal, And bruit abroad his friend’s offence, Betrayed by generous confidence. No wife of equal lineage born The wretch’s joyless home adorn: Ne’er may he do one virtuous deed, And dying see no child succeed. When in the battle’s awful day Fierce warriors stand in dread array, Let the base coward turn and fly, And smitten by the foeman, die. Long may he wander, rags his wear, Doomed in his hand a skull to bear, And like an idiot beg his bread, Who gave consent when Ráma fled. His sin who holy rites forgets, Asleep when shows the sun and sets, A load upon his soul shall lie Whose will allowed the prince to fly. His sin who loves his Master’s dame, His, kindler of destructive flame, His who betrays his trusting friend Shall, mingled all, on him descend. By him no reverence due be paid To blessed God or parted shade: May sire and mother’s sacred name In vain from him obedience claim. Ne’er may he go where dwell the good, Nor win their fame and neighbourhood, But lose all hopes of bliss to-day, Who willed the prince should flee away. May he deceive the poor and weak Who look to him and comfort seek, Betray the suppliants who complain, And make the hopeful hope in vain. Long may his wife his kiss expect, And pine away in cold neglect. May he his lawful love despise, And turn on other dames his eyes, Fool, on forbidden joys intent, Whose will allowed the banishment. His sin who deadly poison throws To spoil the water as it flows, Lay on the wretch its burden dread Who gave consent when Ráma fled.”(351)

  Thus with his words he undeceived Kauśalyá’s troubled heart, who grieved For son and husband reft away; Then prostrate on the ground he lay. Him as he lay half-senseless there, Freed by the mighty oaths he sware, Kauśalyá, by her woe distressed, With melancholy words addressed: “Anew, my son, this sorrow springs To rend my heart with keener stings: These awful oaths which thou hast sworn My breast with double grief have torn. Thy soul, and faithful Lakshmaṇ’s too, Are still, thank Heaven! to virtue true. True to thy promise, thou shalt gain The mansions which the good obtain.”

  Then to her breast that youth she drew, Whose sweet fraternal love she knew, And there in strict embraces held The hero, as her tears outwelled. And Bharat’s heart grew sick and faint With grief and oft-renewed complaint, And all his senses were distraught By the great woe that in him wrought. Thus he lay and still bewailed   With sighs and loud lament Till all his strength and reason failed,   The hours of night were spent.




Canto LXXVI. The Funeral.


The saint Vaśishṭha, best of all Whose words with moving wisdom fall, Bharat, Kaikeyí’s son, addressed, Whom burning fires of grief distressed: “O Prince, whose fame is widely spread, Enough of grief: be comforted. The time is come: arise, and lay Upon the pyre the monarch’s clay.”

  He heard the words Vaśishṭha spoke, And slumbering resolution woke. Then skilled in all the laws declare, He bade his friends the rites prepare. They raised the body from the oil, And placed it, dripping, on the soil; Then laid it on a bed, whereon Wrought gold and precious jewels shone. There, pallor o’er his features spread, The monarch, as in sleep, lay dead. Then Bharat sought his father’s side, And lifted up his voice and cried: “O King, and has thy heart designed To part and leave thy son behind? Make Ráma flee, who loves the right, And Lakshmaṇ of the arm of might? Whither, great Monarch, wilt thou go And leave this people in their woe, Mourning their hero, wild with grief, Of Ráma reft, their lion chief? Ah, who will guard the people well Who in Ayodhyá’s city dwell, When thou, my sire, hast sought the sky, And Ráma has been forced to fly? In widowed woe, bereft of thee, The land no more is fair to see: The city, to my aching sight, Is gloomy as a moonless night.”

  Thus, with o’erwhelming sorrow pained, Sad Bharat by the bed complained: And thus Vaśishṭha, holy sage, Spoke his deep anguish to assuage: “O Lord of men, no longer stay; The last remaining duties pay: Haste, mighty-armed, as I advise, The funeral rites to solemnize.”

  And Bharat heard Vaśishṭha’s rede With due attention and agreed. He summoned straight from every side Chaplain, and priest, and holy guide. The sacred fires he bade them bring Forth from the chapel of the king, Wherein the priests in order due, And ministers, the offerings threw. Distraught in mind, with sob and tear, They laid the body on a bier, And servants, while their eyes brimmed o’er The monarch from the palace bore. Another band of mourners led The long procession of the dead: Rich garments in the way they cast, And gold and silver, as they passed. Then other hands the corse bedewed With fragrant juices that exude From sandal, cedar, aloe, pine, And every perfume rare and fine. Then priestly hands the mighty dead Upon the pyre deposited. The sacred fires they tended next, And muttered low each funeral text; And priestly singers who rehearse The Śaman(352) sang their holy verse. Forth from the town in litters came, Or chariots, many a royal dame, And honoured so the funeral ground, With aged followers ringed around. With steps in inverse order bent,(353) The priests in sad procession went Around the monarch’s burning pyre Who well had nursed each sacred fire: With Queen Kauśalyá and the rest, Their tender hearts with woe distressed. The voice of women, shrill and clear As screaming curlews, smote the ear, As from a thousand voices rose The shriek that tells of woman’s woes. Then weeping, faint, with loud lament, Down Sarjú’s shelving bank they went.   There standing on the river side     With Bharat, priest, and peer,   Their lips the women purified     With water fresh and clear.   Returning to the royal town,     Their eyes with tear-drops filled,   Ten days on earth they laid them down,     And wept till grief was stilled.




Canto LXXVII. The Gathering Of The Ashes.


The tenth day passed: the prince again Was free from every legal stain. He bade them on the twelfth the great Remaining honour celebrate. Much gold he gave, and gems, and food, To all the Bráhman multitude, And goats whose hair was white and fine, And many a thousand head of kine: Slaves, men and damsels, he bestowed, And many a car and fair abode: Such gifts he gave the Bráhman race His father’s obsequies to grace. Then when the morning’s earliest ray Appeared upon the thirteenth day, Again the hero wept and sighed Distraught and sorrow-stupefied; Drew, sobbing in his anguish, near, The last remaining debt to clear, And at the bottom of the pyre, He thus bespake his royal sire: “O father, hast thou left me so, Deserted in my friendless woe, When he to whom the charge was given To keep me, to the wood is driven? Her only son is forced away Who was his helpless mother’s stay: Ah, whither, father, art thou fled; Leaving the queen uncomforted?”

  He looked upon the pile where lay The bones half-burnt and ashes grey, And uttering a piteous moan, Gave way, by anguish overthrown. Then as his tears began to well, Prostrate to earth the hero fell; So from its seat the staff they drag, And cast to earth some glorious flag. The ministers approached again The prince whom rites had freed from stain; So when Yayáti fell, each seer, In pity for his fate, drew near. Śatrughna saw him lying low O’erwhelmed beneath the crush of woe, And as upon the king he thought, He fell upon the earth distraught. When to his loving memory came Those noble gifts, that kingly frame, He sorrowed, by his woe distressed, As one by frenzied rage possessed: “Ah me, this surging sea of woe Has drowned us with its overflow: The source is Manthará, dire and dark, Kaikeyí is the ravening shark: And the great boons the monarch gave Lend conquering might to every wave. Ah, whither wilt thou go, and leave Thy Bharat in his woe to grieve, Whom ever ’twas thy greatest joy To fondle as a tender boy? Didst thou not give with thoughtful care Our food, our drink, our robes to wear? Whose love will now for us provide, When thou, our king and sire, hast died? At such a time bereft, forlorn, Why is not earth in sunder torn, Missing her monarch’s firm control, His love of right, his lofty soul? Ah me, for Ráma roams afar, My sire is where the Blessed are; How can I live deserted? I Will pass into the fire and die. Abandoned thus, I will not brook Upon Ayodhyá’s town to look, Once guarded by Ikshváku’s race: The wood shall be my dwelling place.”

  Then when the princes’ mournful train Heard the sad brothers thus complain, And saw their misery, at the view Their grief burst wilder out anew. Faint with lamenting, sad and worn, Each like a bull with broken horn, The brothers in their wild despair Lay rolling, mad with misery, there. Then old Vaśishṭha good and true, Their father’s priest, all lore who knew, Raised weeping Bharat on his feet, And thus bespake with counsel meet: “Twelve days, my lord, have past away Since flames consumed thy father’s clay: Delay no more: as rules ordain, Gather what bones may yet remain. Three constant pairs are ever found To hem all mortal creatures round:(354) Then mourn not thus, O Prince, for none Their close companionship may shun.”

  Sumantra bade Śatrughna rise, And soothed his soul with counsel wise, And skilled in truth, his hearer taught How all things are and come to naught. When rose each hero from the ground, A lion lord of men, renowned, He showed like Indra’s flag,(355) whereon Fierce rains have dashed and suns have shone. They wiped their red and weeping eyes, And gently made their sad replies: Then, urged to haste, the royal pair Performed the rites that claimed their care.




Canto LXXVIII. Manthará Punished.


Śatrughna thus to Bharat spake Who longed the forest road to take: “He who in woe was wont to give Strength to himself and all that live— Dear Ráma, true and pure in heart, Is banished by a woman’s art. Yet here was Lakshmaṇ, brave and strong, Could not his might prevent the wrong? Could not his arm the king restrain, Or make the banished free again? One loving right and fearing crime Had checked the monarch’s sin in time, When, vassal of a woman’s will, His feet approached the path of ill.”

  While Lakshmaṇ’s younger brother, dread Śatrughna, thus to Bharat said, Came to the fronting door, arrayed In glittering robes, the hump-back maid. There she, with sandal-oil besmeared, In garments meet for queens appeared: And lustre to her form was lent By many a gem and ornament. She girdled with her broidered zone, And many a chain about her thrown, Showed like a female monkey round Whose body many a string is bound. When on that cause of evil fell The quick eye of the sentinel, He grasped her in his ruthless hold, And hastening in, Śatrughna told: “Here is the wicked pest,” he cried, “Through whom the king thy father died, And Ráma wanders in the wood: Do with her as thou deemest good.” The warder spoke: and every word Śatrughna’s breast to fury stirred: He called the servants, all and each. And spake in wrath his hasty speech: “This is the wretch my sire who slew, And misery on my brothers drew: Let her this day obtain the meed, Vile sinner, of her cruel deed.” He spake; and moved by fury laid His mighty hand upon the maid, Who as her fellows ringed her round, Made with her cries the hall resound. Soon as the gathered women viewed Śatrughna in his angry mood, Their hearts disturbed by sudden dread, They turned and from his presence fled. “His rage,” they cried, “on us will fall, And ruthless, he will slay us all. Come, to Kauśalyá let us flee: Our hope, our sure defence is she, Approved by all, of virtuous mind, Compassionate, and good, and kind.”

  His eyes with burning wrath aglow, Śatrughna, shatterer of the foe, Dragged on the ground the hump-back maid Who shrieked aloud and screamed for aid. This way and that with no remorse He dragged her with resistless force, And chains and glittering trinkets burst Lay here and there with gems dispersed, Till like the sky of Autumn shone The palace floor they sparkled on. The lord of men, supremely strong, Haled in his rage the wretch along: Where Queen Kaikeyí dwelt he came, And sternly then addressed the dame. Deep in her heart Kaikeyí felt The stabs his keen reproaches dealt, And of Śatrughna’s ire afraid, To Bharat flew and cried for aid. He looked and saw the prince inflamed With burning rage, and thus exclaimed: “Forgive! thine angry arm restrain: A woman never may be slain. My hand Kaikeyí’s blood would spill, The sinner ever bent on ill, But Ráma, long in duty tried, Would hate the impious matricide: And if he knew thy vengeful blade Had slaughtered e’en this hump-back maid, Never again, be sure, would he Speak friendly word to thee or me.”

  When Bharat’s speech Śatrughna heard He calmed the rage his breast that stirred, Releasing from her dire constraint The trembling wretch with terror faint. Then to Kaikeyí’s feet she crept, And prostrate in her misery wept. Kaikeyí on the hump-back gazed,   And saw her weep and gasp. Still quivering, with her senses dazed,   From fierce Śatrughna’s grasp. With gentle words of pity she   Assuaged her wild despair, E’en as a tender hand might free   A curlew from the snare.




Canto LXXIX. Bharat’s Commands.


Now when the sun’s returning ray Had ushered in the fourteenth day, The gathered peers of state addressed To Bharat’s ear their new request: “Our lord to heaven has parted hence, Long served with deepest reverence; Ráma, the eldest, far from home, And Lakshmaṇ, in the forest roam. O Prince, of mighty fame, be thou Our guardian and our monarch now, Lest secret plot or foeman’s hate Assail our unprotected state. With longing eyes, O Lord of men, To thee look friend and citizen, And ready is each sacred thing To consecrate our chosen king. Come, Bharat, and accept thine own Ancient hereditary throne. Thee let the priests this day install As monarch to preserve us all.”

  Around the sacred gear he bent His circling footsteps reverent, And, firm to vows he would not break, Thus to the gathered people spake: “The eldest son is ever king: So rules the house from which we spring: Nor should ye, Lords, like men unwise, With words like these to wrong advise. Ráma is eldest born, and he The ruler of the land shall be. Now to the woods will I repair, Five years and nine to lodge me there. Assemble straight a mighty force, Cars, elephants, and foot and horse, For I will follow on his track And bring my eldest brother back. Whate’er the rites of throning need Placed on a car the way shall lead: The sacred vessels I will take To the wild wood for Ráma’s sake. I o’er the lion prince’s head The sanctifying balm will shed, And bring him, as the fire they bring Forth from the shrine, with triumphing. Nor will I let my mother’s greed In this her cherished aim succeed: In pathless wilds will I remain, And Ráma here as king shall reign. To make the rough ways smooth and clear Send workman out and pioneer: Let skilful men attend beside Our way through pathless spots to guide.” As thus the royal Bharat spake, Ordaining all for Ráma’s sake, The audience gave with one accord Auspicious answer to their lord: “Be royal Fortune aye benign To thee for this good speech of thine, Who wishest still thine elder’s hand To rule with kingly sway the land.”   Their glorious speech, their favouring cries     Made his proud bosom swell:   And from the prince’s noble eyes     The tears of rapture fell.(356)




Canto LXXX. The Way Prepared.


All they who knew the joiner’s art, Or distant ground in every part; Each busied in his several trade, To work machines or ply the spade; Deft workmen skilled to frame the wheel, Or with the ponderous engine deal; Guides of the way, and craftsmen skilled, To sink the well, make bricks, and build; And those whose hands the tree could hew, And work with slips of cut bamboo, Went forward, and to guide them, they Whose eyes before had seen the way. Then onward in triumphant mood Went all the mighty multitude. Like the great sea whose waves leap high When the full moon is in the sky. Then, in his proper duty skilled, Each joined him to his several guild, And onward in advance they went With every tool and implement. Where bush and tangled creeper lay With trenchant steel they made the way; They felled each stump, removed each stone, And many a tree was overthrown. In other spots, on desert lands, Tall trees were reared by busy hands. Where’er the line of road they took, They plied the hatchet, axe, and hook. Others, with all their strength applied, Cast vigorous plants and shrubs aside, In shelving valleys rooted deep, And levelled every dale and steep. Each pit and hole that stopped the way They filled with stones, and mud, and clay, And all the ground that rose and fell With busy care was levelled well. They bridged ravines with ceaseless toil, And pounded fine the flinty soil. Now here, now there, to right and left, A passage through the ground they cleft, And soon the rushing flood was led Abundant through the new-cut bed, Which by the running stream supplied With ocean’s boundless waters vied. In dry and thirsty spots they sank Full many a well and ample tank, And altars round about them placed To deck the station in the waste. With well-wrought plaster smoothly spread, With bloomy trees that rose o’erhead, With banners waving in the air, And wild birds singing here and there, With fragrant sandal-water wet, With many a flower beside it set, Like the Gods’ heavenly pathway showed That mighty host’s imperial road. Deft workmen, chosen for their skill To do the high-souled Bharat’s will, In every pleasant spot where grew Trees of sweet fruit and fair to view, As he commanded, toiled to grace With all delights his camping-place. And they who read the stars, and well Each lucky sign and hour could tell, Raised carefully the tented shade Wherein high-minded Bharat stayed. With ample space of level ground, With broad deep moat encompassed round; Like Mandar in his towering pride, With streets that ran from side to side; Enwreathed with many a palace tall Surrounded by its noble wall; With roads by skilful workmen made, Where many a glorious banner played; With stately mansions, where the dove Sat nestling in her cote above. Rising aloft supremely fair Like heavenly cars that float in air, Each camp in beauty and in bliss Matched Indra’s own metropolis.   As shines the heaven on some fair night,     With moon and constellations filled,   The prince’s royal road was bright,     Adorned by art of workmen skilled.




Canto LXXXI. The Assembly.


Ere yet the dawn had ushered in The day should see the march begin, Herald and bard who rightly knew Each nice degree of honour due, Their loud auspicious voices raised, And royal Bharat blessed and praised. With sticks of gold the drum they smote, Which thundered out its deafening note, Blew loud the sounding shell, and blent Each high and low-toned instrument. The mingled sound of drum and horn Through all the air was quickly borne, And as in Bharat’s ear it rang, Gave the sad prince another pang.

  Then Bharat, starting from repose, Stilled the glad sounds that round him rose, “I am not king; no more mistake:” Then to Śatrughna thus he spake: “O see what general wrongs succeed Sprung from Kaikeyí’s evil deed! The king my sire has died and thrown Fresh miseries on me alone. The royal bliss, on duty based, Which our just high-souled father graced, Wanders in doubt and sore distress Like a tossed vessel rudderless. And he who was our lordly stay Roams in the forest far away, Expelled by this my mother, who To duty’s law is most untrue.”

  As royal Bharat thus gave vent To bitter grief in wild lament, Gazing upon his face the crowd Of pitying women wept aloud. His lamentation scarce was o’er, When Saint Vaśishṭha, skilled in lore Of royal duty, dear to fame, To join the great assembly came. Girt by disciples ever true Still nearer to that hall he drew, Resplendent, heavenly to behold, Adorned with wealth of gems and gold: E’en so a man in duty tried Draws near to meet his virtuous bride. He reached his golden seat o’erlaid With coverlet of rich brocade, There sat, in all the Vedas read, And called the messengers, and said: “Go forth, let Bráhman, Warrior, peer, And every captain gather here: Let all attentive hither throng: Go, hasten: we delay too long. Śatrughna, glorious Bharat bring, The noble children of the king,(357) Yudhájit(358) and Sumantra, all The truthful and the virtuous call.”

  He ended: soon a mighty sound Of thickening tumult rose around, As to the hall they bent their course With car, and elephant, and horse, The people all with glad acclaim Welcomed Prince Bharat as he came: E’en as they loved their king to greet, Or as the Gods Lord Indra(359) meet.   The vast assembly shone as fair     With Bharat’s kingly face   As Daśaratha’s self were there     To glorify the place.   It gleamed like some unruffled lake     Where monsters huge of mould   With many a snake their pastime take     O’er shells, sand, gems, and gold.




Canto LXXXII. The Departure.


The prudent prince the assembly viewed Thronged with its noble multitude, Resplendent as a cloudless night When the full moon is in his height; While robes of every varied hue A glory o’er the synod threw. The priest in lore of duty skilled Looked on the crowd the hall that filled, And then in accents soft and grave To Bharat thus his counsel gave: “The king, dear son, so good and wise, Has gone from earth and gained the skies, Leaving to thee, her rightful lord, This rich wide land with foison stored. And still has faithful Ráma stood Firm to the duty of the good, And kept his father’s hest aright, As the moon keeps its own dear light. Thus sire and brother yield to thee This realm from all annoyance free: Rejoice thy lords: enjoy thine own: Anointed king, ascend the throne. Let vassal Princes hasten forth From distant lands, west, south, and north, From Kerala,(360) from every sea, And bring ten million gems to thee.” As thus the sage Vaśishṭha spoke, A storm of grief o’er Bharat broke. And longing to be just and true, His thoughts to duteous Ráma flew. With sobs and sighs and broken tones, E’en as a wounded mallard moans, He mourned with deepest sorrow moved, And thus the holy priest reproved: “O, how can such as Bharat dare The power and sway from him to tear, Wise, and devout, and true, and chaste, With Scripture lore and virtue graced? Can one of Daśaratha’s seed Be guilty of so vile a deed? The realm and I are Ráma’s: thou, Shouldst speak the words of justice now. For he, to claims of virtue true, Is eldest born and noblest too: Nahush, Dilípa could not be More famous in their lives than he. As Daśaratha ruled of right, So Ráma’s is the power and right. If I should do this sinful deed And forfeit hope of heavenly meed, My guilty act would dim the shine Of old Ikshváku’s glorious line. Nay, as the sin my mother wrought Is grievous to my inmost thought, I here, my hands together laid, Will greet him in the pathless shade. To Ráma shall my steps be bent, My King, of men most excellent, Raghu’s illustrious son, whose sway Might hell, and earth, and heaven obey.”

  That righteous speech, whose every word Bore virtue’s stamp, the audience heard; On Ráma every thought was set, And with glad tears each eye was wet. “Then, if the power I still should lack To bring my noble brother back, I in the wood will dwell, and share His banishment with Lakshmaṇ there. By every art persuasive I To bring him from the wood will try, And show him to your loving eyes, O Bráhmans noble, good, and wise. E’en now, the road to make and clear, Each labourer pressed, and pioneer Have I sent forward to precede The army I resolve to lead.”

  Thus, by fraternal love possessed, His firm resolve the prince expressed, Then to Sumantra, deeply read In holy texts, he turned and said: “Sumantra, rise without delay, And as I bid my words obey. Give orders for the march with speed, And all the army hither lead.”

  The wise Sumantra, thus addressed, Obeyed the high-souled chief’s behest. He hurried forth with joy inspired And gave the orders he desired. Delight each soldier’s bosom filled, And through each chief and captain thrilled, To hear that march proclaimed, to bring Dear Ráma back from wandering. From house to house the tidings flew: Each soldier’s wife the order knew, And as she listened blithe and gay Her husband urged to speed away. Captain and soldier soon declared The host equipped and all prepared With chariots matching thought for speed, And wagons drawn by ox and steed. When Bharat by Vaśishṭha’s side, His ready host of warriors eyed, Thus in Sumantra’s ear he spoke: “My car and horses quickly yoke.” Sumantra hastened to fulfil With ready joy his master’s will, And quickly with the chariot sped Drawn by fleet horses nobly bred. Then glorious Bharat, true, devout, Whose genuine valour none could doubt, Gave in fit words his order out; For he would seek the shade Of the great distant wood, and there Win his dear brother with his prayer: “Sumantra, haste! my will declare   The host be all arrayed. I to the wood my way will take,   To Ráma supplication make, And for the world’s advantage sake,   Will lead him home again.” Then, ordered thus, the charioteer Who listened with delighted ear, Went forth and gave his orders clear   To captains of the train. He gave the popular chiefs the word, And with the news his friends he stirred, And not a single man deferred   Preparing for the road. Then Bráhman, Warrior, Merchant, thrall, Obedient to Sumantra’s call, Each in his house arose, and all Yoked elephant or camel tall, Or ass or noble steed in stall,   And full appointed showed.




Canto LXXXIII. The Journey Begun.


Then Bharat rose at early morn, And in his noble chariot borne Drove forward at a rapid pace Eager to look on Ráma’s face. The priests and lords, a fair array, In sun-bright chariots led the way. Behind, a well appointed throng, Nine thousand elephants streamed along. Then sixty thousand cars, and then, With various arms, came fighting men. A hundred thousand archers showed In lengthened line the steeds they rode— A mighty host, the march to grace Of Bharat, pride of Raghu’s race. Kaikeyí and Sumitrá came, And good Kauśalyá, dear to fame: By hopes of Ráma’s coming cheered They in a radiant car appeared. On fared the noble host to see Ráma and Lakshmaṇ, wild with glee, And still each other’s ear to please, Of Ráma spoke in words like these: “When shall our happy eyes behold Our hero true, and pure, and bold, So lustrous dark, so strong of arm, Who keeps the world from woe and harm? The tears that now our eyeballs dim Will vanish at the sight of him, As the whole world’s black shadows fly When the bright sun ascends the sky.”

  Conversing thus their way pursued The city’s joyous multitude, And each in mutual rapture pressed A friend or neighbour to his breast. Thus every man of high renown, And every merchant of the town, And leading subjects, joyous went Toward Ráma in his banishment. And those who worked the potter’s wheel, And artists skilled in gems to deal; And masters of the weaver’s art, And those who shaped the sword and dart; And they who golden trinkets made, And those who plied the fuller’s trade; And servants trained the bath to heat, And they who dealt in incense sweet; Physicians in their business skilled, And those who wine and mead distilled; And workmen deft in glass who wrought, And those whose snares the peacock caught; With them who bored the ear for rings, Or sawed, or fashioned ivory things; And those who knew to mix cement, Or lived by sale of precious scent; And men who washed, and men who sewed, And thralls who mid the herds abode; And fishers of the flood, and they Who played and sang, and women gay; And virtuous Bráhmans, Scripture-wise, Of life approved in all men’s eyes; These swelled the prince’s lengthened train, Borne each in car or bullock wain. Fair were the robes they wore upon Their limbs where red-hued unguents shone. These all in various modes conveyed Their journey after Bharat made; The soldiers’ hearts with rapture glowed, Following Bharat on his road, Their chief whose tender love would fain Bring his dear brother home again. With elephant, and horse, and car, The vast procession travelled far, And came where Gangá’s waves below The town of Śringavera(361) flow. There, with his friends and kinsmen nigh, Dwelt Guha, Ráma’s dear ally, Heroic guardian of the land With dauntless heart and ready hand. There for a while the mighty force That followed Bharat stayed its course, Gazing on Gangá’s bosom stirred By many a graceful water-bird. When Bharat viewed his followers there, And Gangá’s water, blest and fair, The prince, who lore of words possessed, His councillors and lords addressed: “The captains of the army call: Proclaim this day a halt for all, That so to-morrow, rested, we May cross this flood that seeks the sea. Meanwhile, descending to the shore, The funeral stream I fain would pour From Gangá’s fair auspicious tide To him, my father glorified.”

  Thus Bharat spoke: each peer and lord Approved his words with one accord, And bade the weary troops repose In separate spots where’er they chose. There by the mighty stream that day, Most glorious in its vast array The prince’s wearied army lay   In various groups reclined. There Bharat’s hours of night were spent, While every eager thought he bent On bringing home from banishment   His brother, great of mind.




Canto LXXXIV. Guha’s Anger.


King Guha saw the host spread o’er The wide expanse of Gangá’s shore, With waving flag and pennon graced, And to his followers spoke in haste: “A mighty army meets my eyes, That rivals Ocean’s self in size: Where’er I look my very mind No limit to the host can find. Sure Bharat with some evil thought His army to our land has brought. See, huge of form, his flag he rears, That like an Ebony-tree appears. He comes with bonds to take and chain, Or triumph o’er our people slain: And after, Ráma will he slay,— Him whom his father drove away: The power complete he longs to gain, And—task too hard—usurp the reign. So Bharat comes with wicked will His brother Ráma’s blood to spill. But Ráma’s slave and friend am I; He is my lord and dear ally. Keep here your watch in arms arrayed Near Gangá’s flood to lend him aid, And let my gathered servants stand And line with troops the river strand. Here let the river keepers meet, Who flesh and roots and berries eat; A hundred fishers man each boat Of the five hundred here afloat, And let the youthful and the strong Assemble in defensive throng. But yet, if, free from guilty thought ’Gainst Ráma, he this land have sought, The prince’s happy host to-day Across the flood shall make its way.”

  He spoke: then bearing in a dish A gift of honey, meat, and fish, The king of the Nishádas drew Toward Bharat for an interview. When Bharat’s noble charioteer Observed the monarch hastening near, He duly, skilled in courteous lore, The tidings to his master bore: “This aged prince who hither bends His footsteps with a thousand friends, Knows, firm ally of Ráma, all That may in Daṇḍak wood befall: Therefore, Kakutstha’s son, admit The monarch, as is right and fit: For doubtless he can clearly tell Where Ráma now and Lakshmaṇ dwell.”

  When Bharat heard Sumantra’s rede, To his fair words the prince agreed: “Go quickly forth,” he cried, “and bring Before my face the aged king.” King Guha, with his kinsmen near, Rejoiced the summoning to hear: He nearer drew, bowed low his head, And thus to royal Bharat said: “No mansions can our country boast, And unexpected comes thy host: But what we have I give thee all: Rest in the lodging of thy thrall. See, the Nishádas here have brought The fruit and roots their hands have sought: And we have woodland fare beside, And store of meat both fresh and dried. To rest their weary limbs, I pray This night at least thy host may stay: Then cheered with all we can bestow To-morrow thou with it mayst go.”




Canto LXXXV. Guha And Bharat.


Thus the Nishádas’ king besought: The prince with spirit wisdom-fraught Replied in seemly words that blent Deep matter with the argument: “Thou, friend of him whom I revere, With honours high hast met me here, For thou alone wouldst entertain And feed to-day so vast a train.” In such fair words the prince replied, Then, pointing to the path he cried: “Which way aright will lead my feet To Bharadvája’s calm retreat; For all this land near Gangá’s streams Pathless and hard to traverse seems?”

  Thus spoke the prince: King Guha heard Delighted every prudent word, And gazing on that forest wide, Raised suppliant hands, and thus replied: “My servants, all the ground who know, O glorious Prince, with thee shall go With constant care thy way to guide, And I will journey by thy side. But this thy host so wide dispread Wakes in my heart one doubt and dread, Lest, threatening Ráma good and great, Ill thoughts thy journey stimulate.”

  But when King Guha, ill at ease, Declared his fear in words like these, As pure as is the cloudless sky With soft voice Bharat made reply: “Suspect me not: ne’er come the time For me to plot so foul a crime! He is my eldest brother, he Is like a father dear to me. I go to lead my brother thence Who makes the wood his residence. No thought but this thy heart should frame: This simple truth my lips proclaim.”

  Then with glad cheer King Guha cried, With Bharat’s answer gratified: “Blessed art thou: on earth I see None who may vie, O Prince, with thee, Who canst of thy free will resign The kingdom which unsought is thine. For this, a name that ne’er shall die, Thy glory through the worlds shall fly, Who fain wouldst balm thy brother’s pain And lead the exile home again.”

  As Guha thus, and Bharat, each To other spoke in friendly speech, The Day-God sank with glory dead, And night o’er all the sky was spread. Soon as King Guha’s thoughtful care Had quartered all the army there, Well honoured, Bharat laid his head Beside Śatrughna on a bed. But grief for Ráma yet oppressed High-minded Bharat’s faithful breast— Such torment little was deserved By him who ne’er from duty swerved. The fever raged through every vein And burnt him with its inward pain: So when in woods the flames leap free The fire within consumes the tree. From heat of burning anguish sprung The sweat upon his body hung, As when the sun with fervid glow On high Himálaya melts the snow. As, banished from the herd, a bull Wanders alone and sorrowful.   Thus sighing and distressed, In misery and bitter grief, With fevered heart that mocked relief, Distracted in his mind, the chief   Still mourned and found no rest.




Canto LXXXVI. Guha’s Speech.


Guha the king, acquainted well With all that in the wood befell, To Bharat the unequalled told The tale of Lakshmaṇ mighty-souled: “With many an earnest word I spake To Lakshmaṇ as he stayed awake, And with his bow and shaft in hand To guard his brother kept his stand: “Now sleep a little, Lakshmaṇ, see This pleasant bed is strewn for thee: Hereon thy weary body lay, And strengthen thee with rest, I pray, Inured to toil are men like these, But thou hast aye been nursed in ease. Rest, duteous-minded! I will keep My watch while Ráma lies asleep: For in the whole wide world is none Dearer to me than Raghu’s son. Harbour no doubt or jealous fear: I speak the truth with heart sincere: For from the grace which he has shown Will glory on my name be thrown: Great store of merit shall I gain, And duteous, form no wish in vain. Let me enforced by many a row Of followers, armed with shaft and bow For well-loved Ráma’s weal provide Who lies asleep by Sítá’s side. For through this wood I often go, And all its shades conceal I know: And we with conquering arms can meet A four-fold host arrayed complete.” “With words like these I spoke, designed To move the high-souled Bharat’s mind, But he upon his duty bent, Plied his persuasive argument: “O, how can slumber close mine eyes When lowly couched with Sítá lies The royal Ráma? can I give My heart to joy, or even live? He whom no mighty demon, no, Nor heavenly God can overthrow, See, Guha, how he lies, alas, With Sítá couched on gathered grass. By varied labours, long, severe, By many a prayer and rite austere, He, Daśaratha’s cherished son, By Fortune stamped, from Heaven was won. Now as his son is forced to fly, The king ere long will surely die: Reft of his guardian hand, forlorn In widowed grief this land will mourn. E’en now perhaps, with toil o’erspent, The women cease their loud lament, And cries of woe no longer ring Throughout the palace of the king. But ah for sad Kauśalyá! how Fare she and mine own mother now? How fares the king? this night, I think, Some of the three in death will sink. With hopes upon Śatrughna set My mother may survive as yet, But the sad queen will die who bore The hero, for her grief is sore. His cherished wish that would have made Dear Ráma king, so long delayed, “Too late! too late!” the king will cry, And conquered by his misery die. When Fate has brought the mournful day Which sees my father pass away, How happy in their lives are they Allowed his funeral rites to pay. Our exile o’er, with him who ne’er Turns from the oath his lips may swear, May we returning safe and well gain in fair Ayodhyá dwell.” Thus Bharat stood with many a sigh Lamenting, and the night went by. Soon as the morning light shone fair In votive coils both bound their hair. And then I sent them safely o’er And left them on the farther shore. With Sítá then they onward passed, Their coats of bark about them cast,   Their locks like hermits’ bound, The mighty tamers of the foe, Each with his arrows and his bow,   Went over the rugged ground, Proud in their strength and undeterred Like elephants that lead the herd,   And gazing oft around.”




Canto LXXXVII. Guha’s Story.


That speech of Guha Bharat heard With grief and tender pity stirred, And as his ears the story drank, Deep in his thoughtful heart it sank. His large full eyes in anguish rolled, His trembling limbs grew stiff and cold; Then fell he, like a tree uptorn, In woe too grievous to be borne. When Guha saw the long-armed chief Whose eye was like a lotus leaf, With lion shoulders strong and fair, High-mettled, prostrate in despair,— Pale, bitterly afflicted, he Reeled as in earthquake reels a tree. But when Śatrughna standing nigh Saw his dear brother helpless lie, Distraught with woe his head he bowed, Embraced him oft and wept aloud. Then Bharat’s mothers came, forlorn Of their dear king, with fasting worn, And stood with weeping eyes around The hero prostrate on the ground. Kauśalyá, by her woe oppressed, The senseless Bharat’s limbs caressed, As a fond cow in love and fear Caresses oft her youngling dear: Then yielding to her woe she said, Weeping and sore disquieted: “What torments, O my son, are these Of sudden pain or swift disease? The lives of us and all the line Depend, dear child, on only thine. Ráma and Lakshmaṇ forced to flee, I live by naught but seeing thee: For as the king has past away Thou art my only help to-day. Hast thou, perchance, heard evil news Of Lakshmaṇ, which thy soul subdues, Or Ráma dwelling with his spouse— My all is he—neath forest boughs?”

  Then slowly gathering sense and strength The weeping hero rose at length, And words like these to Guha spake, That bade Kauśalyá comfort take: “Where lodged the prince that night? and where Lakshmaṇ the brave, and Sítá fair? Show me the couch whereon he lay, Tell me the food he ate, I pray.”

  Then Guha the Nishádas’ king Replied to Bharat’s questioning: “Of all I had I brought the best To serve my good and honoured guest Food of each varied kind I chose, And every fairest fruit that grows. Ráma the hero truly brave Declined the gift I humbly gave: His Warrior part he ne’er forgot, And what I brought accepted not: “No gifts, my friend, may we accept: Our law is, Give, and must be kept.” The high-souled chief, O Monarch, thus With gracious words persuaded us. Then calm and still, absorbed in thought, He drank the water Lakshmaṇ brought, And then, obedient to his vows, He fasted with his gentle spouse. So Lakshmaṇ too from food abstained, And sipped the water that remained: Then with ruled lips, devoutly staid, The three(362) their evening worship paid. Then Lakshmaṇ with unwearied care Brought heaps of sacred grass, and there With his own hands he quickly spread, For Ráma’s rest, a pleasant bed, And faithful Sítá’s too, where they Reclining each by other lay. Then Lakshmaṇ bathed their feet, and drew A little distance from the two. Here stands the tree which lent them shade, Here is the grass beneath it laid, Where Ráma and his consort spent The night together ere they went. Lakshmaṇ, whose arms the foeman quell, Watched all the night as sentinel,   And kept his great bow strung: His hand was gloved, his arm was braced, Two well-filled quivers at his waist,   With deadly arrows, hung. I took my shafts and trusty bow, And with that tamer of the foe   Stood ever wakeful near, And with my followers, bow in hand, Behind me ranged, a ready band,   Kept watch o’er Indra’s peer.”




Canto LXXXVIII. The Ingudí Tree.


When Bharat with each friend and peer Had heard that tale so full and clear, They went together to the tree The bed which Ráma pressed to see. Then Bharat to his mothers said: “Behold the high-souled hero’s bed: These tumbled heaps of grass betray Where he that night with Sítá lay: Unmeet, the heir of fortune high Thus on the cold bare earth should lie, The monarch’s son, in counsel sage, Of old imperial lineage. That lion-lord whose noble bed With finest skins of deer was spread,— How can he now endure to press The bare earth, cold and comfortless! This sudden fall from bliss to grief Appears untrue, beyond belief: My senses are distraught: I seem To view the fancies of a dream. There is no deity so great, No power in heaven can master Fate, If Ráma, Daśaratha’s heir, Lay on the ground and slumbered there; And lovely Sítá, she who springs From fair Videha’s ancient kings, Ráma’s dear wife, by all adored, Lay on the earth beside her lord. Here was his couch, upon this heap He tossed and turned in restless sleep: On the hard soil each manly limb Has stamped the grass with signs of him. That night, it seems, fair Sítá spent Arrayed in every ornament, For here and there my eyes behold Small particles of glistering gold. She laid her outer garment here, For still some silken threads appear, How dear in her devoted eyes Must be the bed where Ráma lies, Where she so tender could repose And by his side forget her woes. Alas, unhappy, guilty me! For whom the prince was forced to flee, And chief of Raghu’s sons and best, A bed like this with Sítá pressed. Son of a royal sire whose hand Ruled paramount o’er every land, Could he who every joy bestows, Whose body like the lotus shows, The friend of all, who charms the sight, Whose flashing eyes are darkly bright, Leave the dear kingdom, his by right, Unmeet for woe, the heir of bliss, And lie upon a bed like this? Great joy and happy fate are thine, O Lakshmaṇ, marked with each fair sign, Whose faithful footsteps follow still Thy brother in his hour of ill. And blest is Sítá, nobly good, Who dwells with Ráma in the wood. Ours is, alas, a doubtful fate Of Ráma reft and desolate. My royal sire has gained the skies, In woods the high-souled hero lies; The state is wrecked and tempest-tossed, A vessel with her rudder lost. Yet none in secret thought has planned With hostile might to seize the land: Though forced in distant wilds to dwell, The hero’s arm protects it well. Unguarded, with deserted wall, No elephant or steed in stall, My father’s royal city shows Her portals open to her foes, Of bold protectors reft and bare, Defenceless in her dark despair: But still her foes the wish restrain, As men from poisoned cates refrain. I from this hour my nights will pass Couched on the earth or gathered grass, Eat only fruit and roots, and wear A coat of bark, and matted hair. I in the woods will pass, content, For him the term of banishment; So shall I still unbroken save The promise which the hero gave. While I remain for Ráma there, Śatrughna will my exile share, And Ráma in his home again, With Lakshmaṇ, o’er Ayodhyá reign, for him, to rule and guard the state, The twice-born men shall consecrate. O, may the Gods I serve incline To grant this earnest wish of mine! If when I bow before his feet And with all moving arts entreat,   He still deny my prayer, Then with my brother will I live: He must, he must permission give,   Roaming in forests there.”




Canto LXXXIX. The Passage Of Gangá.


That night the son of Raghu lay On Gangá’s bank till break of day: Then with the earliest light he woke And thus to brave Śatrughna spoke. “Rise up, Śatrughna, from thy bed: Why sleepest thou the night is fled. See how the sun who chases night Wakes every lotus with his light. Arise, arise, and first of all The lord of Śringavera call, For he his friendly aid will lend Our army o’er the flood to send.”

  Thus urged, Śatrughna answered: “I, Remembering Ráma, sleepless lie.” As thus the brothers, each to each, The lion-mettled, ended speech, Came Guha, the Nishádas’ king, And spoke with kindly questioning: “Hast thou in comfort passed,” he cried, “The night upon the river side? With thee how fares it? and are these, Thy soldiers, healthy and at ease?” Thus the Nishádas’ lord inquired In gentle words which love inspired, And Bharat, Ráma’s faithful slave, Thus to the king his answer gave: “The night has sweetly passed, and we Are highly honoured, King, by thee. Now let thy servants boats prepare, Our army o’er the stream to bear.”

  The speech of Bharat Guha heard, And swift to do his bidding stirred. Within the town the monarch sped And to his ready kinsmen said: “Awake, each kinsman, rise, each friend! May every joy your lives attend. Gather each boat upon the shore And ferry all the army o’er.” Thus Guha spoke: nor they delayed, But, rising quick, their lord obeyed, And soon, from every side secured, Five hundred boats were ready moored. Some reared aloft the mystic sign,(363) And mighty bells were hung in line: Of firmest build, gay flags they bore, And sailors for the helm and oar. One such King Guha chose, whereon, Of fair white cloth, an awning shone, And sweet musicians charmed the ear,— And bade his servants urge it near. Then Bharat swiftly sprang on board, And then Śatrughna, famous lord, To whom, with many a royal dame, Kauśalyá and Sumitrá came. The household priest went first in place, The elders, and the Bráhman race, And after them the monarch’s train Of women borne in many a wain. Then high to heaven the shouts of those Who fired the army’s huts,(364) arose, With theirs who bathed along the shore, Or to the boats the baggage bore. Full freighted with that mighty force The boats sped swiftly on their course, By royal Guha’s servants manned, And gentle gales the banners fanned. Some boats a crowd of dames conveyed, In others noble coursers neighed; Some chariots and their cattle bore, Some precious wealth and golden store. Across the stream each boat was rowed, There duly disembarked its load, And then returning on its way, Sped here and there in merry play. Then swimming elephants appeared With flying pennons high upreared. And as the drivers urged them o’er, The look of winged mountains wore. Some men in barges reached the strand, Others on rafts came safe to land: Some buoyed with pitchers crossed the tide, And others on their arms relied. Thus with the help the monarch gave The army crossed pure Gangá’s wave: Then in auspicious hour it stood Within Prayága’s famous wood. The prince with cheering words addressed His weary men, and bade them rest   Where’er they chose and he, With priest and deacon by his side, To Bharadvája’s dwelling hied   That best of saints to see.




Canto XC. The Hermitage.


The prince of men a league away Saw where the hermit’s dwelling lay, Then with his lords his path pursued, And left his warrior multitude. On foot, as duty taught his mind, He left his warlike gear behind; Two robes of linen cloth he wore, And bade Vaśishṭha walk before. Then Bharat from his lords withdrew When Bharadvája came in view, And toward the holy hermit went Behind Vaśishṭha, reverent. When Bharadvája, saint austere, Saw good Vaśishṭha drawing near, He cried, upspringing from his seat, “The grace-gift bring, my friend to greet.” When Saint Vaśishṭha near him drew, And Bharat paid the reverence due, The glorious hermit was aware That Daśaratha’s son was there. The grace-gift, water for their feet He gave, and offered fruit to eat; Then, duty-skilled, with friendly speech In seemly order questioned each: “How fares it in Ayodhyá now With treasury and army? how With kith and kin and friends most dear, With councillor, and prince, and peer?” But, for he knew the king was dead, Of Daśaratha naught he said. Vaśishṭha and the prince in turn Would of the hermit’s welfare learn: Of holy fires they fain would hear, Of pupils, trees, and birds, and deer. The glorious saint his answer made That all was well in holy shade: Then love of Ráma moved his breast, And thus he questioned of his guest: “Why art thou here, O Prince, whose band With kingly sway protects the land? Declare the cause, explain the whole, For yet some doubt disturbs my soul. He whom Kauśalyá bare, whose might The foemen slays, his line’s delight, He who with wife and brother sent Afar now roam in banishment, Famed prince, to whom his father spake This order for a woman’s sake: “Away! and in the forest spend Thy life till fourteen years shall end”— Has thou the wish to harm him, bent On sin against the innocent? Wouldst thou thine elder’s realm enjoy Without a thorn that can annoy?”

  With sobbing voice and tearful eye Thus Bharat sadly made reply: “Ah lost am I, if thou, O Saint, Canst thus in thought my heart attaint: No warning charge from thee I need; Ne’er could such crime from me proceed. The words my guilty mother spake When fondly jealous for my sake— Think not that I, to triumph moved, Those words approve or e’er approved. O Hermit, I have sought this place To win the lordly hero’s grace, To throw me at my brother’s feet And lead him to his royal seat. To this, my journey’s aim and end, Thou shouldst, O Saint, thy favour lend: Where is the lord of earth? do thou, Most holy, say, where roams he now?”

  Then, by the saint Vaśishṭha pressed,     And all the gathered priests beside,   To Bharat’s dutiful request     The hermit graciously replied: “Worthy of thee, O Prince, this deed, True son of Raghu’s ancient seed. I know thee reverent, well-controlled, The glory of the good of old. I grant thy prayer: in this pursuit I know thy heart is resolute. ’Tis for thy sake those words I said That wider still thy fame may spread. I know where Ráma, duty-tried, His brother, and his wife abide. Where Chitrakúṭa’s heights arise Thy brother Ráma’s dwelling lies. Go thither with the morning’s light, And stay with all thy lords tonight: For I would show thee honour high, And do not thou my wish deny.”




Canto XCI. Bharadvája’s Feast.


Soon as he saw the prince’s mind To rest that day was well inclined, He sought Kaikeyí’s son to please With hospitable courtesies. Then Bharat to the saint replied: “Our wants are more than satisfied. The gifts which honoured strangers greet, And water for our weary feet Hast thou bestowed with friendly care, And every choice of woodland fare.”

  Then Bharadvája spoke, a smile Playing upon his lips the while: “I know, dear Prince, thy friendly mind Will any fare sufficient find, But gladly would I entertain And banquet all thine armed train: Such is my earnest wish: do thou This longing of my heart allow, Why hast thou hither bent thy way, And made thy troops behind thee stay? Why unattended? couldst thou not With friends and army seek this spot?”

  Bharat, with reverent hands raised high, To that great hermit made reply: “My troops, for awe of thee, O Sage, I brought not to thy hermitage: Troops of a king or monarch’s son A hermit’s home should ever shun. Behind me comes a mighty train Wide spreading o’er the ample plain, Where every chief and captain leads Men, elephants, and mettled steeds. I feared, O reverend Sage, lest these Might harm the holy ground and trees, Springs might be marred and cots o’erthrown, So with the priests I came alone.”

  “Bring all thy host,” the hermit cried, And Bharat, to his joy, complied. Then to the chapel went the sire, Where ever burnt the sacred fire, And first, in order due, with sips Of water purified his lips: To Viśvakarmá, then he prayed, His hospitable feast to aid: “Let Viśvakarmá hear my call, The God who forms and fashions all: A mighty banquet I provide, Be all my wants this day supplied. Lord Indra at their head, the three(365) Who guard the worlds I call to me: A mighty host this day I feed, Be now supplied my every need. Let all the streams that eastward go, And those whose waters westering flow, Both on the earth and in the sky, Flow hither and my wants supply. Be some with ardent liquor filled, And some with wine from flowers distilled, While some their fresh cool streams retain Sweet as the juice of sugar-cane. I call the Gods, I call the band Of minstrels that around them stand: I call the Háhá and Huhú, I call the sweet Viśvávasu, I call the heavenly wives of these With all the bright Apsarases, Alambúshá of beauty rare, The charmer of the tangled hair, Ghritáchí and Viśváchi fair, Hemá and Bhímá sweet to view, And lovely Nágadantá too, And all the sweetest nymphs who stand By Indra or by Brahmá’s hand— I summon these with all their train And Tumburu to lead the strain. Here let Kuvera’s garden rise Which far in Northern Kuru(366) lies: For leaves let cloth and gems entwine, And let its fruit be nymphs divine. Let Soma(367) give the noblest food To feed the mighty multitude, Of every kind, for tooth and lip, To chew, to lick, to suck, and sip. Let wreaths, where fairest flowers abound, Spring from the trees that bloom around. Each sort of wine to woo the taste, And meats of every kind be placed.”

  Thus spake the hermit self-restrained, With proper tone by rules ordained, On deepest meditation bent, In holy might preëminent. Then as with hands in reverence raised Absorbed in thought he eastward gazed, The deities he thus addressed Came each in semblance manifest. Delicious gales that cooled the frame From Malaya and Dardar came, That kissed those scented hills and threw Auspicious fragrance where they blew. Then falling fast in sweetest showers Came from the sky immortal flowers, And all the airy region round With heavenly drums was made to sound. Then breathed a soft celestial breeze, Then danced the bright Apsarases, The minstrels and the Gods advanced, And warbling lutes the soul entranced. The earth and sky that music filled, And through each ear it softly thrilled, As from the heavenly quills it fell With time and tune attempered well. Soon as the minstrels ceased to play And airs celestial died away, The troops of Bharat saw amazed What Viśvakarmá’s art had raised. On every side, five leagues around, All smooth and level lay the ground, With fresh green grass that charmed the sight Like sapphires blent with lazulite. There the Wood-apple hung its load, The Mango and the Citron glowed, The Bel and scented Jak were there, And Apelá with fruitage fair. There, brought from Northern Kuru, stood Rich in delights, the glorious wood, And many a stream was seen to glide With flowering trees along its side. There mansions rose with four wide halls, And elephants and chargers’ stalls, And many a house of royal state, Triumphal arc and bannered gate. With noble doorways, sought the sky, Like a pale cloud, a palace high, Which far and wide rare fragrance shed, With wreaths of white engarlanded. Square was its shape, its halls were wide, With many a seat and couch supplied, Drink of all kinds, and every meat Such as celestial Gods might eat. Then at the bidding of the seer Kaikeyí’s strong-armed son drew near, And passed within that fair abode Which with the noblest jewels glowed. Then, as Vaśishṭha led the way, The councillors, in due array, Followed delighted and amazed And on the glorious structure gazed. Then Bharat, Raghu’s son, drew near The kingly throne, with prince and peer, Whereby the chouri in the shade Of the white canopy was laid. Before the throne he humbly bent And honoured Ráma, reverent, Then in his hand the chouri bore, And sat where sits a councillor. His ministers and household priest Sat by degrees from chief to least, Then sat the captain of the host And all the men he honoured most. Then when the saint his order gave, Each river with enchanted wave Rolled milk and curds divinely sweet Before the princely Bharat’s feet; And dwellings fair on either side, With gay white plaster beautified, Their heavenly roofs were seen to lift, The Bráhman Bharadvája’s gift. Then straight by Lord Kuvera sent, Gay with celestial ornament Of bright attire and jewels’ shine, Came twenty thousand nymphs divine: The man on whom those beauties glanced That moment felt his soul entranced. With them from Nandan’s blissful shades Came twenty thousand heavenly maids. Tumburu, Nárad, Gopa came, And Sutanu, like radiant flame, The kings of the Gandharva throng, And ravished Bharat with their song. Then spoke the saint, and swift obeyed Alambúshá, the fairest maid, And Miśrakeśí bright to view, Ramaṇá, Puṇḍríká too, And danced to him with graceful ease The dances of Apsarases. All chaplets that by Gods are worn, Or Chaitraratha’s graves adorn, Bloomed by the saint’s command arrayed On branches in Prayága’s shade. When at the saint’s command the breeze Made music with the Vilva trees, To wave in rhythmic beat began The boughs of each Myrobolan, And holy fig-trees wore the look Of dancers, as their leaflets shook. The fair Tamála, palm, and pine, With trees that tower and plants that twine, The sweetly varying forms displayed Of stately dame or bending maid. Here men the foaming winecup quaffed, Here drank of milk full many a draught, And tasted meats of every kind, Well dressed, whatever pleased their mind. Then beauteous women, seven or eight, Stood ready by each man to wait: Beside the stream his limbs they stripped And in the cooling water dipped. And then the fair ones, sparkling eyed, With soft hands rubbed his limbs and dried, And sitting on the lovely bank Held up the winecup as he drank. Nor did the grooms forget to feed Camel and mule and ox and steed, For there were stores of roasted grain, Of honey and of sugar-cane. So fast the wild excitement spread Among the warriors Bharat led, That all the mighty army through The groom no more his charger knew, And he who drove might seek in vain To tell his elephant again. With every joy and rapture fired, Entranced with all the heart desired, The myriads of the host that night Revelled delirious with delight. Urged by the damsels at their side In wild delight the warriors cried: “Ne’er will we seek Ayodhyá, no, Nor yet to Daṇḍak forest go: Here will we stay: may happy fate On Bharat and on Ráma wait.” Thus cried the army gay and free Exulting in their lawless glee, Both infantry and those who rode On elephants, or steeds bestrode, Ten thousand voices shouting, “This Is heaven indeed for perfect bliss.” With garlands decked they idly strayed, And danced and laughed and sang and played. At length as every soldier eyed, With food like Amrit satisfied, Each dainty cate and tempting meat, No longer had he care to eat. Thus soldier, servant, dame, and slave Received whate’er the wish might crave. As each in new-wrought clothes arrayed Enjoyed the feast before him laid. Each man was seen in white attire Unstained by spot or speck of mire: None was athirst or hungry there, And none had dust upon his hair. On every side in woody dells Was milky food in bubbling wells, And there were all-supplying cows And honey dropping from the boughs. Nor wanted lakes of flower-made drink With piles of meat upon the brink, Boiled, stewed, and roasted, varied cheer, Peachick and jungle-fowl and deer, There was the flesh of kid and boar, And dainty sauce in endless store, With juice of flowers concocted well, And soup that charmed the taste and smell, And pounded fruits of bitter taste, And many a bath was ready placed Down by each river’s shelving side There stood great basins well supplied, And laid therein, of dazzling sheen, White brushes for the teeth were seen, And many a covered box wherein Was sandal powdered for the skin. And mirrors bright with constant care, And piles of new attire were there, And store of sandals and of shoes, Thousands of pairs, for all to choose: Eye-unguents, combs for hair and beard, Umbrellas fair and bows appeared. Lakes gleamed, that lent digestive aid,(368) And some for pleasant bathing made, With waters fair, and smooth incline For camels, horses, mules, and kine. There saw they barley heaped on high The countless cattle to supply: The golden grain shone fair and bright As sapphires or the lazulite. To all the gathered host it seemed As if that magic scene they dreamed, And wonder, as they gazed, increased At Bharadvája’s glorious feast.

  Thus in the hermit’s grove they spent That night in joy and merriment, Blest as the Gods who take their ease Under the shade of Nandan’s trees. Each minstrel bade the saint adieu, And to his blissful mansion flew, And every stream and heavenly dame Returned as swiftly as she came.




Canto XCII. Bharat’s Farewell.


So Bharat with his army spent The watches of the night content, And gladly, with the morning’s light Drew near his host the anchorite. When Bharadvája saw him stand With hand in reverence joined to hand, When fires of worship had been fed, He looked upon the prince and said: “O blameless son, I pray thee tell, Did the past night content thee well? Say if the feast my care supplied Thy host of followers gratified.”

  His hands he joined, his head he bent And spoke in answer reverent To the most high and radiant sage Who issued from his hermitage: “Well have I passed the night: thy feast Gave joy to every man and beast; And I, great lord, and every peer Were satisfied with sumptuous cheer, Thy banquet has delighted all From highest chief to meanest thrall, And rich attire and drink and meat Banished the thought of toil and heat. And now, O Hermit good and great, A boon of thee I supplicate. To Ráma’s side my steps I bend: Do thou with friendly eye commend. O tell me how to guide my feet To virtuous Ráma’s lone retreat: Great Hermit, I entreat thee, say How far from here and which the way.”

  Thus by fraternal love inspired The chieftain of the saint inquired: Then thus replied the glorious seer Of matchless might, of vows austere: “Ere the fourth league from here be passed, Amid a forest wild and vast, Stands Chitrakúṭa’s mountain tall, Lovely with wood and waterfall. North of the mountain thou wilt see The beauteous stream Mandákiní, Where swarm the waterfowl below, And gay trees on the margin grow. Then will a leafy cot between The river and the hill be seen: ’Tis Ráma’s, and the princely pair Of brothers live for certain there. Hence to the south thine army lead, And then more southward still proceed, So shalt thou find his lone retreat, And there the son of Raghu meet.”

  Soon as the ordered march they knew, The widows of the monarch flew, Leaving their cars, most meet to ride, And flocked to Bharadvája’s side. There with the good Sumitrá Queen Kauśalyá, sad and worn, was seen, Caressing, still with sorrow faint, The feet of that illustrious saint, Kaikeyí too, her longings crossed, Reproached of all, her object lost, Before the famous hermit came, And clasped his feet, o’erwhelmed with shame. With circling steps she humbly went Around the saint preëminent, And stood not far from Bharat’s side With heart oppressed, and heavy-eyed. Then the great seer, who never broke One holy vow, to Bharat spoke: “Speak, Raghu’s son: I fain would learn The story of each queen in turn.”

  Obedient to the high request By Bharadvája thus addressed, His reverent hands together laid, He, skilled in speech, his answer made: “She whom, O Saint, thou seest here A Goddess in her form appear, Was the chief consort of the king, Now worn with fast and sorrowing. As Aditi in days of yore The all-preserving Vishṇu bore, Kauśalyá bore with happy fate Lord Ráma of the lion’s gait. She who, transfixed with torturing pangs, On her left arm so fondly hangs, As when her withering leaves decay Droops by the wood the Cassia spray, Sumitrá, pained with woe, is she, The consort second of the three: Two princely sons the lady bare, Fair as the Gods in heaven are fair. And she, the wicked dame through whom My brothers’ lives are wrapped in gloom, And mourning for his offspring dear, The king has sought his heavenly sphere,— Proud, foolish-hearted, swift to ire, Self-fancied darling of my sire, Kaikeyí, most ambitious queen, Unlovely with her lovely mien, My mother she, whose impious will Is ever bent on deeds of ill, In whom the root and spring I see Of all this woe which crushes me.”

  Quick breathing like a furious snake, With tears and sobs the hero spake, With reddened eyes aglow with rage. And Bharadvája, mighty sage, Supreme in wisdom, calm and grave, In words like these good counsel gave: “O Bharat, hear the words I say; On her the fault thou must not lay: For many a blessing yet will spring From banished Ráma’s wandering.” And Bharat, with that promise cheered, Went circling round that saint revered, He humbly bade farewell, and then Gave orders to collect his men. Prompt at the summons thousands flew To cars which noble coursers drew, Bright-gleaming, glorious to behold, Adorned with wealth of burnished gold. Then female elephants and male, Gold-girthed, with flags that wooed the gale, Marched with their bright bells’ tinkling chime Like clouds when ends the summer time: Some cars were huge and some were light, For heavy draught or rapid flight, Of costly price, of every kind, With clouds of infantry behind. The dames, Kauśalyá at their head, Were in the noblest chariots led, And every gentle bosom beat With hope the banished prince to meet. The royal Bharat, glory-crowned, With all his retinue around, Borne in a beauteous litter rode, Like the young moon and sun that glowed. The army as it streamed along, Cars, elephants, in endless throng, Showed, marching on its southward way, Like autumn clouds in long array.




Canto XCIII. Chitrakúta In Sight.


As through the woods its way pursued That mighty bannered multitude, Wild elephants in terror fled With all the startled herds they led, And bears and deer were seen on hill, In forest glade, by every rill. Wide as the sea from coast to coast, The high-souled Bharat’s mighty host Covered the earth as cloudy trains Obscure the sky when fall the rains. The stately elephants he led, And countless steeds the land o’erspread, So closely crowded that between Their serried ranks no ground was seen. Then when the host had travelled far, And steeds were worn who drew the car, The glorious Bharat thus addressed Vaśishṭha, of his lords the best: “The spot, methinks, we now behold Of which the holy hermit told, For, as his words described, I trace Each several feature of the place: Before us Chitrakúṭa shows, Mandákiní beside us flows: Afar umbrageous woods arise Like darksome clouds that veil the skies. Now tread these mountain-beasts of mine On Chitrakúṭa’s fair incline. The trees their rain of blossoms shed On table-lands beneath them spread, As from black clouds the floods descend When the hot days of summer end. Śatrughna, look, the mountain see Where heavenly minstrels wander free, And horses browse beneath the steep, Countless as monsters in the deep. Scared by my host the mountain deer Starting with tempest speed appear Like the long lines of cloud that fly In autumn through the windy sky. See, every warrior shows his head With fragrant blooms engarlanded; All look like southern soldiers who Lift up their shields of azure hue. This lonely wood beneath the hill, That was so dark and drear and still, Covered with men in endless streams Now like Ayodhyá’s city seems. The dust which countless hoofs excite Obscures the sky and veils the light; But see, swift winds those clouds dispel As if they strove to please me well. See, guided in their swift career By many a skilful charioteer, Those cars by fleetest coursers drawn Race onward over glade and lawn. Look, startled as the host comes near The lovely peacocks fly in fear, Gorgeous as if the fairest blooms Of earth had glorified their plumes. Look where the sheltering covert shows The trooping deer, both bucks and does, That occupy in countless herds This mountain populous with birds. Most lovely to my mind appears This place which every charm endears: Fair as the road where tread the Blest; Here holy hermits take their rest. Then let the army onward press And duly search each green recess For the two lion-lords, till we Ráma once more and Lakshmaṇ see.”

  Thus Bharat spoke: and hero bands Of men with weapons in their hands Entered the tangled forest: then A spire of smoke appeared in ken. Soon as they saw the rising smoke To Bharat they returned and spoke: “No fire where men are not: ’tis clear That Raghu’s sons are dwelling here. Or if not here those heroes dwell Whose mighty arms their foeman quell, Still other hermits here must be Like Ráma, true and good as he.”

  His ears attentive Bharat lent To their resistless argument, Then to his troops the chief who broke His foe’s embattled armies spoke: “Here let the troops in silence stay; One step beyond they must not stray. Come Dhrishṭi and Sumantra, you With me alone the path pursue.” Their leader’s speech the warriors heard, And from his place no soldier stirred, And Bharat bent his eager eyes Where curling smoke was seen to rise.

  The host his order well obeyed, And halting there in silence stayed Watching where from the thicket’s shade   They saw the smoke appear. And joy through all the army ran, “Soon shall we meet,” thought every man,   “The prince we hold so dear.”




Canto XCIV. Chitrakúta.


There long the son of Raghu dwelt And love for hill and wood he felt. Then his Videhan spouse to please And his own heart of woe to ease, Like some Immortal—Indra so Might Swarga’s charms to Śachí show— Drew her sweet eyes to each delight Of Chitrakúṭa’s lovely height: “Though reft of power and kingly sway, Though friends and home are far away, I cannot mourn my altered lot, Enamoured of this charming spot. Look, darling, on this noble hill Which sweet birds with their music fill, Bright with a thousand metal dyes His lofty summits cleave the skies. See, there a silvery sheen is spread, And there like blood the rocks are red. There shows a streak of emerald green, And pink and yellow glow between. There where the higher peaks ascend, Crystal and flowers and topaz blend, And others flash their light afar Like mercury or some fair star: With such a store of metals dyed The king of hills is glorified. There through the wild birds’ populous home The harmless bear and tiger roam: Hyænas range the woody slopes With herds of deer and antelopes. See, love, the trees that clothe his side All lovely in their summer pride, In richest wealth of leaves arrayed, With flower and fruit and light and shade, Look where the young Rose-apple glows; What loaded boughs the Mango shows; See, waving in the western wind The light leaves of the Tamarind, And mark that giant Peepul through The feathery clump of tall bamboo.(369) Look, on the level lands above, Delighting in successful love In sweet enjoyment many a pair Of heavenly minstrels revels there, While overhanging boughs support Their swords and mantles as they sport: Then see that pleasant shelter where Play the bright Daughters of the Air.(370) The mountain seems with bright cascade And sweet rill bursting from the shade, Like some majestic elephant o’er Whose burning head the torrents pour. Where breathes the man who would not feel Delicious languor o’er him steal, As the young morning breeze that springs From the cool cave with balmy wings, Breathes round him laden with the scent Of bud and blossom dew-besprent? If many autumns here I spent With thee, my darling innocent, And Lakshmaṇ, I should never know The torture of the fires of woe, This varied scene so charms my sight, This mount so fills me with delight, Where flowers in wild profusion spring, And ripe fruits glow and sweet birds sing. My beauteous one, a double good Springs from my dwelling in the wood: Loosed is the bond my sire that tied, And Bharat too is gratified. My darling, dost thou feel with me Delight from every charm we see, Of which the mind and every sense Feel the enchanting influence? My fathers who have passed away, The royal saints, were wont to say, That life in woodland shades like this Secures a king immortal bliss. See, round the hill at random thrown, Huge masses lie of rugged stone Of every shape and many a hue, Yellow and white and red and blue. But all is fairer still by night: Each rock reflects a softer light, When the whole mount from foot to crest In robes of lambent flame is dressed; When from a million herbs a blaze Of their own luminous glory plays, And clothed in fire each deep ravine, Each pinnacle and crag is seen. Some parts the look of mansions wear, And others are as gardens fair, While others seem a massive block Of solid undivided rock. Behold those pleasant beds o’erlaid With lotus leaves, for lovers made, Where mountain birch and costus throw Cool shadows on the pair below. See where the lovers in their play Have cast their flowery wreaths away, And fruit and lotus buds that crowned Their brows lie trodden on the ground. North Kuru’s realm is fair to see, Vasvaukasárá,(371) Naliní,(372) But rich in fruit and blossom still More fair is Chitrakúṭa’s hill. Here shall the years appointed glide With thee, my beauty, by my side,   And Lakshmaṇ ever near; Here shall I live in all delight, Make my ancestral fame more bright, Tread in their path who walk aright,   And to my oath adhere.”




Canto XCV. Mandákiní.


Then Ráma, like the lotus eyed, Descended from the mountain side, And to the Maithil lady showed The lovely stream that softly flowed. And thus Ayodhyá’s lord addressed His bride, of dames the loveliest, Child of Videha’s king, her face Bright with the fair moon’s tender grace: “How sweetly glides, O darling, look, Mandákiní’s delightful brook, Adorned with islets, blossoms gay, And sárases and swans at play! The trees with which her banks are lined Show flowers and fruit of every kind: The match in radiant sheen is she Of King Kuvera’s Naliní.(373) My heart exults with pleasure new The shelving band and ford to view, Where gathering herds of thirsty deer Disturb the wave that ran so clear. Now look, those holy hermits mark In skins of deer and coats of bark; With twisted coils of matted hair, The reverend men are bathing there, And as they lift their arms on high The Lord of Day they glorify: These best of saints, my large-eyed spouse, Are constant to their sacred vows. The mountain dances while the trees Bend their proud summits to the breeze, And scatter many a flower and bud From branches that o’erhang the flood. There flows the stream like lucid pearl, Round islets here the currents whirl, And perfect saints from middle air Are flocking to the waters there. See, there lie flowers in many a heap From boughs the whistling breezes sweep, And others wafted by the gale Down the swift current dance and sail. Now see that pair of wild-fowl rise, Exulting with their joyful cries: Hark, darling, wafted from afar How soft their pleasant voices are. To gaze on Chitrakúṭa’s hill, To look upon this lovely rill, To bend mine eyes on thee, dear wife, Is sweeter than my city life. Come, bathe we in the pleasant rill Whose dancing waves are never still, Stirred by those beings pure from sin, The sanctities who bathe therein: Come, dearest, to the stream descend, Approach her as a darling friend, And dip thee in the silver flood Which lotuses and lilies stud. Let this fair hill Ayodhyá seem, Its silvan things her people deem, And let these waters as they flow Our own beloved Sarjú show. How blest, mine own dear love, am I; Thou, fond and true, art ever nigh, And duteous, faithful Lakshmaṇ stays Beside me, and my word obeys. Here every day I bathe me thrice, Fruit, honey, roots for food suffice, And ne’er my thoughts with longing stray To distant home or royal sway. For who this charming brook can see Where herds of roedeer wander free, And on the flowery-wooded brink Apes, elephants, and lions drink,   Nor feel all sorrow fly?” Thus eloquently spoke the pride Of Raghu’s children to his bride, And wandered happy by her side Where Chitrakúṭa azure-dyed   Uprears his peaks on high.




Canto XCVI. The Magic Shaft.(374)


Thus Ráma showed to Janak’s child The varied beauties of the wild, The hill, the brook and each fair spot, Then turned to seek their leafy cot. North of the mountain Ráma found A cavern in the sloping ground, Charming to view, its floor was strown With many a mass of ore and stone, In secret shadow far retired Where gay birds sang with joy inspired, And trees their graceful branches swayed With loads of blossom downward weighed. Soon as he saw the cave which took Each living heart and chained the look, Thus Ráma spoke to Sítá who Gazed wondering on the silvan view: “Does this fair cave beneath the height, Videhan lady, charm thy sight? Then let us resting here a while The languor of the way beguile. That block of stone so smooth and square Was set for thee to rest on there, And like a thriving Keśar tree This flowery shrub o’ershadows thee.” Thus Ráma spoke, and Janak’s child, By nature ever soft and mild, In tender words which love betrayed Her answer to the hero made: “O pride of Raghu’s children, still My pleasure is to do thy will. Enough for me thy wish to know: Far hast thou wandered to and fro.”

  Thus Sítá spake in gentle tone, And went obedient to the stone, Of perfect face and faultless limb Prepared to rest a while with him. And Ráma, as she thus replied, Turned to his spouse again and cried: “Thou seest, love, this flowery shade For silvan creatures’ pleasure made, How the gum streams from trees and plants Torn by the tusks of elephants! Through all the forest clear and high Resounds the shrill cicala’s cry. Hark how the kite above us moans, And calls her young in piteous tones; So may my hapless mother be Still mourning in her home for me. There mounted on that lofty Sál The loud Bhringráj(375) repeats his call: How sweetly now he tunes his throat Responsive to the Koïl’s note. Or else the bird that now has sung May be himself the Koïl’s young, Linked with such winning sweetness are The notes he pours irregular. See, round the blooming Mango clings That creeper with her tender rings, So in thy love, when none is near, Thine arms are thrown round me, my dear.”

  Thus in his joy he cried; and she, Sweet speaker, on her lover’s knee, Of faultless limb and perfect face, Grew closer to her lord’s embrace. Reclining in her husband’s arms, A goddess in her wealth of charms, She filled his loving breast anew With mighty joy that thrilled him through. His finger on the rock he laid, Which veins of sanguine ore displayed, And painted o’er his darling’s eyes The holy sign in mineral dyes. Bright on her brow the metal lay Like the young sun’s first gleaming ray, And showed her in her beauty fair As the soft light of morning’s air. Then from the Keśar’s laden tree He picked fair blossoms in his glee, And as he decked each lovely tress, His heart o’erflowed with happiness. So resting on that rocky seat A while they spent in pastime sweet, Then onward neath the shady boughs Went Ráma with his Maithil spouse. She roaming in the forest shade Where every kind of creature strayed Observed a monkey wandering near, And clung to Ráma’s arm in fear. The hero Ráma fondly laced His mighty arms around her waist, Consoled his beauty in her dread, And scared the Monkey till he fled. That holy mark of sanguine ore That gleamed on Sítá’s brow before, Shone by that close embrace impressed Upon the hero’s ample chest. Then Sítá, when the beast who led The monkey troop, afar had fled, Laughed loudly in light-hearted glee That mark on Ráma’s chest to see. A clump of bright Aśokas fired The forest in their bloom attired: The restless blossoms as they gleamed A host of threatening monkeys seemed. Then Sítá thus to Ráma cried, As longingly the flowers she eyed: “Pride of thy race, now let us go Where those Aśoka blossoms grow.” He on his darling’s pleasure bent With his fair goddess thither went And roamed delighted through the wood Where blossoming Aśokas stood, As Śiva with Queen Umá roves Through Himaván’s majestic groves. Bright with purpureal glow the pair Of happy lovers sported there, And each upon the other set A flower-inwoven coronet. There many a crown and chain they wove Of blooms from that Aśoka grove, And in their graceful sport the two Fresh beauty o’er the mountain threw. The lover let his love survey Each pleasant spot that round them lay, Then turned they to their green retreat Where all was garnished, gay, and neat. By brotherly affection led, Sumitrá’s son to meet them sped, And showed the labours of the day Done while his brother was away. There lay ten black-deer duly slain With arrows pure of poison stain, Piled in a mighty heap to dry, With many another carcass nigh. And Lakshmaṇ’s brother saw, o’erjoyed, The work that had his hands employed, Then to his consort thus he cried: “Now be the general gifts supplied.” Then Sítá, fairest beauty, placed The food for living things to taste, And set before the brothers meat And honey that the pair might eat. They ate the meal her hands supplied, Their lips with water purified: Then Janak’s daughter sat at last And duly made her own repast. The other venison, to be dried, Piled up in heaps was set aside, And Ráma told his wife to stay And drive the flocking crows away. Her husband saw her much distressed By one more bold than all the rest, Whose wings where’er he chose could fly, Now pierce the earth, now roam the sky. Then Ráma laughed to see her stirred To anger by the plaguing bird: Proud of his love the beauteous dame With burning rage was all aflame. Now here, now there, again, again She chased the crow, but all in vain, Enraging her, so quick to strike With beak and wing and claw alike: Then how the proud lip quivered, how The dark frown marked her angry brow! When Ráma saw her cheek aglow With passion, he rebuked the crow. But bold in impudence the bird, With no respect for Ráma’s word, Fearless again at Sítá flew: Then Ráma’s wrath to fury grew. The hero of the mighty arm Spoke o’er a shaft the mystic charm, Laid the dire weapon on his bow And launched it at the shameless crow. The bird, empowered by Gods to spring Through earth itself on rapid wing, Through the three worlds in terror fled Still followed by that arrow dread. Where’er he flew, now here now there, A cloud of weapons filled the air. Back to the high-souled prince he fled And bent at Ráma’s feet his head, And then, as Sítá looked, began His speech in accents of a man: “O pardon, and for pity’s sake Spare, Ráma, spare my life to take! Where’er I turn, where’er I flee, No shelter from this shaft I see.”

  The chieftain heard the crow entreat Helpless and prostrate at his feet, And while soft pity moved his breast, With wisest speech the bird addressed: “I took the troubled Sítá’s part, And furious anger filled my heart. Then on the string my arrow lay Charmed with a spell thy life to slay. Thou seekest now my feet, to crave Forgiveness and thy life to save. So shall thy prayer have due respect: The suppliant I must still protect. But ne’er in vain this dart may flee; Yield for thy life a part of thee, What portion of thy body, say, Shall this mine arrow rend away? Thus far, O bird, thus far alone On thee my pity may be shown. Forfeit a part thy life to buy: ’Tis better so to live than die.” Thus Ráma spoke: the bird of air Pondered his speech with anxious care, And wisely deemed it good to give One of his eyes that he might live. To Raghu’s son he made reply: “O Ráma, I will yield an eye. So let me in thy grace confide And live hereafter single-eyed.” Then Ráma charged the shaft, and lo, Full in the eye it smote the crow. And the Videhan lady gazed Upon the ruined eye amazed. The crow to Ráma humbly bent, Then where his fancy led he went. Ráma with Lakshmaṇ by his side With needful work was occupied.




Canto XCVII. Lakshman’s Anger.


Thus Ráma showed his love the rill Whose waters ran beneath the hill, Then resting on his mountain seat Refreshed her with the choicest meat. So there reposed the happy two: Then Bharat’s army nearer drew: Rose to the skies a dusty cloud, The sound of trampling feet was loud. The swelling roar of marching men Drove the roused tiger from his den, And scared amain the serpent race Flying to hole and hiding-place. The herds of deer in terror fled, The air was filled with birds o’erhead, The bear began to leave his tree, The monkey to the cave to flee. Wild elephants were all amazed As though the wood around them blazed. The lion oped his ponderous jaw, The buffalo looked round in awe. The prince, who heard the deafening sound, And saw the silvan creatures round Fly wildly startled from their rest, The glorious Lakshmaṇ thus addressed: “Sumitrá’s noble son most dear, Hark, Lakshmaṇ, what a roar I hear, The tumult of a coming crowd, Appalling, deafening, deep, and loud! The din that yet more fearful grows Scares elephants and buffaloes, Or frightened by the lions, deer Are flying through the wood in fear. I fain would know who seeks this place Comes prince or monarch for the chase? Or does some mighty beast of prey Frighten the silvan herds away? ’Tis hard to reach this mountain height, Yea, e’en for birds in airy flight. Then fain, O Lakshmaṇ, would I know What cause disturbs the forest so.”

  Lakshmaṇ in haste, the wood to view, Climbed a high Sál that near him grew, The forest all around he eyed, First gazing on the eastern side. Then northward when his eyes he bent He saw a mighty armament Of elephants, and cars, and horse, And men on foot, a mingled force, And banners waving in the breeze, And spoke to Ráma words like these: “Quick, quick, my lord, put out the fire, Let Sítá to the cave retire. Thy coat of mail around thee throw, Prepare thine arrows and thy bow.”

  In eager haste thus Lakshmaṇ cried, And Ráma, lion lord, replied: “Still closer be the army scanned, And say who leads the warlike band.” Lakshmaṇ his answer thus returned, As furious rage within him burned, Exciting him like kindled fire To scorch the army in his ire: “’Tis Bharat: he has made the throne By consecrating rites his own: To gain the whole dominion thus He comes in arms to slaughter us. I mark tree-high upon his car His flagstaff of the Kovidár,(376) I see his glittering banner glance, I see his chivalry advance: I see his eager warriors shine On elephants in lengthened line. Now grasp we each the shafts and bow, And higher up the mountain go. Or in this place, O hero, stand With weapons in each ready hand. Perhaps beneath our might may fall This leader of the standard tall, And Bharat I this day may see Who brought this mighty woe on thee, Sítá, and me, who drove away My brother from the royal sway. Bharat our foe at length is nigh, And by this hand shall surely die: Brother, I see no sin at all If Bharat by my weapon fall. No fault is his who slays the foe Whose hand was first to strike the blow: With Bharat now the crime begins Who against thee and duty sins. The queen athirst for royal sway Will see her darling son to-day Fall by this hand, like some fair tree Struck by an elephant, slain by me. Kaikeyí’s self shall perish too With kith and kin and retinue, And earth by my avenging deed Shall from this mass of sin be freed. This day my wrath, too long restrained, Shall fall upon the foe, unchained, Mad as the kindled flame that speeds Destroying through the grass and reeds. This day mine arrows keen and fierce The bodies of the foe shall pierce: The woods on Chitrakúṭa’s side Shall run with torrents crimson-dyed. The wandering beasts of prey shall feed On heart-cleft elephant and steed, And drag to mountain caves away The bodies that my arrows slay. Doubt not that Bharat and his train Shall in this mighty wood be slain: So shall I pay the debt my bow And these my deadly arrows owe.”




Canto XCVIII. Lakshman Calmed.


Then Ráma nobly calm allayed The wrath that Lakshmaṇ’s bosom swayed: “What need have we the sword to wield, To bend the bow or lift the shield, If Bharat brave, and wise, and good, Himself has sought this sheltering wood? I sware my father’s will to do, And if I now my brother slew What gain in kingship should I find, Despised and scorned by all mankind? Believe me, e’en as I would shrink From poisoned meat or deadly drink, No power or treasure would I win By fall of friend or kith or kin. Brother, believe the words I speak: For your dear sakes alone I seek Duty and pleasure, wealth and gain: A holy life, a happy reign. If royal sway my heart desires, My brothers’ weal the wish inspires: Their bliss and safety is my care, By this uplifted bow I swear. ’Twere not so hard for me to gain This broad land girdled by the main, But even Indra’s royal might Should ne’er be mine in duty’s spite. If any bliss my soul can see Deprived of dear Śatrughna, thee, And Bharat, may the flame destroy With ashy gloom the selfish joy. Far dearer than this life of mine, Knowing the custom of our line, His heart with fond affection fraught, Bharat Ayodhyá’s town resought And hearing when he came that I, With thee and Sítá, forced to fly With matted hair and hermit dress Am wandering in the wilderness. While grief his troubled senses storms, And tender love his bosom warms, From every thought of evil clear, Is come to meet his brother here. Some grievous words perchance he spoke Kaikeyí’s anger to provoke, Then won the king, and comes to lay Before my feet the royal sway. Hither, methinks, in season due Comes Bharat for an interview, Nor in his secret heart has he One evil thought ’gainst thee or me. What has he done ere now, reflect! How failed in love or due respect To make thee doubt his faith and lay This evil to his charge to-day? Thou shouldst not join with Bharat’s name So harsh a speech and idle blame. The blows thy tongue at Bharat deals, My sympathizing bosom feels. How, urged by stress of any ill, Should sons their father’s life-blood spill, Or brother slay in impious strife A brother dearer than his life? If thou these cruel words hast said By strong desire of empire led, My brother Bharat will I pray To give to thee the kingly sway. “Give him the realm,” my speech shall be, And Bharat will, methinks, agree.”

  Thus spoke the prince whose chief delight Was duty, and to aid the right: And Lakshmaṇ keenly felt the blame, And shrank within himself for shame: And then his answer thus returned, With downcast eye and cheek that burned: “Brother, I ween, to see thy face Our sire himself has sought this place.” Thus Lakshmaṇ spoke and stood ashamed, And Ráma saw and thus exclaimed: “It is the strong-armed monarch: he Is come, methinks, his sons to see, To bid us both the forest quit For joys for which he deems us fit: He thinks on all our care and pain, And now would lead us home again. My glorious father hence will bear Sítá who claims all tender care. I see two coursers fleet as storms, Of noble breed and lovely forms. I see the beast of mountain size Who bears the king our father wise, The aged Victor, march this way In front of all the armed array. But doubt and fear within me rise, For when I look with eager eyes I see no white umbrella spread, World-famous, o’er the royal head. Now, Lakshmaṇ, from the tree descend, And to my words attention lend.”

  Thus spoke the pious prince: and he Descended from the lofty tree, And reverent hand to hand applied, Stood humbly by his brother’s side.

  The host, compelled by Bharat’s care, The wood from trampling feet to spare, Dense crowding half a league each way Encamped around the mountain lay. Below the tall hill’s shelving side Gleamed the bright army far and wide   Spread