[ADA-ramayana  —  part 3 of 12, continuation of part 2]
============================================================

And none of all the warders checked His entrance for their great respect Of him well known, in place so high, Still fain their king to gratify. He stood beside the royal chief, Unwitting of his deadly grief, And with sweet words began to sing The praises of his lord and king: “As, when the sun begins to rise, The sparkling sea delights our eyes, Wake, calm with gentle soul, and thus Give rapture, mighty King, to us. As Mátali(279) this selfsame hour Sang lauds of old to Indra’s power, When he the Titan hosts o’erthrew, So hymn I thee with praises due. The Vedas, with their kindred lore, Brahmá their soul-born Lord adore, With all the doctrines of the wise, And bid him, as I bid thee, rise. As, with the moon, the Lord of Day Wakes with the splendour of his ray Prolific Earth, who neath him lies, So, mighty King, I bid thee rise. With blissful words, O Lord of men, Rise, radiant in thy form, as when The sun ascending darts his light From Meru’s everlasting height. May Śiva, Agni, Sun, and Moon Bestow on thee each choicest boon, Kuvera, Varuṇa, Indra bless Kakutstha’s son with all success. Awake, the holy night is fled, The happy light abroad is spread; Awake, O best of kings, and share The glorious task that claims thy care. The holy sage Vaśishṭha waits, With all his Bráhmans, at the gate. Give thy decree, without delay, To consecrate thy son today. As armies, by no captain led, As flocks that feed unshepherded, Such is the fortune of a state Without a king and desolate.”

  Such were the words the bard addressed, With weight of sage advice impressed; And, as he heard, the hapless king Felt deeper yet his sorrow’s sting. At length, all joy and comfort fled, He raised his eyes with weeping red, And, mournful for his Ráma’s sake, The good and glorious monarch spake: “Why seek with idle praise to greet The wretch for whom no praise is meet? Thy words mine aching bosom tear, And plunge me deeper in despair.”

  Sumantra heard the sad reply, And saw his master’s tearful eye. With reverent palm to palm applied He drew a little space aside. Then, as the king, with misery weak, With vain endeavour strove to speak, Kaikeyí, skilled in plot and plan, To sage Sumantra thus began: “The king, absorbed in joyful thought For his dear son, no rest has sought: Sleepless to him the night has past, And now o’erwatched he sinks at last. Then go, Sumantra, and with speed The glorious Ráma hither lead: Go, as I pray, nor longer wait; No time is this to hesitate.”   “How can I go, O Lady fair, Unless my lord his will declare?”   “Fain would I see him,” cried the king, “Quick, quick, my beauteous Ráma bring.”   Then rose the happy thought to cheer The bosom of the charioteer, “The king, I ween, of pious mind, The consecration has designed.” Sumantra for his wisdom famed, Delighted with the thought he framed, From the calm chamber, like a bay Of crowded ocean, took his way.   He turned his face to neither side,   But forth he hurried straight; Only a little while he eyed The guards who kept the gate. He saw in front a gathered crowd   Of men of every class, Who, parting as he came, allowed   The charioteer to pass.




Canto XV. The Preparations.


  There slept the Bráhmans, deeply read In Scripture, till the night had fled; Then, with the royal chaplains, they Took each his place in long array. There gathered fast the chiefs of trade, Nor peer nor captain long delayed, Assembling all in order due The consecrating rite to view.

  The morning dawned with cloudless ray On Pushya’s high auspicious day, And Cancer with benignant power Looked down on Ráma’s natal hour. The twice-born chiefs, with zealous heed, Made ready what the rite would need. The well-wrought throne of holy wood And golden urns in order stood. There was the royal car whereon A tiger’s skin resplendent shone; There water, brought for sprinkling thence Where, in their sacred confluence, Blend Jumná’s waves with Gangá’s tide, From many a holy flood beside, From brook and fountain far and near, From pool and river, sea and mere. And there were honey, curd, and oil, Parched rice and grass, the garden’s spoil, Fresh milk, eight girls in bright attire, An elephant with eyes of fire; And urns of gold and silver made, With milky branches overlaid, All brimming from each sacred flood, And decked with many a lotus bud. And dancing-women fair and free, Gay with their gems, were there to see, Who stood in bright apparel by With lovely brow and witching eye. White flashed the jewelled chouri there, And shone like moonbeams through the air; The white umbrella overhead A pale and moonlike lustre shed, Wont in pure splendour to precede, And in such rites the pomp to lead. There stood the charger by the side Of the great bull of snow-white hide; There was all music soft and loud, And bards and minstrels swelled the crowd. For now the monarch bade combine Each custom of his ancient line With every rite Ayodhyá’s state Observed, her kings to consecrate.

  Then, summoned by the king’s behest, The multitudes together pressed, And, missing still the royal sire, Began, impatient, to inquire: “Who to our lord will tidings bear That all his people throng the square? Where is the king? the sun is bright, And all is ready for the rite.”

  As thus they spoke, Sumantra, tried In counsel, to the chiefs replied, Gathered from lands on every side: “To Ráma’s house I swiftly drave, For so the king his mandate gave. Our aged lord and Ráma too In honour high hold all of you: I in your words (be long your days!) Will ask him why he thus delays.”

  Thus spoke the peer in Scripture read, And to the ladies’ bower he sped. Quick through the gates Sumantra hied, Which access ne’er to him denied. Behind the curtained screen he drew, Which veiled the chamber from the view. In benediction loud he raised His voice, and thus the monarch praised: “Sun, Moon, Kuvera, Śiva bless Kakutstha’s son with high success! The Lords of air, flood, fire decree The victory, my King, to thee! The holy night has past away, Auspicious shines the morning’s ray. Rise, Lord of men, thy part to take In the great rite. Awake! awake! Bráhmans and captains, chiefs of trade, All wait in festive garb arrayed; For thee they look with eager eyes: O Raghu’s son, awake! arise.”

  To him in holy Scripture read, Who hailed him thus, the monarch said, Upraising from his sleep his head: “Go, Ráma, hither lead as thou Wast ordered by the queen but now. Come, tell me why my mandate laid Upon thee thus is disobeyed. Away! and Ráma hither bring; I sleep not: make no tarrying.”

  Thus gave the king command anew: Sumantra from his lord withdrew; With head in lowly reverence bent, And filled with thoughts of joy, he went. The royal street he traversed, where Waved flag and pennon to the air, And, as with joy the car he drove, He let his eyes delighted rove. On every side, where’er he came, He heard glad words, their theme the same, As in their joy the gathered folk Of Ráma and the throning spoke. Then saw he Ráma’s palace bright And vast as Mount Kailása’s height, That glorious in its beauty showed As Indra’s own supreme abode: With folding doors both high and wide; With hundred porches beautified: Where golden statues towering rose O’er gemmed and coralled porticoes. Bright like a cave in Meru’s side, Or clouds through Autumn’s sky that ride: Festooned with length of bloomy twine, Flashing with pearls and jewels’ shine, While sandal-wood and aloe lent The mingled riches of their scent; With all the odorous sweets that fill The breezy heights of Dardar’s hill. There by the gate the Sáras screamed, And shrill-toned peacocks’ plumage gleamed. Its floors with deftest art inlaid, Its sculptured wolves in gold arrayed, With its bright sheen the palace took The mind of man and chained the look, For like the sun and moon it glowed, And mocked Kuvera’s loved abode. Circling the walls a crowd he viewed Who stood in reverent attitude, With throngs of countrymen who sought Acceptance of the gifts they brought. The elephant was stationed there, Appointed Ráma’s self to bear; Adorned with pearls, his brow and cheek Were sandal-dyed in many a streak, While he, in stature, bulk, and pride, With Indra’s own Airávat(280) vied. Sumantra, borne by coursers fleet, Flashing a radiance o’er the street,   To Ráma’s palace flew, And all who lined the royal road, Or thronged the prince’s rich abode,   Rejoiced as near he drew. And with delight his bosom swelled As onward still his course he held Through many a sumptuous court Like Indra’s palace nobly made, Where peacocks revelled in the shade,   And beasts of silvan sort. Through many a hall and chamber wide, That with Kailása’s splendour vied.   Or mansions of the Blest, While Ráma’s friends, beloved and tried, Before his coming stepped aside,   Still on Sumantra pressed. He reached the chamber door, where stood Around his followers young and good, Bard, minstrel, charioteer, Well skilled the tuneful chords to sweep, With soothing strain to lull to sleep,   Or laud their master dear. Then, like a dolphin darting through Unfathomed depths of ocean’s blue   With store of jewels decked, Through crowded halls that rock-like rose, Or as proud hills where clouds repose,   Sumantra sped unchecked— Halls like the glittering domes on high Reared for the dwellers of the sky   By heavenly architect.




Canto XVI. Ráma Summoned.


So through the crowded inner door Sumantra, skilled in ancient lore, On to the private chambers pressed Which stood apart from all the rest. There youthful warriors, true and bold, Whose ears were ringed with polished gold, All armed with trusty bows and darts, Watched with devoted eyes and hearts. And hoary men, a faithful train, Whose aged hands held staves of cane, The ladies’ guard, apparelled fair In red attire, were stationed there. Soon as they saw Sumantra nigh, Each longed his lord to gratify, And from his seat beside the door Up sprang each ancient servitor. Then to the warders quickly cried The skilled Sumantra, void of pride: “Tell Ráma that the charioteer Sumantra waits for audience here.” The ancient men with one accord Seeking the pleasure of their lord, Passing with speed the chamber door To Ráma’s ear the message bore. Forthwith the prince with duteous heed Called in the messenger with speed, For ’twas his sire’s command, he knew, That sent him for the interview. Like Lord Kuvera, well arrayed,   He pressed a couch of gold, Wherefrom a covering of brocade   Hung down in many a fold. Oil and the sandal’s fragrant dust   Had tinged his body o’er Dark as the stream the spearman’s thrust   Drains from the wounded boar. Him Sítá watched with tender care,   A chouri in her hand, As Chitrá,(281) ever fond in fair,   Beside the Moon will stand. Him glorious with unborrowed light, A liberal lord, of sunlike might, Sumantra hailed in words like these, Well skilled in gentle courtesies, As, with joined hands in reverence raised, Upon the beauteous prince he gazed: “Happy Kauśalyá! Blest is she, The Mother of a son like thee. Now rise, O Ráma, speed away. Go to thy sire without delay: For he and Queen Kaikeyí seek An interview with thee to speak.”

  The lion-lord of men, the best Of splendid heroes, thus addressed, To Sítá spake with joyful cheer: “The king and queen, my lady dear, Touching the throning, for my sake Some salutary counsel take. The lady of the full black eye Would fain her husband gratify, And, all his purpose understood, Counsels the monarch to my good. A happy fate is mine, I ween, When he, consulting with his queen, Sumantra on this charge, intent Upon my gain and good, has sent. An envoy of so noble sort Well suits the splendour of the court. The consecration rite this day Will join me in imperial sway. To meet the lord of earth, for so His order bids me, I will go. Thou, lady, here in comfort stay, And with thy maidens rest or play.”

  Thus Ráma spake. For meet reply The lady of the large black eye Attended to the door her lord, And blessings on his head implored: “The majesty and royal state Which holy Bráhmans venerate, The consecration and the rite Which sanctifies the ruler’s might, And all imperial powers should be Thine by thy father’s high decree, As He, the worlds who formed and planned, The kingship gave to Indra’s hand. Then shall mine eyes my king adore When lustral rites and fast are o’er, And black deer’s skin and roebuck’s horn Thy lordly limbs and hand adorn. May He whose hands the thunder wield Be in the east thy guard and shield; May Yáma’s care the south befriend, And Varuṇ’s arm the west defend; And let Kuvera, Lord of Gold, The north with firm protection hold.”

  Then Ráma spoke a kind farewell, And hailed the blessings as they fell From Sítá’s gentle lips; and then, As a young lion from his den Descends the mountain’s stony side, So from the hall the hero hied. First Lakshmaṇ at the door he viewed Who stood in reverent attitude, Then to the central court he pressed Where watched the friends who loved him best. To all his dear companions there He gave kind looks and greeting fair. On to the lofty car that glowed Like fire the royal tiger strode. Bright as himself its silver shone: A tiger’s skin was laid thereon. With cloudlike thunder, as it rolled, It flashed with gems and burnished gold, And, like the sun’s meridian blaze, Blinded the eye that none could gaze. Like youthful elephants, tall and strong, Fleet coursers whirled the car along: In such a car the Thousand-eyed Borne by swift horses loves to ride. So like Parjanya,(282) when he flies Thundering through the autumn skies, The hero from the palace sped, As leaves the moon some cloud o’erhead. Still close to Ráma Lakshmaṇ kept, Behind him to the car he leapt, And, watching with fraternal care, Waved the long chouri’s silver hair, As from the palace gate he came Up rose the tumult of acclaim. While loud huzza and jubilant shout Pealed from the gathered myriads out. Then elephants, like mountains vast, And steeds who all their kind surpassed, Followed their lord by hundreds, nay By thousands, led in long array. First marched a band of warriors trained, With sandal dust and aloe stained; Well armed was each with sword and bow, And every breast with hope aglow, And ever, as they onward went,   Shouts from the warrior train, And every sweet-toned instrument   Prolonged the minstrel strain. On passed the tamer of his foes, While well clad dames, in crowded rows, Each chamber lattice thronged to view, And chaplets on the hero threw. Then all, of peerless face and limb, Sang Ráma’s praise for love of him, And blent their voices, soft and sweet, From palace high and crowded street: “Now, sure, Kauśalyá’s heart must swell To see the son she loves so well, Thee Ráma, thee, her joy and pride, Triumphant o’er the realm preside.” Then—for they knew his bride most fair Of all who part the soft dark hair, His love, his life, possessed the whole Of her young hero’s heart and soul:— “Be sure the lady’s fate repays Some mighty vow of ancient days,(283) For blest with Ráma’s love is she As, with the Moon’s, sweet Rohiní.”(284)

  Such were the witching words that came From lips of many a peerless dame Crowding the palace roofs to greet The hero as he gained the street.




Canto XVII. Ráma’s Approach.


As Ráma, rendering blithe and gay His loving friends, pursued his way, He saw on either hand a press Of mingled people numberless. The royal street he traversed, where Incense of aloe filled the air, Where rose high palaces, that vied With paly clouds, on either side; With flowers of myriad colours graced. And food for every varied taste, Bright as the glowing path o’erhead Which feet of Gods celestial tread, Loud benedictions, sweet to hear, From countless voices soothed his ear. While he to each gave due salute His place and dignity to suit: “Be thou,” the joyful people cried, “Be thou our guardian, lord and guide. Throned and anointed king to-day, Thy feet set forth upon the way Wherein, each honoured as a God, Thy fathers and forefathers trod. Thy sire and his have graced the throne, And loving care to us have shown: Thus blest shall we and ours remain, Yea still more blest in Ráma’s reign. No more of dainty fare we need, And but one cherished object heed, That we may see our prince today Invested with imperial sway.”

  Such were the words and pleasant speech That Ráma heard, unmoved, from each Of the dear friends around him spread, As onward through the street he sped, For none could turn his eye or thought From the dear form his glances sought, With fruitless ardour forward cast Even when Raghu’s son had past. And he who saw not Ráma nigh, Nor caught a look from Ráma’s eye, A mark for scorn and general blame, Reproached himself in bitter shame. For to each class his equal mind With sympathy and love inclined Most fully of the princely four, So greatest love to him they bore.

  His circling course the hero bent Round shrine and altar, reverent, Round homes of Gods, where cross-roads met, Where many a sacred tree was set. Near to his father’s house he drew Like Indra’s beautiful to view, And with the light his glory gave Within the royal palace drave. Through three broad courts, where bowmen kept Their watch and ward, his coursers swept, Then through the two remaining went On foot the prince preëminent. Through all the courts the hero passed, And gained the ladies’ bower at last; Then through the door alone withdrew, And left without his retinue. When thus the monarch’s noble boy   Had gone his sire to meet, The multitude, elate with joy,   Stood watching in the street, And his return with eager eyes   Expected at the gates, As for his darling moon to rise   The King of Rivers(285) waits.




Canto XVIII. The Sentence.


With hopeless eye and pallid mien There sat the monarch with the queen. His father’s feet with reverence due He clasped, and touched Kaikeyí’s too. The king, with eyes still brimming o’er, Cried Ráma! and could do no more. His voice was choked, his eye was dim, He could not speak or look on him. Then sudden fear made Ráma shake As though his foot had roused a snake, Soon as his eyes had seen the change So mournful, terrible, and strange. For there his reason well-nigh fled, Sighing, with soul disquieted,   To torturing pangs a prey, Dismayed, despairing, and distraught, In a fierce whirl of wildering thought   The hapless monarch lay, Like Ocean wave-engarlanded Storm-driven from his tranquil bed,   The Sun-God in eclipse, Or like a holy seer, heart-stirred With anguish, when a lying word   Has passed his heedless lips. The sight of his dear father, pained With woe and misery unexplained   Filled Ráma with unrest, As Ocean’s pulses rise and swell When the great moon he loves so well   Shines full upon his breast. So grieving for his father’s sake, To his own heart the hero spake: “Why will the king my sire to-day No kindly word of greeting say? At other times, though wroth he be, His eyes grow calm that look on me. Then why does anguish wring his brow To see his well-beloved now?” Sick and perplexed, distraught with woe, To Queen Kaikeyí bowing low, While pallor o’er his bright cheek spread, With humble reverence he said: “What have I done, unknown, amiss To make my father wroth like this? Declare it, O dear Queen, and win His pardon for my heedless sin. Why is the sire I ever find Filled with all love to-day unkind? With eyes cast down and pallid cheek This day alone he will not speak. Or lies he prostrate neath the blow Of fierce disease or sudden woe? For all our bliss is dashed with pain, And joy unmixt is hard to gain. Does stroke of evil fortune smite Dear Bharat, charming to the sight, Or on the brave Śatrughna fall, Or consorts, for he loves them all? Against his words when I rebel, Or fail to please the monarch well, When deeds of mine his soul offend, That hour I pray my life may end. How should a man to him who gave His being and his life behave? The sire to whom he owes his birth Should be his deity on earth. Hast thou, by pride and folly moved, With bitter taunt the king reproved? Has scorn of thine or cruel jest To passion stirred his gentle breast? Speak truly, Queen, that I may know What cause has changed the monarch so.”

  Thus by the high-souled prince addressed, Of Raghu’s sons the chief and best, She cast all ruth and shame aside, And bold with greedy words replied: “Not wrath, O Ráma, stirs the king, Nor misery stabs with sudden sting; One thought that fills his soul has he, But dares not speak for fear of thee. Thou art so dear, his lips refrain From words that might his darling pain. But thou, as duty bids, must still The promise of thy sire fulfil. He who to me in days gone by Vouchsafed a boon with honours high, Dares now, a king, his word regret, And caitiff-like disowns the debt. The lord of men his promise gave To grant the boon that I might crave, And now a bridge would idly throw When the dried stream has ceased to flow. His faith the monarch must not break In wrath, or e’en for thy dear sake. From faith, as well the righteous know, Our virtue and our merits flow. Now, be they good or be they ill, Do thou thy father’s words fulfil: Swear that his promise shall not fail, And I will tell thee all the tale. Yes, Ráma, when I hear that thou Hast bound thee by thy father’s vow, Then, not till then, my lips shall speak, Nor will he tell what boon I seek.”

  He heard, and with a troubled breast This answer to the queen addressed: “Ah me, dear lady, canst thou deem That words like these thy lips beseem? I, at the bidding of my sire, Would cast my body to the fire, A deadly draught of poison drink, Or in the waves of ocean sink: If he command, it shall be done,— My father and my king in one. Then speak and let me know the thing So longed for by my lord the king. It shall be done: let this suffice; Ráma ne’er makes a promise twice.”

  He ended. To the princely youth Who loved the right and spoke the truth, Cruel, abominable came The answer of the ruthless dame: “When Gods and Titans fought of yore, Transfixed with darts and bathed in gore Two boons to me thy father gave For the dear life ’twas mine to save. Of him I claim the ancient debt, That Bharat on the throne be set, And thou, O Ráma, go this day To Daṇḍak forest far away. Now, Ráma, if thou wilt maintain Thy father’s faith without a stain, And thine own truth and honour clear, Then, best of men, my bidding hear. Do thou thy father’s word obey, Nor from the pledge he gave me stray. Thy life in Daṇḍak forest spend Till nine long years and five shall end. Upon my Bharat’s princely head Let consecrating drops be shed, With all the royal pomp for thee Made ready by the king’s decree. Seek Daṇḍak forest and resign Rites that would make the empire thine, For twice seven years of exile wear The coat of bark and matted hair. Then in thy stead let Bharat reign Lord of his royal sire’s domain, Rich in the fairest gems that shine, Cars, elephants, and steeds, and kine. The monarch mourns thy altered fate And vails his brow compassionate: Bowed down by bitter grief he lies And dares not lift to thine his eyes. Obey his word: be firm and brave, And with great truth the monarch save.”   While thus with cruel words she spoke,     No grief the noble youth betrayed; But forth the father’s anguish broke,   At his dear Ráma’s lot dismayed.




Canto XIX. Ráma’s Promise.


Calm and unmoved by threatened woe The noble conqueror of the foe Answered the cruel words she spoke, Nor quailed beneath the murderous stroke:

  “Yea, for my father’s promise sake I to the wood my way will take, And dwell a lonely exile there In hermit dress with matted hair. One thing alone I fain would learn, Why is the king this day so stern? Why is the scourge of foes so cold, Nor gives me greeting as of old? Now let not anger flush thy cheek: Before thy face the truth I speak, In hermit’s coat with matted hair To the wild wood will I repair. How can I fail his will to do, Friend, master, grateful sovereign too? One only pang consumes my breast: That his own lips have not expressed His will, nor made his longing known That Bharat should ascend the throne. To Bharat I would yield my wife, My realm and wealth, mine own dear life, Unasked I fain would yield them all: More gladly at my father’s call, More gladly when the gift may free His honour and bring joy to thee. Thus, lady, his sad heart release From the sore shame, and give him peace. But tell me, O, I pray thee, why The lord of men, with downcast eye, Lies prostrate thus, and one by one Down his pale cheek the tear-drops run. Let couriers to thy father speed On horses of the swiftest breed, And, by the mandate of the king, Thy Bharat to his presence bring. My father’s words I will not stay To question, but this very day To Daṇḍak’s pathless wild will fare, For twice seven years an exile there.”

  When Ráma thus had made reply Kaikeyí’s heart with joy beat high. She, trusting to the pledge she held, The youth’s departure thus impelled: “’Tis well. Be messengers despatched On coursers ne’er for fleetness matched, To seek my father’s home and lead My Bharat back with all their speed. And, Ráma, as I ween that thou Wilt scarce endure to linger now, So surely it were wise and good This hour to journey to the wood. And if, with shame cast down and weak, No word to thee the king can speak, Forgive, and from thy mind dismiss A trifle in an hour like this. But till thy feet in rapid haste Have left the city for the waste, And to the distant forest fled, He will not bathe nor call for bread.”

  “Woe! woe!” from the sad monarch burst, In surging floods of grief immersed; Then swooning, with his wits astray, Upon the gold-wrought couch he lay, And Ráma raised the aged king: But the stern queen, unpitying, Checked not her needless words, nor spared The hero for all speed prepared, But urged him with her bitter tongue, Like a good horse with lashes stung, She spoke her shameful speech. Serene He heard the fury of the queen, And to her words so vile and dread Gently, unmoved in mind, he said: “I would not in this world remain A grovelling thrall to paltry gain, But duty’s path would fain pursue, True as the saints themselves are true. From death itself I would not fly My father’s wish to gratify, What deed soe’er his loving son May do to please him, think it done. Amid all duties, Queen, I count This duty first and paramount, That sons, obedient, aye fulfil Their honoured fathers’ word and will. Without his word, if thou decree, Forth to the forest will I flee, And there shall fourteen years be spent Mid lonely wilds in banishment. Methinks thou couldst not hope to find One spark of virtue in my mind, If thou, whose wish is still my lord, Hast for this grace the king implored. This day I go, but, ere we part, Must cheer my Sítá’s tender heart, To my dear mother bid farewell; Then to the woods, a while to dwell. With thee, O Queen, the care must rest That Bharat hear his sire’s behest, And guard the land with righteous sway, For such the law that lives for aye.”

  In speechless woe the father heard, Wept with loud cries, but spoke no word. Then Ráma touched his senseless feet, And hers, for honour most unmeet; Round both his circling steps he bent, Then from the bower the hero went. Soon as he reached the gate he found His dear companions gathered round. Behind him came Sumitrá’s child With weeping eyes so sad and wild. Then saw he all that rich array Of vases for the glorious day. Round them with reverent stops he paced, Nor vailed his eye, nor moved in haste. The loss of empire could not dim The glory that encompassed him. So will the Lord of Cooling Rays(286) On whom the world delights to gaze, Through the great love of all retain Sweet splendour in the time of wane. Now to the exile’s lot resigned He left the rule of earth behind: As though all worldly cares he spurned No trouble was in him discerned. The chouries that for kings are used, And white umbrella, he refused, Dismissed his chariot and his men, And every friend and citizen. He ruled his senses, nor betrayed The grief that on his bosom weighed, And thus his mother’s mansion sought To tell the mournful news he brought. Nor could the gay-clad people there Who flocked round Ráma true and fair, One sign of altered fortune trace Upon the splendid hero’s face. Nor had the chieftain, mighty-armed, Lost the bright look all hearts that charmed, As e’en from autumn moons is thrown A splendour which is all their own. With his sweet voice the hero spoke Saluting all the gathered folk, Then righteous-souled and great in fame Close to his mother’s house he came. Lakshmaṇ the brave, his brother’s peer In princely virtues, followed near, Sore troubled, but resolved to show No token of his secret woe. Thus to the palace Ráma went   Where all were gay with hope and joy; But well he knew the dire event   That hope would mar, that bliss destroy. So to his grief he would not yield   Lest the sad change their hearts might rend, And, the dread tiding unrevealed,   Spared from the blow each faithful friend.




Canto XX. Kausalyá’s Lament.


But in the monarch’s palace, when Sped from the bower that lord of men, Up from the weeping women went A mighty wail and wild lament: “Ah, he who ever freely did His duty ere his sire could bid, Our refuge and our sure defence, This day will go an exile hence, He on Kauśalyá loves to wait Most tender and affectionate, And as he treats his mother, thus From childhood has he treated us. On themes that sting he will not speak, And when reviled is calm and meek. He soothes the angry, heals offence: He goes to-day an exile hence. Our lord the king is most unwise, And looks on life with doting eyes, Who in his folly casts away The world’s protection, hope, and stay.”

  Thus in their woe, like kine bereaved Of their young calves,(287) the ladies grieved, And ever as they wept and wailed With keen reproach the king assailed. Their lamentation, mixed with tears, Smote with new grief the monarch’s ears, Who, burnt with woe too great to bear, Fell on his couch and fainted there.

  Then Ráma, smitten with the pain His heaving heart could scarce restrain, Groaned like an elephant and strode With Lakshmaṇ to the queen’s abode. A warder there, whose hoary eld In honour high by all was held, Guarding the mansion, sat before The portal, girt with many more. Swift to their feet the warders sprang, And loud the acclamation rang, Hail, Ráma! as to him they bent, Of victor chiefs preëminent. One court he passed, and in the next Saw, masters of each Veda text, A crowd of Bráhmans, good and sage, Dear to the king for lore and age. To these he bowed his reverent head, Thence to the court beyond he sped. Old dames and tender girls, their care To keep the doors, were stationed there. And all, when Ráma came in view, Delighted to the chamber flew, To bear to Queen Kauśalyá’s ear The tidings that she loved to hear. The queen, on rites and prayer intent, In careful watch the night had spent, And at the dawn, her son to aid, To Vishṇu holy offerings made. Firm in her vows, serenely glad, In robes of spotless linen clad, As texts prescribe, with grace implored, Her offerings in the fire she poured. Within her splendid bower he came, And saw her feed the sacred flame. There oil, and grain, and vases stood, With wreaths, and curds, and cates, and wood, And milk, and sesamum, and rice, The elements of sacrifice. She, worn and pale with many a fast And midnight hours in vigil past, In robes of purest white arrayed, To Lakshmí Queen drink-offerings paid. So long away, she flew to meet   The darling of her soul: So runs a mare with eager feet   To welcome back her foal. He with his firm support upheld   The queen, as near she drew, And, by maternal love impelled,   Her arms around him threw. Her hero son, her matchless boy   She kissed upon the head: She blessed him in her pride and joy   With tender words, and said: “Be like thy royal sires of old, The nobly good, the lofty-souled! Their lengthened days and fame be thine, And virtue, as beseems thy line! The pious king, thy father, see True to his promise made to thee: That truth thy sire this day will show, And regent’s power on thee bestow.”

  She spoke. He took the proffered seat, And as she pressed her son to eat, Raised reverent bands, and, touched with shame, Made answer to the royal dame: “Dear lady, thou hast yet to know That danger threats, and heavy woe: A grief that will with sore distress On Sítá, thee, and Lakshmaṇ press. What need of seats have such as I? This day to Daṇḍak wood I fly. The hour is come, a time, unmeet For silken couch and gilded seat. I must to lonely wilds repair, Abstain from flesh, and living there On roots, fruit, honey, hermit’s food, Pass twice seven years in solitude. To Bharat’s hand the king will yield The regent power I thought to wield, And me, a hermit, will he send My days in Daṇḍak wood to spend.”

  As when the woodman’s axe has lopped A Śal branch in the grove, she dropped: So from the skies a Goddess falls Ejected from her radiant halls.

  When Ráma saw her lying low, Prostrate by too severe a blow, Around her form his arms he wound And raised her fainting from the ground. His hand upheld her like a mare Who feels her load too sore to bear, And sinks upon the way o’ertoiled, And all her limbs with dust are soiled. He soothed her in her wild distress With loving touch and soft caress. She, meet for highest fortune, eyed The hero watching by her side, And thus, while Lakshmaṇ bent to hear, Addressed her son with many a tear! “If, Ráma, thou had ne’er been born My child to make thy mother mourn, Though reft of joy, a childless queen, Such woe as this I ne’er had seen. Though to the childless wife there clings One sorrow armed with keenest stings, “No child have I: no child have I,” No second misery prompts the sigh. When long I sought, alas, in vain, My husband’s love and bliss to gain, In Ráma all my hopes I set And dreamed I might be happy yet. I, of the consorts first and best, Must bear my rivals’ taunt and jest, And brook, though better far than they, The soul distressing words they say. What woman can be doomed to pine In misery more sore than mine, Whose hopeless days must still be spent In grief that ends not and lament? They scorned me when my son was nigh; When he is banished I must die. Me, whom my husband never prized, Kaikeyí’s retinue despised With boundless insolence, though she Tops not in rank nor equals me. And they who do me service yet, Nor old allegiance quite forget, Whene’er they see Kaikeyí’s son, With silent lips my glances shun. How, O my darling, shall I brook Each menace of Kaikeyí’s look, And listen, in my low estate, To taunts of one so passionate? For seventeen years since thou wast born I sat and watched, ah me, forlorn! Hoping some blessed day to see Deliverance from my woes by thee. Now comes this endless grief and wrong, So dire I cannot bear it long, Sinking, with age and sorrow worn, Beneath my rivals’ taunts and scorn. How shall I pass in dark distress My long lone days of wretchedness Without my Ráma’s face, as bright As the full moon to cheer my sight? Alas, my cares thy steps to train, And fasts, and vows, and prayers are vain. Hard, hard, I ween, must be this heart To hear this blow nor burst apart, As some great river bank, when first The floods of Rain-time on it burst. No, Fate that speeds not will not slay,     Nor Yama’s halls vouchsafe me room,   Or, like a lion’s weeping prey,     Death now had borne me to my doom.   Hard is my heart and wrought of steel     That breaks not with the crushing blow,   Or in the pangs this day I feel     My lifeless frame had sunk below.   Death waits his hour, nor takes me now:     But this sad thought augments my pain,   That prayer and largess, fast and vow,     And Heavenward service are in vain.   Ah me, ah me! with fruitless toil     Of rites austere a child I sought:   Thus seed cast forth on barren soil     Still lifeless lies and comes to naught.   If ever wretch by anguish grieved     Before his hour to death had fled,   I mourning, like a cow bereaved,     Had been this day among the dead.”




Canto XXI. Kausalyá Calmed.


While thus Kauśalyá wept and sighed, With timely words sad Lakshmaṇ cried: “O honoured Queen I like it ill That, subject to a woman’s will, Ráma his royal state should quit And to an exile’s doom submit. The aged king, fond, changed, and weak, Will as the queen compels him speak. But why should Ráma thus be sent To the wild woods in banishment? No least offence I find in him, I see no fault his fame to dim. Not one in all the world I know, Not outcast wretch, not secret foe, Whose whispering lips would dare assail His spotless life with slanderous tale. Godlike and bounteous, just, sincere, E’en to his very foemen dear: Who would without a cause neglect The right, and such a son reject? And if a king such order gave, In second childhood, passion’s slave, What son within his heart would lay The senseless order, and obey? Come, Ráma, ere this plot be known Stand by me and secure the throne. Stand like the King who rules below, Stand aided by thy brother’s bow: How can the might of meaner men Resist thy royal purpose then? My shafts, if rebels court their fate, Shall lay Ayodhyá desolate. Then shall her streets with blood be dyed Of those who stand on Bharat’s side: None shall my slaughtering hand exempt, For gentle patience earns contempt. If, by Kaikeyí’s counsel changed, Our father’s heart be thus estranged, No mercy must our arm restrain, But let the foe be slain, be slain. For should the guide, respected long, No more discerning right and wrong, Turn in forbidden paths to stray, ’Tis meet that force his steps should stay. What power sufficient can he see, What motive for the wish has he, That to Kaikeyí would resign The empire which is justly thine? Can he, O conqueror of thy foes, Thy strength and mine in war oppose? Can he entrust, in our despite, To Bharat’s hand thy royal right? I love this brother with the whole Affection of my faithful soul. Yea Queen, by bow and truth I swear, By sacrifice, and gift, and prayer, If Ráma to the forest goes, Or where the burning furnace glows, First shall my feet the forest tread, The flames shall first surround my head. My might shall chase thy grief and tears, As darkness flies when morn appears. Do thou, dear Queen, and Ráma too Behold what power like mine can do. My aged father I will kill, The vassal of Kaikeyí’s will, Old, yet a child, the woman’s thrall, Infirm, and base, the scorn of all.”

  Thus Lakshmaṇ cried, the mighty-souled: Down her sad cheeks the torrents rolled, As to her son Kauśalyá spake:

  “Now thou hast heard thy brother, take His counsel if thou hold it wise, And do the thing his words advise, Do not, my son, with tears I pray, My rival’s wicked word obey, Leave me not here consumed with woe, Nor to the wood, an exile, go. If thou, to virtue ever true, Thy duty’s path would still pursue, The highest duty bids thee stay And thus thy mother’s voice obey. Thus Kaśyap’s great ascetic son A seat among the Immortals won: In his own home, subdued, he stayed, And honour to his mother paid. If reverence to thy sire be due, Thy mother claims like honour too, And thus I charge thee, O my child, Thou must not seek the forest wild. Ah, what to me were life and bliss, Condemned my darling son to miss? But with my Ráma near, to eat The very grass itself were sweet. But if thou still wilt go and leave Thy hapless mother here to grieve, I from that hour will food abjure, Nor life without my son endure. Then it will be thy fate to dwell In depth of world-detested hell. As Ocean in the olden time Was guilty of an impious crime That marked the lord of each fair flood As one who spills a Bráhman’s blood.”(288)

  Thus spake the queen, and wept, and sighed: Then righteous Ráma thus replied: “I have no power to slight or break Commandments which my father spake. I bend my head, dear lady, low, Forgive me, for I needs must go. Once Kaṇdu, mighty saint, who made His dwelling in the forest shade, A cow—and duty’s claims he knew— Obedient to his father, slew. And in the line from which we spring, When ordered by their sire the king, Through earth the sons of Sagar cleft, And countless things of life bereft.(289) So Jamadagní’s son(290) obeyed His sire, when in the wood he laid His hand upon his axe, and smote Through Renuká his mother’s throat. The deeds of these and more beside. Peers of the Gods, my steps shall guide, And resolute will I fulfil My father’s word, my father’s will. Nor I, O Queen, unsanctioned tread This righteous path, by duty led: The road my footsteps journey o’er Was traversed by the great of yore. This high command which all accept Shall faithfully by me be kept, For duty ne’er will him forsake Who fears his sire’s command to break.”

  Thus to his mother wild with grief: Then thus to Lakshmaṇ spake the chief Of those by whom the bow is bent, Mid all who speak, most eloquent: “I know what love for me thou hast, What firm devotion unsurpassed: Thy valour and thy worth I know, And glory that appals the foe. Blest youth, my mother’s woe is great, It bends her ’neath its matchless weight: No claims will she, with blinded eyes, Of truth and patience recognize. For duty is supreme in place, And truth is duty’s noblest base. Obedient to my sire’s behest I serve the cause of duty best. For man should truly do whate’er To mother, Bráhman, sire, he sware: He must in duty’s path remain, Nor let his word be pledged in vain. And, O my brother, how can I Obedience to this charge deny? Kaikeyí’s tongue my purpose spurred, But ’twas my sire who gave the word. Cast these unholy thoughts aside Which smack of war and Warriors’ pride; To duty’s call, not wrath attend, And tread the path which I commend.”

  Ráma by fond affection moved His brother Lakshmaṇ thus reproved; Then with joined hands and reverent head Again to Queen Kauśalyá said:

  “I needs must go—do thou consent— To the wild wood in banishment. O give me, by my life I pray, Thy blessing ere I go away. I, when the promised years are o’er, Shall see Ayodhyá’s town once more. Then, mother dear, thy tears restrain, Nor let thy heart be wrung by pain: In time, my father’s will obeyed, Shall I return from greenwood shade. My dear Videhan, thou, and I, Lakshmaṇ, Sumitrá, feel this tie, And must my father’s word obey, As duty bids that rules for aye. Thy preparations now forgo, And lock within thy breast thy woe, Nor be my pious wish withstood To go an exile to the wood.”

Calm and unmoved the prince explained   His duty’s claim and purpose high, The mother life and sense regained,   Looked on her son and made reply: “If reverence be thy father’s due,   The same by right and love is mine: Go not, my charge I thus renew,   Nor leave me here in woe to pine, What were such lonely life to me,   Rites to the shades, or deathless lot? More dear, my son, one hour with thee   Than all the world where thou art not.” As bursts to view, when brands blaze high,   Some elephant concealed by night, So, when he heard his mother’s cry,   Burnt Ráma’s grief with fiercer might. Thus to the queen, half senseless still,   And Lakshmaṇ, burnt with heart-felt pain, True to the right, with steadfast will,   His duteous speech he spoke again: “Brother, I know thy loving mind,   Thy valour and thy truth I know, But now to claims of duty blind   Thou and my mother swell my woe. The fruits of deeds in human life   Make love, gain, duty, manifest, Dear when they meet as some fond wife   With her sweet babes upon her breast. But man to duty first should turn   Whene’er the three are not combined: For those who heed but gain we spurn,   And those to pleasure all resigned. Shall then the virtuous disobey   Hosts of an aged king and sire, Though feverous joy that father sway,   Or senseless love or causeless ire? I have no power, commanded thus,   To slight his promise and decree: The honoured sire of both of us,   My mother’s lord and life is he. Shall she, while yet the holy king   Is living, on the right intent,— Shall she, like some poor widowed thing,   Go forth with me to banishment? Now, mother, speed thy parting son,   And let thy blessing soothe my pain, That I may turn, mine exile done,   Like King Yayáti, home again. Fair glory and the fruit she gives,   For lust of sway I ne’er will slight: What, for the span a mortal lives.   Were rule of faith without the right?” He soothed her thus, firm to the last   His counsel to his brother told: Then round the queen in reverence passed,   And held her in his loving hold.




Canto XXII. Lakshman Calmed.


So Ráma kept unshaken still His noble heart with iron will. To his dear brother next he turned, Whose glaring eyes with fury burned, Indignant, panting like a snake, And thus again his counsel spake: “Thine anger and thy grief restrain, And firm in duty’s path remain. Dear brother, lay thy scorn aside, And be the right thy joy and pride. Thy ready zeal and thoughtful care To aid what rites should grace the heir,— These ’tis another’s now to ask; Come, gird thee for thy noble task, That Bharat’s throning rites may he Graced with the things prepared for me. And with thy gentle care provide That her fond heart, now sorely tried With fear and longing for my sake, With doubt and dread may never ache. To know that thoughts of coming ill One hour that tender bosom fill With agony and dark despair Is grief too great for me to bear. I cannot, brother, call to mind One wilful fault or undesigned, When I have pained in anything My mothers or my sire the king. The right my father keeps in view, In promise, word, and action true; Let him then all his fear dismiss, Nor dread the loss of future bliss. He fears his truth herein will fail: Hence bitter thoughts his heart assail. He trembles lest the rites proceed, And at his pangs my heart should bleed. So now this earnest wish is mine, The consecration to resign, And from this city turn away To the wild wood with no delay. My banishment to-day will free Kaikeyí from her cares, that she, At last contented and elate, May Bharat’s throning celebrate. Then will the lady’s trouble cease, Then will her heart have joy and peace, When wandering in the wood I wear Deerskin, and bark, and matted hair. Nor shall by me his heart be grieved Whose choice approved, whose mind conceived This counsel which I follow. No, Forth to the forest will I go. ’Tis Fate, Sumitrás son, confess, That sends me to the wilderness. ’Tis Fate alone that gives away To other hands the royal sway. How could Kaikeyí’s purpose bring On me this pain and suffering, Were not her change of heart decreed By Fate whose will commands the deed? I know my filial love has been The same throughout for every queen, And with the same affection she Has treated both her son and me. Her shameful words of cruel spite To stay the consecrating rite, And drive me banished from the throne,— These I ascribe to Fate alone, How could she, born of royal race, Whom nature decks with fairest grace, Speak like a dame of low degree Before the king to torture me? But Fate, which none may comprehend, To which all life must bow and bend, In her and me its power has shown, And all my hopes are overthrown. What man, Sumitrá’s darling, may Contend with Fate’s resistless sway, Whose all-commanding power we find Our former deeds alone can bind? Our life and death, our joy and pain, Anger and fear, and loss and gain, Each thing that is, in every state, All is the work of none but Fate. E’en saints, inspired with rigid zeal, When once the stroke of Fate they feel, In sternest vows no more engage, And fall enslaved by love and rage. So now the sudden stroke whose weight Descends unlooked for, comes of Fate, And with unpitying might destroys The promise of commencing joys. Weigh this true counsel in thy soul: With thy firm heart thy heart control; Then, brother, thou wilt cease to grieve For hindered rites which now I leave. So cast thy needless grief away, And strictly my commands obey. Those preparations check with speed, Nor let my throning rites proceed. Those urns that stand prepared to shed King-making drops upon my head, Shall, with their pure lustrations now Inaugurate my hermit’s vow. Yet what have I to do with things That touch the state and pomp of kings? These hands of mine shall water take To sanctify the vow I make. Now Lakshmaṇ, let thy heart no more My fortune changed and lost deplore. A forest life more joys may bring Than those that wait upon a king, Now though her arts successful mar     My consecrating rite,   Let not the youngest queen too far     Thy jealous fear excite.   Nor let one thought suggesting ill     Upon our father fall,   But let thy heart remember still     That Fate is lord of all.”




Canto XXIII. Lakshman’s Anger.


Thus Ráma to his brother said; And Lakshmaṇ bent his drooping head. In turns by grief and pride impelled, A middle course of thought he held, Then in a frown of anger, bent His brows that chief most excellent, And like a serpent in his hole, Breathed fierce and fast in wrath of soul. His threatening brows so darkly frowned, His eyes so fiercely glanced around, They made his glare, which none might brook, Like some infuriate lion’s look. Like some wild elephant, full oft He raised and shook his hand(291) aloft. Now turned his neck to left and right Now bent, now raised its stately height. Now in his rage that sword he felt Which mangling wounds to foemen dealt, With sidelong glance his brother eyed, And thus in burning words replied: “Thy rash resolve, thy eager haste, Thy mighty fear, are all misplaced: No room is here for duty’s claim, No cause to dread the people’s blame. Can one as brave as thou consent To use a coward’s argument? The glory of the Warrior race With craven speech his lips debase? Can one like thee so falsely speak, Exalting Fate, confessed so weak? Canst thou, undoubting still restrain? Suspicions of those sinful twain? Canst thou, most duteous, fail to know Their hearts are set on duty’s show? They with deceit have set their trains, And now the fruit rewards their pains. Had they not long ago agreed, O Ráma, on this treacherous deed, That promised boon, so long retained, He erst had given and she had gained. I cannot, O my brother, bear To see another throned as heir With rites which all our people hate: Then, O, this passion tolerate. This vaunted duty which can guide Thy steps from wisdom’s path aside, And change the counsel of thy breast, O lofty-hearted, I detest. Wilt thou, when power and might are thine, Submit to this abhorred design? Thy father’s impious hest fulfil, That vassal of Kaikeyí’s will? But if thou still wilt shut thine eyes, Nor see the guile herein that lies, My soul is sad, I deeply mourn, And duty seems a thing to scorn. Canst thou one moment think to please This pair who live for love and ease, And ’gainst thy peace, as foes, allied, With tenderest names their hatred hide? Now if thy judgment still refers To Fate this plot of his and hers, My mind herein can ne’er agree: And O, in this be ruled by me. Weak, void of manly pride are they Who bend to Fate’s imputed sway: The choicest souls, the nobly great Disdain to bow their heads to Fate. And he who dares his Fate control With vigorous act and manly soul, Though threatening Fate his hopes assail, Unmoved through all need never quail. This day mankind shall learn aright The power of Fate and human might, So shall the gulf that lies between A man and Fate be clearly seen. The might of Fate subdued by me This hour the citizens shall see, Who saw its intervention stay Thy consecrating rites to-day. My power shall turn this Fate aside, That threatens, as, with furious stride, An elephant who scorns to feel, In rage unchecked, the driver’s steel. Not the great Lords whose sleepless might Protects the worlds, shall stay the rite Though earth, hell, heaven combine their powers: And shall we fear this sire of ours? Then if their minds are idly bent To doom thee, King, to banishment, Through twice seven years of exile they Shall in the lonely forest stay. I will consume the hopes that fire The queen Kaikeyí and our sire, That to her son this check will bring Advantage, making Bharat king. The power of Fate will ne’er withstand The might that arms my vigorous hand; If danger and distress assail, My fearless strength will still prevail. A thousand circling years shall flee: The forest then thy home shall be, And thy good sons, succeeding, hold The empire which their sire controlled. The royal saints, of old who reigned, For aged kings this rest ordained: These to their sons their realm commit That they, like sires, may cherish it. O pious soul, if thou decline The empire which is justly thine, Lest, while the king distracted lies, Disorder in the state should rise, I,—or no mansion may I find In worlds to hero souls assigned,— The guardian of thy realm will be, As the sea-bank protects the sea. Then cast thine idle fears aside: With prosperous rites be sanctified. The lords of earth may strive in vain: My power shall all their force restrain. My pair of arms, my warrior’s bow Are not for pride or empty show: For no support these shafts were made; And binding up ill suits my blade: To pierce the foe with deadly breach— This is the work of all and each. But small, methinks the love I show For him I count my mortal foe. Soon as my trenchant steel is bare, Flashing its lightning through the air, I heed no foe, nor stand aghast Though Indra’s self the levin cast. Then shall the ways be hard to pass, Where chariots lie in ruinous mass; When elephant and man and steed Crushed in the murderous onslaught bleed, And legs and heads fall, heap on heap, Beneath my sword’s tremendous sweep. Struck by my keen brand’s trenchant blade, Thine enemies shall fall dismayed, Like towering mountains rent in twain, Or lightning clouds that burst in rain. When armed with brace and glove I stand, And take my trusty bow in hand, Who then shall vaunt his might? who dare Count him a man to meet me there? Then will I loose my shafts, and strike Man, elephant, and steed alike: At one shall many an arrow fly, And many a foe with one shall die. This day the world my power shall see, That none in arms can rival me: My strength the monarch shall abase, And set thee, lord, in lordliest place. These arms which breathe the sandal’s scent, Which golden bracelets ornament, These hands which precious gifts bestow, Which guard the friend and smite the foe, A nobler service shall assay, And fight in Ráma’s cause to-day, The robbers of thy rights to stay.   Speak, brother, tell thy foeman’s name     Whom I, in conquering strife,   May strip of followers and fame,     Of fortune, or of life.   Say, how may all this sea-girt land     Be brought to own thy sway:   Thy faithful servant here I stand     To listen and obey.”   Then strove the bride of Raghu’s race     Sad Lakshmaṇ’s heart to cheer,   While slowly down the hero’s face,     Unchecked, there rolled a tear.   “The orders of my sire,” he cried,     “My will shall ne’er oppose:   I follow still, whate’er betide,     The path which duty shows.”




Canto XXIV. Kausalyá Calmed.


But when Kauśalyásaw that he Resolved to keep his sire’s decree, While tears and sobs her utterance broke, Her very righteous speech she spoke: “Can he, a stranger yet to pain, Whose pleasant words all hearts enchain, Son of the king and me the queen, Live on the grain his hands may glean; Can he, whose slaves and menials eat The finest cakes of sifted wheat— Can Ráma in the forest live On roots and fruit which woodlands give; Who will believe, who will not fear When the sad story smites his ear, That one so dear, so noble held, Is by the king his sire expelled? Now surely none may Fate resist, Which orders all as it may list, If, Ráma, in thy strength and grace, The woods become thy dwelling-place. A childless mother long I grieved, And many a sigh for offspring heaved, With wistful longing weak and worn Till thou at last, my son, wast born. Fanned by the storm of that desire Deep in my soul I felt the fire, Whose offerings flowed from weeping eyes, With fuel fed of groans and sighs, While round the flame the smoke grew hot Of tears because thou camest not. Now reft of thee, too fiery fierce The flame of woe my heart will pierce, As, when the days of spring return, The sun’s hot beams the forest burn. The mother cow still follows near The wanderings of her youngling dear. So close to thine my feet shall be, Where’er thou goest following thee.”

  Ráma, the noblest lord of men, Heard his fond mother’s speech, and then In soothing words like these replied To the sad queen who wept and sighed: “Nay, by Kaikeyí’s art beguiled, When I am banished to the wild, If thou, my mother, also fly, The aged king will surely die. When wedded dames their lords forsake, Long for the crime their souls shall ache. Thou must not e’en in thought within Thy bosom frame so dire a sin. Long as Kakutstha’s son, who reigns Lord of the earth, in life remains, Thou must with love his will obey: This duty claims, supreme for aye. Yes, mother, thou and I must be Submissive to my sire’s decree, King, husband, sire is he confessed, The lord of all, the worthiest. I in the wilds my days will spend Till twice seven years have reached an end, Then with great joy will come again, And faithful to thy hests remain.”

  Kauśalyá by her son addressed, With love and passion sore distressed, Afflicted, with her eyes bedewed, To Ráma thus her speech renewed:   “Nay, Ráma, but my heart will break If with these queens my home I make. Lead me too with thee; let me go And wander like a woodland roe.”   Then, while no tear the hero shed, Thus to the weeping queen he said: “Mother, while lives the husband, he Is woman’s lord and deity. O dearest lady, thou and I Our lord and king must ne’er deny; The lord of earth himself have we Our guardian wise and friend to be. And Bharat, true to duty’s call, Whose sweet words take the hearts of all, Will serve thee well, and ne’er forget The virtuous path before him set. Be this, I pray, thine earnest care, That the old king my father ne’er, When I have parted hence, may know, Grieved for his son, a pang of woe. Let not this grief his soul distress, To kill him with the bitterness. With duteous care, in every thing, Love, comfort, cheer the aged king. Though, best of womankind, a spouse Keeps firmly all her fasts and vows, Nor yet her husband’s will obeys, She treads in sin’s forbidden ways. She to her husband’s will who bends, Goes to high bliss that never ends, Yea, though the Gods have found in her No reverential worshipper. Bent on his weal, a woman still Must seek to do her husband’s will: For Scripture, custom, law uphold This duty Heaven revealed of old. Honour true Bráhmans for my sake, And constant offerings duly make, With fire-oblations and with flowers, To all the host of heavenly powers. Look to the coming time, and yearn For the glad hour of my return. And still thy duteous course pursue, Abstemious, humble, kind, and true. The highest bliss shalt thou obtain When I from exile come again, If, best of those who keep the right, The king my sire still see the light.”

  The queen, by Ráma thus addressed, Still with a mother’s grief oppressed, While her long eyes with tears were dim, Began once more and answered him: “Not by my pleading may be stayed The firm resolve thy soul has made. My hero, thou wilt go; and none The stern commands of Fate may shun. Go forth, dear child whom naught can bend, And may all bliss thy steps attend. Thou wilt return, and that dear day Will chase mine every grief away. Thou wilt return, thy duty done, Thy vows discharged, high glory won; From filial debt wilt thou be free, And sweetest joy will come on me. My son, the will of mighty Fate At every time must dominate, If now it drives thee hence to stray Heedless of me who bid thee stay. Go, strong of arm, go forth, my boy, Go forth, again to come with joy, And thine expectant mother cheer With those sweet tones she loves to hear. O that the blessed hour were nigh When thou shalt glad this anxious eye, With matted hair and hermit dress returning from the wilderness.”   Kauśalyá’s conscious soul approved,     As her proud glance she bent   On Ráma constant and unmoved,     Resolved on banishment.   Such words, with happy omens fraught     To her dear son she said,   Invoking with each eager thought     A blessing on his head.




Canto XXV. Kausalyá’s Blessing.


Her grief and woe she cast aside, Her lips with water purified, And thus her benison began That mother of the noblest man: “If thou wilt hear no words of mine, Go forth, thou pride of Raghu’s line. Go, darling, and return with speed, Walking where noble spirits lead. May virtue on thy steps attend, And be her faithful lover’s friend. May Those to whom thy vows are paid In temple and in holy shade, With all the mighty saints combine To keep that precious life of thine. The arms wise Viśvámitra(292) gave Thy virtuous soul from danger save. Long be thy life: thy sure defence Shall be thy truthful innocence, And that obedience, naught can tire, To me thy mother and thy sire. May fanes where holy fires are fed, Altars with grass and fuel spread, Each sacrificial ground, each tree, Rock, lake, and mountain, prosper thee. Let old Viráj,(293) and Him who made The universe, combine to aid; Let Indra and each guardian Lord Who keeps the worlds, their help afford, And be thy constant friend the Sun, Lord Púshá, Bhaga, Aryuman.(294) Fortnights and seasons, nights and days, Years, months, and hours, protect thy ways, Vrihaspati shall still be nigh, The War-God, and the Moon on high, And Nárad(295) and the sainted seven(296) Shall watch thee from their starry heaven. The mountains, and the seas which ring The world, and Varuṇa the King, Sky, ether, and the wind, whate’er Moves not or moves, for thee shall care. Each lunar mansion be benign, With happier light the planets shine; All gods, each light in heaven that glows, Protect my child where’er he goes. The twilight hours, the day and night, Keep in the wood thy steps aright. Watch, minute, instant, as they flee, Shall all bring happiness to thee. Celestials and the Titan brood Protect thee in thy solitude, And haunt the mighty wood to bless The wanderer in his hermit dress. Fear not, by mightier guardians screened, The giant or night-roving fiend; Nor let the cruel race who tear Man’s flesh for food thy bosom scare. Far be the ape, the scorpion’s sting, Fly, gnat, and worm, and creeping thing. Thee shall the hungry lion spare, The tiger, elephant, and bear: Safe, from their furious might repose, Safe from the horned buffaloes. Each savage thing the forests breed, That love on human flesh to feed, Shall for my child its rage abate, When thus its wrath I deprecate. Blest be thy ways: may sweet success The valour of my darling bless. To all that Fortune can bestow, Go forth, my child, my Ráma, go. Go forth, O happy in the love Of all the Gods below, above; And in those guardian powers confide Thy paths who keep, thy steps who guide. May Śukra,(297) Yáma, Sun, and Moon, And He who gives each golden boon,(298) Won by mine earnest prayers, be good To thee, my son, in Daṇḍak wood. Fire, wind, and smoke, each text and spell From mouths of holy seers that fell, Guard Ráma when his limbs he dips, Or with the stream makes pure his lips! May the great saints and He, the Lord Who made the worlds, by worlds adored, And every God in heaven beside My banished Ráma keep and guide.”

  Thus with due praise the long-eyed dame, Ennobled by her spotless fame, With wreaths of flowers and precious scent Worshipped the Gods, most reverent. A high-souled Bráhman lit the fire, And offered, at the queen’s desire, The holy oil ordained to burn For Ráma’s weal and safe return. Kauśalyá best of dames, with care Set oil, wreaths, fuel, mustard, there. Then when the rites of fire had ceased, For Ráma’s bliss and health, the priest, Standing without gave what remained In general offering,(299) as ordained. Dealing among the twice-horn train Honey, and curds, and oil, and grain, He bade each heart and voice unite To bless the youthful anchorite. Then Ráma’s mother, glorious dame Bestowed, to meet the Bráhman’s claim, A lordly fee for duty done: And thus again addressed her son:

  “Such blessings as the Gods o’erjoyed Poured forth, when Vritra(300) was destroyed, On Indra of the thousand eyes, Attend, my child, thine enterprise! Yea, such as Vinatá once gave To King Suparṇa(301) swift and brave, Who sought the drink that cheers the skies, Attend, my child, thine enterprise! Yea, such as, when the Amrit rose,(302) And Indra slew his Daitya foes, The royal Aditi bestowed On Him whose hand with slaughter glowed Of that dire brood of monstrous size, Attend, my child, thine enterprise! E’en such as peerless Vishṇu graced, When with his triple step he paced, Outbursting from the dwarf’s disguise,(303) Attend, my child, thine enterprise! Floods, isles, and seasons as they fly, Worlds, Vedas, quarters of the sky, Combine, O mighty-armed, to bless Thee destined heir of happiness!”

  The long-eyed lady ceased: she shed Pure scent and grain upon his head. And that prized herb whose sovereign power Preserves from dark misfortune’s hour, Upon the hero’s arm she set, To be his faithful amulet. While holy texts she murmured low, And spoke glad words though crushed by woe, Concealing with obedient tongue The pangs with which her heart was wrung. She bent, she kissed his brow, she pressed Her darling to her troubled breast: “Firm in thy purpose, go,” she cried, “Go Ráma, and may bliss betide. Attain returning safe and well, Triumphant in Ayodhyá, dwell. Then shall my happy eyes behold The empire by thy will controlled. Then grief and care shall leave no trace, Joy shall light up thy mother’s face, And I shall see my darling reign, In moonlike glory come again. These eyes shall fondly gaze on thee So faithful to thy sire’s decree, When thou the forest wild shalt quit On thine ancestral throne to sit. Yea, thou shalt turn from exile back, Nor choicest blessings ever lack, Then fill with rapture ever new My bosom and thy consort’s too.   To Śiva and the heavenly host     My worship has been paid,   To mighty saint, to godlike ghost,     To every wandering shade.   Forth to the forest thou wilt hie,     Therein to dwell so long:   Let all the quarters of the sky     Protect my child from wrong.”   Her blessings thus the queen bestowed;     Then round him fondly paced,   And often, while her eyes o’erflowed,     Her dearest son embraced.   Kauśalyá’s honoured feet he pressed,     As round her steps she bent,   And radiant with her prayers that blessed,     To Sítá’s home he went.




Canto XXVI. Alone With Sítá.


So Ráma, to his purpose true, To Queen Kauśalyá bade adieu, Received the benison she gave, And to the path of duty clave. As through the crowded street he passed, A radiance on the way he cast, And each fair grace, by all approved, The bosoms of the people moved.

  Now of the woeful change no word The fair Videhan bride had heard; The thought of that imperial rite Still filled her bosom with delight. With grateful heart and joyful thought The Gods in worship she had sought, And, well in royal duties learned, Sat longing till her lord returned, Not all unmarked by grief and shame Within his sumptuous home he came, And hurried through the happy crowd With eye dejected, gloomy-browed. Up Sítá sprang, and every limb Trembled with fear at sight of him. She marked that cheek where anguish fed, Those senses care-disquieted. For, when he looked on her, no more Could his heart hide the load it bore, Nor could the pious chief control The paleness o’er his cheek that stole. His altered cheer, his brow bedewed With clammy drops, his grief she viewed, And cried, consumed with fires of woe, “What, O my lord, has changed thee so? Vrihaspati looks down benign, And the moon rests in Pushya’s sign, As Bráhmans sage this day declare: Then whence, my lord, this grief and care? Why does no canopy, like foam For its white beauty, shade thee home, Its hundred ribs spread wide to throw Splendour on thy fair head below? Where are the royal fans, to grace The lotus beauty of thy face, Fair as the moon or wild-swan’s wing, And waving round the new-made king? Why do no sweet-toned bards rejoice To hail thee with triumphant voice? No tuneful heralds love to raise Loud music in their monarch’s praise? Why do no Bráhmans, Scripture-read, Pour curds and honey on thy head, Anointed, as the laws ordain, With holy rites, supreme to reign? Where are the chiefs of every guild? Where are the myriads should have filled The streets, and followed home their king With merry noise and triumphing? Why does no gold-wrought chariot lead With four brave horses, best for speed? No elephant precede the crowd Like a huge hill or thunder cloud, Marked from his birth for happy fate, Whom signs auspicious decorate? Why does no henchman, young and fair, Precede thee, and delight to bear Entrusted to his reverent hold The burthen of thy throne of gold? Why, if the consecrating rite Be ready, why this mournful plight? Why do I see this sudden change, This altered mien so sad and strange?”

  To her, as thus she weeping cried, Raghu’s illustrious son replied:   “Sítá, my honoured sire’s decree Commands me to the woods to flee. O high-born lady, nobly bred In the good paths thy footsteps tread, Hear, Janak’s daughter, while I tell The story as it all befell. Of old my father true and brave Two boons to Queen Kaikeyí gave. Through these the preparations made For me to-day by her are stayed, For he is bound to disallow This promise by that earlier vow. In Daṇḍak forest wild and vast Must fourteen years by me be passed. My father’s will makes Bharat heir, The kingdom and the throne to share. Now, ere the lonely wild I seek, I come once more with thee to speak. In Bharat’s presence, O my dame, Ne’er speak with pride of Ráma’s name: Another’s eulogy to hear Is hateful to a monarch’s ear. Thou must with love his rule obey To whom my father yields the sway. With love and sweet observance learn His grace, and more the king’s, to earn. Now, that my father may not break The words of promise that he spake, To the drear wood my steps are bent: Be firm, good Sítá, and content. Through all that time, my blameless spouse, Keep well thy fasts and holy vows. Rise from thy bed at break of day, And to the Gods due worship pay. With meek and lowly love revere The lord of men, my father dear, And reverence to Kauśalyá show, My mother, worn with eld and woe: By duty’s law, O best of dames, High worship from thy love she claims, Nor to the other queens refuse Observance, rendering each her dues: By love and fond attention shown They are my mothers like mine own. Let Bharat and Śatrughna bear In thy sweet love a special share: Dear as my life, O let them be Like brother and like son to thee. In every word and deed refrain From aught that Bharat’s soul may pain: He is Ayodhyá’s king and mine, The head and lord of all our line. For those who serve and love them much With weariless endeavour, touch And win the gracious hearts of kings. While wrath from disobedience springs. Great monarchs from their presence send Their lawful sons who still offend, And welcome to the vacant place Good children of an alien race. Then, best of women, rest thou here, And Bharat’s will with love revere. Obedient to thy king remain, And still thy vows of truth maintain.   To the wide wood my steps I bend:     Make thou thy dwelling here;   See that thy conduct ne’er offend,     And keep my words, my dear.”




Canto XXVII. Sítá’s Speech.


His sweetly-speaking bride, who best Deserved her lord, he thus addressed. Then tender love bade passion wake, And thus the fair Videhan spake: “What words are these that thou hast said? Contempt of me the thought has bred. O best of heroes, I dismiss With bitter scorn a speech like this: Unworthy of a warrior’s fame It taints a monarch’s son with shame, Ne’er to be heard from those who know The science of the sword and bow. My lord, the mother, sire, and son Receive their lots by merit won; The brother and the daughter find The portions to their deeds assigned. The wife alone, whate’er await, Must share on earth her husband’s fate. So now the king’s command which sends Thee to the wild, to me extends. The wife can find no refuge, none, In father, mother, self, or son: Both here, and when they vanish hence, Her husband is her sole defence. If, Raghu’s son, thy steps are led Where Daṇḍak’s pathless wilds are spread, My foot before thine own shall pass Through tangled thorn and matted grass. Dismiss thine anger and thy doubt: Like refuse water cast them out, And lead me, O my hero, hence— I know not sin—with confidence. Whate’er his lot, ’tis far more sweet To follow still a husband’s feet Than in rich palaces to lie, Or roam at pleasure through the sky. My mother and my sire have taught What duty bids, and trained each thought, Nor have I now mine ear to turn The duties of a wife to learn. I’ll seek with thee the woodland dell And pathless wild where no men dwell, Where tribes of silvan creatures roam, And many a tiger makes his home. My life shall pass as pleasant there As in my father’s palace fair. The worlds shall wake no care in me; My only care be truth to thee. There while thy wish I still obey, True to my vows with thee I’ll stray, And there shall blissful hours be spent In woods with honey redolent. In forest shades thy mighty arm Would keep a stranger’s life from harm, And how shall Sítá think of fear When thou, O glorious lord, art near? Heir of high bliss, my choice is made, Nor can I from my will be stayed. Doubt not; the earth will yield me roots, These will I eat, and woodland fruits; And as with thee I wander there I will not bring thee grief or care. I long, when thou, wise lord, art nigh, All fearless, with delighted eye To gaze upon the rocky hill, The lake, the fountain, and the rill; To sport with thee, my limbs to cool, In some pure lily-covered pool, While the white swan’s and mallard’s wings Are plashing in the water-springs. So would a thousand seasons flee Like one sweet day, if spent with thee. Without my lord I would not prize A home with Gods above the skies: Without my lord, my life to bless, Where could be heaven or happiness?   Forbid me not: with thee I go     The tangled wood to tread.   There will I live with thee, as though     This roof were o’er my head.   My will for thine shall be resigned;     Thy feet my steps shall guide.   Thou, only thou, art in my mind:     I heed not all beside.   Thy heart shall ne’er by me be grieved;     Do not my prayer deny:   Take me, dear lord; of thee bereaved     Thy Sítá swears to die.”   These words the duteous lady spake,     Nor would he yet consent   His faithful wife with him to take     To share his banishment.   He soothed her with his gentle speech;     To change her will he strove;   And much he said the woes to teach     Of those in wilds who rove.




Canto XXVIII. The Dangers Of The Wood.


Thus Sítá spake, and he who knew His duty, to its orders true, Was still reluctant as the woes Of forest life before him rose. He sought to soothe her grief, to dry The torrent from each brimming eye, And then, her firm resolve to shake, These words the pious hero spake:

  “O daughter of a noble line, Whose steps from virtue ne’er decline, Remain, thy duties here pursue, As my fond heart would have thee do. Now hear me, Sítá, fair and weak, And do the words that I shall speak. Attend and hear while I explain Each danger in the wood, each pain. Thy lips have spoken: I condemn The foolish words that fell from them. This senseless plan, this wish of thine To live a forest life, resign. The names of trouble and distress Suit well the tangled wilderness. In the wild wood no joy I know, A forest life is nought but woe. The lion in his mountain cave Answers the torrents as they rave, And forth his voice of terror throws: The wood, my love, is full of woes. There mighty monsters fearless play, And in their maddened onset slay The hapless wretch who near them goes: The wood, my love, is full of woes. ’Tis hard to ford each treacherous flood, So thick with crocodiles and mud, Where the wild elephants repose: The wood, my love, is full of woes. Or far from streams the wanderer strays Through thorns and creeper-tangled ways, While round him many a wild-cock crows: The wood, my love, is full of woes. On the cold ground upon a heap Of gathered leaves condemned to sleep, Toil-wearied, will his eyelids close: The wood, my love, is full of woes. Long days and nights must he content His soul with scanty aliment, What fruit the wind from branches blows: The wood, my love, is full of woes. O Sítá, while his strength may last, The ascetic in the wood must fast, Coil on his head his matted hair, And bark must be his only wear. To Gods and spirits day by day The ordered worship he must pay, And honour with respectful care Each wandering guest who meets him there. The bathing rites he ne’er must shun At dawn, at noon, at set of sun, Obedient to the law he knows: The wood, my love, is full of woes. To grace the altar must be brought The gift of flowers his hands have sought— The debt each pious hermit owes: The wood, my love, is full of woes. The devotee must be content To live, severely abstinent, On what the chance of fortune shows: The wood, my love, is full of woes. Hunger afflicts him evermore: The nights are black, the wild winds roar; And there are dangers worse than those: The wood, my love, is full of woes. There creeping things in every form Infest the earth, the serpents swarm, And each proud eye with fury glows: The wood, my love, is full of woes. The snakes that by the rives hide In sinuous course like rivers glide, And line the path with deadly foes: The wood, my love, is full of woes. Scorpions, and grasshoppers, and flies Disturb the wanderer as he lies, And wake him from his troubled doze: The wood, my love, is full of woes. Trees, thorny bushes, intertwined, Their branched ends together bind, And dense with grass the thicket grows: The wood, my dear, is full of woes, With many ills the flesh is tried, When these and countless fears beside Vex those who in the wood remain: The wilds are naught but grief and pain. Hope, anger must be cast aside, To penance every thought applied: No fear must be of things to fear: Hence is the wood for ever drear. Enough, my love: thy purpose quit: For forest life thou art not fit. As thus I think on all, I see The wild wood is no place for thee.”




Canto XXIX. Sítá’s Appeal.


Thus Ráma spake. Her lord’s address The lady heard with deep distress, And, as the tear bedimmed her eye, In soft low accents made reply: “The perils of the wood, and all The woes thou countest to appal, Led by my love I deem not pain; Each woe a charm, each loss a gain. Tiger, and elephant, and deer, Bull, lion, buffalo, in fear, Soon as thy matchless form they see, With every silvan beast will flee. With thee, O Ráma, I must go: My sire’s command ordains it so. Bereft of thee, my lonely heart Must break, and life and I must part. While thou, O mighty lord, art nigh, Not even He who rules the sky, Though He is strongest of the strong, With all his might can do me wrong. Nor can a lonely woman left By her dear husband live bereft. In my great love, my lord, I ween, The truth of this thou mayst have seen. In my sire’s palace long ago I heard the chief of those who know, The truth-declaring Bráhmans, tell My fortune, in the wood to dwell. I heard their promise who divine The future by each mark and sign, And from that hour have longed to lead The forest life their lips decreed. Now, mighty Ráma, I must share Thy father’s doom which sends thee there; In this I will not be denied, But follow, love, where thou shalt guide. O husband, I will go with thee, Obedient to that high decree. Now let the Bráhmans’ words be true, For this the time they had in view. I know full well the wood has woes; But they disturb the lives of those Who in the forest dwell, nor hold Their rebel senses well controlled. In my sire’s halls, ere I was wed, I heard a dame who begged her bread Before my mother’s face relate What griefs a forest life await. And many a time in sport I prayed To seek with thee the greenwood shade, For O, my heart on this is set, To follow thee, dear anchoret. May blessings on thy life attend: I long with thee my steps to bend, For with such hero as thou art This pilgrimage enchants my heart. Still close, my lord, to thy dear side My spirit will be purified: Love from all sin my soul will free: My husband is a God to me. So, love, with thee shall I have bliss And share the life that follows this. I heard a Bráhman, dear to fame, This ancient Scripture text proclaim: “The woman whom on earth below Her parents on a man bestow, And lawfully their hands unite With water and each holy rite, She in this world shall be his wife, His also in the after life.” Then tell me, O beloved, why Thou wilt this earnest prayer deny, Nor take me with thee to the wood, Thine own dear wife so true and good. But if thou wilt not take me there Thus grieving in my wild despair, To fire or water I will fly, Or to the poisoned draught, and die.”

  So thus to share his exile, she Besought him with each earnest plea, Nor could she yet her lord persuade To take her to the lonely shade. The answer of the strong-armed chief Smote the Videhan’s soul with grief, And from her eyes the torrents came bathing the bosom of the dame.




Canto XXX. The Triumph Of Love.


The daughter of Videha’s king, While Ráma strove to soothe the sting Of her deep anguish, thus began Once more in furtherance of her plan: And with her spirit sorely tried By fear and anger, love and pride, With keenly taunting words addressed Her hero of the stately breast: “Why did the king my sire, who reigns O’er fair Videha’s wide domains, Hail Ráma son with joy unwise, A woman in a man’s disguise? Now falsely would the people say, By idle fancies led astray, That Ráma’s own are power and might, As glorious as the Lord of Light. Why sinkest thou in such dismay? What fears upon thy spirit weigh, That thou, O Ráma, fain wouldst flee From her who thinks of naught but thee? To thy dear will am I resigned In heart and body, soul and mind, As Sávitrí gave all to one, Satyaván, Dyumatsena’s son.(304) Not e’en in fancy can I brook To any guard save thee to look: Let meaner wives their houses shame, To go with thee is all my claim. Like some low actor, deemst thou fit Thy wife to others to commit— Thine own, espoused in maiden youth, Thy wife so long, unblamed for truth? Do thou, my lord, his will obey For whom thou losest royal sway, To whom thou wouldst thy wife confide— Not me, but thee, his wish may guide. Thou must not here thy wife forsake, And to the wood thy journey make, Whether stern penance, grief, and care, Or rule or heaven await thee there. Nor shall fatigue my limbs distress When wandering in the wilderness: Each path which near to thee I tread Shall seem a soft luxurious bed. The reeds, the bushes where I pass, The thorny trees, the tangled grass Shall feel, if only thou be near, Soft to my touch as skins of deer. When the rude wind in fury blows, And scattered dust upon me throws, That dust, beloved lord, to me Shall as the precious sandal be. And what shall be more blest than I, When gazing on the wood I lie In some green glade upon a bed With sacred grass beneath us spread? The root, the leaf, the fruit which thou Shalt give me from the earth or bough, Scanty or plentiful, to eat, Shall taste to me as Amrit sweet. As there I live on flowers and roots And every season’s kindly fruits, I will not for my mother grieve, My sire, my home, or all I leave. My presence, love, shall never add One pain to make the heart more sad; I will not cause thee grief or care, Nor be a burden hard to bear. With thee is heaven, where’er the spot; Each place is hell where thou art not. Then go with me, O Ráma; this Is all my hope and all my bliss. If thou wilt leave thy wife who still Entreats thee with undaunted will, This very day shall poison close The life that spurns the rule of foes. How, after, can my soul sustain The bitter life of endless pain, When thy dear face, my lord, I miss? No, death is better far than this. Not for an hour could I endure The deadly grief that knows not cure, Far less a woe I could not shun For ten long years, and three, and one.”

  While fires of woe consumed her, such Her sad appeal, lamenting much; Then with a wild cry, anguish-wrung, About her husband’s neck she clung. Like some she-elephant who bleeds Struck by the hunter’s venomed reeds, So in her quivering heart she felt The many wounds his speeches dealt. Then, as the spark from wood is gained,(305) Down rolled the tear so long restrained: The crystal moisture, sprung from woe, From her sweet eyes began to flow, As runs the water from a pair Of lotuses divinely fair. And Sítá’s face with long dark eyes, Pure as the moon of autumn skies, Faded with weeping, as the buds Of lotuses when sink the floods. Around his wife his arms he strained, Who senseless from her woe remained, And with sweet words, that bade her wake To life again, the hero spake: “I would not with thy woe, my Queen, Buy heaven and all its blissful sheen. Void of all fear am I as He, The self-existent God, can be. I knew not all thy heart till now, Dear lady of the lovely brow, So wished not thee in woods to dwell; Yet there mine arm can guard thee well. Now surely thou, dear love, wast made To dwell with me in green wood shade. And, as a high saint’s tender mind Clings to its love for all mankind, So I to thee will ever cling, Sweet daughter of Videha’s king. The good, of old, O soft of frame, Honoured this duty’s sovereign claim, And I its guidance will not shun, True as light’s Queen is to the Sun. I cannot, pride of Janak’s line, This journey to the wood decline: My sire’s behest, the oath he sware, The claims of truth, all lead me there. One duty, dear the same for aye, Is sire and mother to obey: Should I their orders once transgress My very life were weariness. If glad obedience be denied To father, mother, holy guide, What rites, what service can be done That stern Fate’s favour may be won? These three the triple world comprise, O darling of the lovely eyes. Earth has no holy thing like these Whom with all love men seek to please. Not truth, or gift, or bended knee, Not honour, worship, lordly fee, Storms heaven and wins a blessing thence Like sonly love and reverence. Heaven, riches, grain, and varied lore, With sons and many a blessing more, All these are made their own with ease By those their elders’ souls who please. The mighty-souled, who ne’er forget, Devoted sons, their filial debt, Win worlds where Gods and minstrels are, And Brahmá’s sphere more glorious far. Now as the orders of my sire, Who keeps the way of truth, require, So will I do, for such the way Of duty that endures for aye: To take thee, love, to Daṇḍak’s wild My heart at length is reconciled, For thee such earnest thoughts impel To follow, and with me to dwell. O faultless form from feet to brows, Come with me, as my will allows, And duty there with me pursue, Trembler, whose bright eyes thrill me through. In all thy days, come good come ill, Preserve unchanged such noble will, And thou, dear love, wilt ever be The glory of thy house and me. Now, beauteous-armed, begin the tasks The woodland life of hermits asks. For me the joys of heaven above Have charms no more without thee, love. And now, dear Sítá, be not slow: Food on good mendicants bestow, And for the holy Bráhmans bring Thy treasures and each precious thing. Thy best attire and gems collect, The jewels which thy beauty decked, And every ornament and toy Prepared for hours of sport and joy: The beds, the cars wherein I ride, Among our followers, next, divide.”

  She conscious that her lord approved Her going, with great rapture moved, Hastened within, without delay, Prepared to give their wealth away.




Canto XXXI. Lakshman’s Prayer.


When Lakshmaṇ, who had joined them there, Had heard the converse of the pair, His mien was changed, his eyes o’erflowed, His breast no more could bear its load. The son of Raghu, sore distressed, His brother’s feet with fervour pressed, While thus to Sítá he complained, And him by lofty vows enchained: “If thou wilt make the woods thy home, Where elephant and roebuck roam, I too this day will take my bow And in the path before thee go. Our way will lie through forest ground Where countless birds and beasts are found, I heed not homes of Gods on high, I heed not life that cannot die, Nor would I wish, with thee away, O’er the three worlds to stretch my sway.”

  Thus Lakshmaṇ spake, with earnest prayer His brother’s woodland life to share. As Ráma still his prayer denied With soothing words, again he cried: “When leave at first thou didst accord, Why dost thou stay me now, my lord? Thou art my refuge: O, be kind, Leave me not, dear my lord, behind. Thou canst not, brother, if thou choose That I still live, my wish refuse.”

  The glorious chief his speech renewed To faithful Lakshmaṇ as he sued, And on the eyes of Ráma gazed Longing to lead, with hands upraised: “Thou art a hero just and dear, Whose steps to virtue’s path adhere, Loved as my life till life shall end, My faithful brother and my friend. If to the woods thou take thy way With Sítá and with me to-day, Who for Kauśalyá will provide, And guard the good Sumitrá’s side? The lord of earth, of mighty power, Who sends good things in plenteous shower, As Indra pours the grateful rain, A captive lies in passion’s chain. The power imperial for her son Has Aśvapati’s daughter(306) won, And she, proud queen, will little heed Her miserable rivals’ need. So Bharat, ruler of the land, By Queen Kaikeyí’s side will stand, Nor of those two will ever think, While grieving in despair they sink. Now, Lakshmaṇ, as thy love decrees, Or else the monarch’s heart to please, Follow this counsel and protect My honoured mother from neglect. So thou, while not to me alone Thy great affection will be shown, To highest duty wilt adhere By serving those thou shouldst revere. Now, son of Raghu, for my sake Obey this one request I make, Or, of her darling son bereft, Kauśalyá has no comfort left.”

  The faithful Lakshmaṇ, thus addressed In gentle words which love expressed, To him in lore of language learned, His answer, eloquent, returned:

  “Nay, through thy might each queen will share Attentive Bharat’s love and care, Should Bharat, raised as king to sway This noblest realm, his trust betray, Nor for their safety well provide, Seduced by ill-suggesting pride, Doubt not my vengeful hand shall kill The cruel wretch who counsels ill— Kill him and all who lend him aid, And the three worlds in league arrayed. And good Kauśalyá well can fee A thousand champions like to me. A thousand hamlets rich in grain The station of that queen maintain. She may, and my dear mother too, Live on the ample revenue. Then let me follow thee: herein: Is naught that may resemble sin. So shall I in my wish succeed, And aid, perhaps, my brother’s need. My bow and quiver well supplied With arrows hanging at my side, My hands shall spade and basket bear, And for thy feet the way prepare. I’ll bring thee roots and berries sweet. And woodland fare which hermits eat. Thou shall with thy Videhan spouse Recline upon the mountain’s brows; Be mine the toil, be mine to keep Watch o’er thee waking or asleep.”

  Filled by his speech with joy and pride, Ráma to Lakshmaṇ thus replied: “Go then, my brother, bid adieu To all thy friends and retinue. And those two bows of fearful might, Celestial, which, at that famed rite, Lord Varuṇ gave to Janak, king Of fair Vedeha with thee bring, With heavenly coats of sword-proof mail, Quivers, whose arrows never fail, And golden-hilted swords so keen, The rivals of the sun in sheen. Tended with care these arms are all Preserved in my preceptor’s hall. With speed, O Lakshmaṇ, go, produce, And bring them hither for our use.” So on a woodland life intent, To see his faithful friends he went, And brought the heavenly arms which lay By Ráma’s teacher stored away. And Raghu’s son to Ráma showed Those wondrous arms which gleamed and glowed, Well kept, adorned with many a wreath Of flowers on case, and hilt, and sheath. The prudent Ráma at the sight Addressed his brother with delight: “Well art thou come, my brother dear, For much I longed to see thee here. For with thine aid, before I go, I would my gold and wealth bestow Upon the Bráhmans sage, who school Their lives by stern devotion’s rule. And for all those who ever dwell Within my house and serve me well, Devoted servants, true and good, Will I provide a livelihood.   Quick, go and summon to this place     The good Vaśishṭha’s son,   Suyajǹa, of the Bráhman race     The first and holiest one.   To all the Bráhmans wise and good     Will I due reverence pay,   Then to the solitary wood     With thee will take my way.”




Canto XXXII. The Gift Of The Treasures.


That speech so noble which conveyed His friendly wish, the chief obeyed, With steps made swift by anxious thought The wise Suyajǹa’s home he sought. Him in the hall of Fire(307) he found, And bent before him to the ground: “O friend, to Ráma’s house return, Who now performs a task most stern.” He, when his noonday rites were done, Went forth with fair Sumitrá’s son, And came to Ráma’s bright abode Rich in the love which Lakshmí showed. The son of Raghu, with his dame, With joined hands met him as he came, Showing to him who Scripture knew The worship that is Agni’s due. With armlets, bracelets, collars, rings, With costly pearls on golden strings, With many a gem for neck and limb The son of Raghu honoured him. Then Ráma, at his wife’s request, The wise Suyajǹa thus addressed: “Accept a necklace too to deck With golden strings thy spouse’s neck. And Sítá here, my friend, were glad A girdle to her gift to add. And many a bracelet wrought with care, And many an armlet rich and rare, My wife to thine is fain to give, Departing in the wood to live. A bed by skilful workmen made, With gold and various gems inlaid— This too, before she goes, would she Present, O saintly friend, to thee. Thine be my elephant, so famed, My uncle’s present, Victor named; And let a thousand coins of gold, Great Bráhman, with the gift be told.” Thus Ráma spoke: nor he declined The noble gifts for him designed. On Ráma, Lakshmaṇ, Sítá he Invoked all high felicity.

  In pleasant words then Ráma gave His best to Lakshmaṇ prompt and brave, As Brahmá speaks for Him to hear Who rules the Gods’ celestial sphere: “To the two best of Bráhmans run; Agastya bring, and Kuśik’s son, And precious gifts upon them rain, Like fostering floods upon the grain. O long-armed Prince of Raghu’s line, Delight them with a thousand kine, And many a fair and costly gem, With gold and silver, give to them. To him, so deep in Scripture, who, To Queen Kauśalyá, ever true, Serves her with blessing and respect, Chief of the Taittiríya sect(308)— To him, with women-slaves, present A chariot rich with ornament, And costly robes of silk beside, Until the sage be satisfied. On Chitraratha, true and dear, My tuneful bard and charioteer, Gems, robes, and plenteous wealth confer— Mine ancient friend and minister. And these who go with staff in hand, Grammarians trained, a numerous band, Who their deep study only prize, Nor think of other exercise, Who toil not, loving dainty fare, Whose praises e’en the good declare— On these be eighty cars bestowed, And each with precious treasures load. A thousand bulls for them suffice, Two hundred elephants of price, And let a thousand kine beside The dainties of each meal provide. The throng who sacred girdles wear, And on Kauśalyá wait with care— A thousand golden coins shall please, Son of Sumitrá, each of these. Let all, dear Lakshmaṇ of the train These special gifts of honour gain: My mother will rejoice to know Her Bráhmans have been cherished so.”

  Then Raghu’s son addressed the crowd Who round him stood and wept aloud, When he to all who thronged the court Had dealt his wealth for their support: “In Lakshmaṇ’s house and mine remain, And guard them till I come again.” To all his people sad with grief, In loving words thus spoke their chief, Then bade his treasure-keeper bring Gold, silver, and each precious thing. Then straight the servants went and bore Back to their chief the wealth in store. Before the people’s eyes it shone, A glorious pile to look upon. The prince of men with Lakshmaṇ’s aid Parted the treasures there displayed, Gave to the poor, the young, the old, And twice-born men, the gems and gold.

  A Bráhman, long in evil case, Named Trijaṭ, born of Garga’s race, Earned ever toiling in a wood With spade and plough his livelihood. The youthful wife, his babes who bore, Their indigence felt more and more. Thus to the aged man she spake: “Hear this my word: my counsel take. Come, throw thy spade and plough away; To virtuous Ráma go to-day, And somewhat of his kindness pray.”

  He heard the words she spoke: around His limbs his ragged cloth he wound, And took his journey by the road That led to Ráma’s fair abode. To the fifth court he made his way; Nor met the Bráhman check or stay. Brighu, Angiras(309) could not be Brighter with saintly light than he. To Ráma’s presence on he pressed, And thus the noble chief addressed: “O Ráma, poor and weak am I, And many children round me cry. Scant living in the woods I earn: On me thine eye of pity turn.” And Ráma, bent on sport and jest, The suppliant Bráhman thus addressed: “O aged man, one thousand kine, Yet undistributed, are mine. The cows on thee will I bestow As far as thou thy staff canst throw.”

  The Bráhman heard. In eager haste He bound his cloth around his waist. Then round his head his staff he whirled, And forth with mightiest effort hurled. Cast from his hand it flew, and sank To earth on Sarjú’s farther bank, Where herds of kine in thousands fed Near to the well-stocked bullock shed. And all the cows that wandered o’er The meadow, far as Sarjú’s shore, At Ráma’s word the herdsmen drove To Trijaṭ’s cottage in the grove. He drew the Bráhman to his breast, And thus with calming words addressed: “Now be not angry, Sire. I pray: This jest of mine was meant in play. These thousand kine, but not alone. Their herdsmen too, are all thine own. And wealth beside I give thee: speak, Thine shall be all thy heart can seek.”

  Thus Ráma spake. And Trijaṭ prayed For means his sacrifice to aid. And Ráma gave much wealth, required To speed his offering as desired.




Canto XXXIII. The People’s Lament.


Thus Sítá and the princes brave Much wealth to all the Bráhmans gave. Then to the monarch’s house the three Went forth the aged king to see. The princes from two servants took Those heavenly arms of glorious look, Adorned with garland and with band By Sítá’s beautifying hand. On each high house a mournful throng Had gathered ere they passed along, Who gazed in pure unselfish woe From turret, roof, and portico. So dense the crowd that blocked the ways, The rest, unable there to gaze, Were fain each terrace to ascend, And thence their eyes on Ráma bend. Then as the gathered multitude On foot their well-loved Ráma viewed, No royal shade to screen his head, Such words, disturbed in grief, they said: “O look, our hero, wont to ride Leading a host in perfect pride— Now Lakshmaṇ, sole of all his friends, With Sítá on his steps attends. Though he has known the sweets of power, And poured his gifts in liberal shower, From duty’s path he will not swerve, But, still his father’s truth preserve. And she whose form so soft and fair Was veiled from spirits of the air, Now walks unsheltered from the day, Seen by the crowds who throng the way. Ah, for that gently-nurtured form! How will it fade with sun and storm! How will the rain, the cold, the heat Mar fragrant breast and tinted feet! Surely some demon has possessed His sire, and speaks within his breast, Or how could one that is a king Thus send his dear son wandering? It were a deed unkindly done To banish e’en a worthless son: But what, when his pure life has gained The hearts of all, by love enchained? Six sovereign virtues join to grace Ráma the foremost of his race: Tender and kind and pure is he, Docile, religious, passion-free. Hence misery strikes not him alone: In bitterest grief the people moan, Like creatures of the stream, when dry In the great heat the channels lie. The world is mournful with the grief That falls on its beloved chief, As, when the root is hewn away, Tree, fruit, and flower, and bud decay. The soul of duty, bright to see, He is the root of you and me; And all of us, who share his grief, His branches, blossom, fruit, and leaf. Now like the faithful Lakshmaṇ, we Will follow and be true as he; Our wives and kinsmen call with speed, And hasten where our lord shall lead. Yes, we will leave each well-loved spot, The field, the garden, and the cot, And, sharers of his weal and woe, Behind the pious Ráma go. Our houses, empty of their stores, With ruined courts and broken doors, With all their treasures borne away. And gear that made them bright and gay: O’errun by rats, with dust o’erspread, Shrines, whence the deities have fled, Where not a hand the water pours, Or sweeps the long-neglected floors, No incense loads the evening air, No Bráhmans chant the text and prayer, No fire of sacrifice is bright, No gift is known, no sacred rite; With floors which broken vessels strew, As if our woes had crushed them too— Of these be stern Kaikeyí queen, And rule o’er homes where we have been. The wood where Ráma’s feet may roam Shall be our city and our home, And this fair city we forsake, Our flight a wilderness shall make. Each serpent from his hole shall hie, The birds and beasts from mountain fly, Lions and elephants in fear Shall quit the woods when we come near, Yield the broad wilds for us to range, And take our city in exchange. With Ráma will we hence, content If, where he is, our days be spent.”

  Such were the varied words the crowd Of all conditions spoke aloud. And Ráma heard their speeches, yet Changed not his purpose firmly set. His father’s palace soon he neared, That like Kailása’s hill appeared. Like a wild elephant he strode Right onward to the bright abode. Within the palace court he stepped, Where ordered bands their station kept, And saw Sumantra standing near With down-cast eye and gloomy cheer.




Canto XXXIV. Ráma In The Palace.


The dark incomparable chief Whose eye was like a lotus leaf, Cried to the mournful charioteer, “Go tell my sire that I am here.”

  Sumantra, sad and all dismayed, The chieftain’s order swift obeyed. Within the palace doors he hied And saw the king, who wept and sighed. Like the great sun when wrapped in shade Like fire by ashes overlaid, Or like a pool with waters dried, So lay the world’s great lord and pride, A while the wise Sumantra gazed On him whose senses woe has dazed, Grieving for Ráma. Near he drew With hands upraised in reverence due. With blessing first his king he hailed; Then with a voice that well-nigh failed, In trembling accents soft and low Addressed the monarch in his woe: “The prince of men, thy Ráma, waits Before thee at the palace gates. His wealth to Bráhmans he has dealt, And all who in his home have dwelt. Admit thy son. His friends have heard His kind farewell and parting word, He longs to see thee first, and then Will seek the wilds, O King of men. He, with each princely virtue’s blaze, Shines as the sun engirt by rays.”

  The truthful King who loved to keep The law profound as Ocean’s deep, And stainless as the dark blue sky, Thus to Sumantra made reply: “Go then, Sumantra, go and call My wives and ladies one and all. Drawn round me shall they fill the place When I behold my Ráma’s face.”

  Quick to the inner rooms he sped, And thus to all the women said, “Come, at the summons of the king: Come all, and make no tarrying.”

  Their husband’s word, by him conveyed, Soon as they heard, the dames obeyed, And following his guidance all Came thronging to the regal hall. In number half seven hundred, they, All lovely dames, in long array, With their bright eyes for weeping red, To stand round Queen Kauśalyá, sped. They gathered, and the monarch viewed One moment all the multitude, Then to Sumantra spoke and said: “Now let my son be hither led.”

  Sumantra went. Then Ráma came, And Lakshmaṇ, and the Maithil dame, And, as he led them on, their guide Straight to the monarch’s presence hied. When yet far off the father saw His son with raised palms toward him draw, Girt by his ladies, sick with woes, Swift from his royal seat he rose. With all his strength the aged man To meet his darling Ráma ran, But trembling, wild with dark despair, Fell on the ground and fainted there. And Lakshmaṇ, wont in cars to ride, And Ráma, threw them by the side Of the poor miserable king, Half lifeless with his sorrow’s sting. Throughout the spacious hall up went A thousand women’s wild lament: “Ah Ráma!” thus they wailed and wept, And anklets tinkled as they stepped Around his body, weeping, threw Their loving arms the brothers two, And then, with Sítá’s gentle aid, The king upon a couch was laid. At length to earth’s imperial lord, When life and knowledge were restored, Though seas of woe went o’er his head, With suppliant hand, thus Ráma said: “Lord of us all, great King, thou art: Bid me farewell before we part, To Daṇḍak wood this day I go: One blessing and one look bestow. Let Lakshmaṇ my companion be, And Sítá also follow me. With truthful pleas I sought to bend Their purpose; but no ear they lend. Now cast this sorrow from thy heart, And let us all, great King, depart. As Brahmá sends his children, so Let Lakshmaṇ, me, and Sítá go.”

  He stood unmoved, and watched intent Until the king should grant consent. Upon his son his eyes he cast, And thus the monarch spake at last: “O Ráma, by her arts enslaved, I gave the boons Kaikeyí craved, Unfit to reign, by her misled: Be ruler in thy father’s stead.”

  Thus by the lord of men addressed, Ráma, of virtue’s friends the best, In lore of language duly learned, His answer, reverent, thus returned: “A thousand years, O King, remain O’er this our city still to reign. I in the woods my life will lead: The lust of rule no more I heed. Nine years and five I there will spend, And when the portioned days shall end, Will come, my vows and exile o’er, And clasp thy feet, my King, once more.”

  A captive in the snare of truth, Weeping, distressed with woe and ruth, Thus spake the monarch, while the queen Kaikeyí urged him on unseen: “Go then, O Ráma, and begin Thy course unvext by fear and sin: Go, my beloved son, and earn Success, and joy, and safe return. So fast the bonds of duty bind. O Raghu’s son, thy truthful mind, That naught can turn thee back, or guide Thy will so strongly fortified. But O, a little longer stay, Nor turn thy steps this night away, That I one little day-—alas! One only—-with my son may pass. Me and thy mother do not slight, But stay, my son, with me to-night; With every dainty please thy taste, And seek to-morrow morn the waste. Hard is thy task, O Raghu’s son, Dire is the toil thou wilt not shun, Far to the lonely wood to flee, And leave thy friends for love of me. I swear it by my truth, believe, For thee, my son, I deeply grieve, Misguided by the traitress dame With hidden guile like smouldering flame. Now, by her wicked counsel stirred, Thou fain wouldst keep my plighted word. No marvel that my eldest born Would hold me true when I have sworn.”

  Then Ráma having calmly heard His wretched father speak each word, With Lakshmaṇ standing by his side Thus, humbly, to the King replied: “If dainties now my taste regale, To-morrow must those dainties fail. This day departure I prefer To all that wealth can minister. O’er this fair land, no longer mine, Which I, with all her realms, resign, Her multitudes of men, her grain, Her stores of wealth, let Bharat reign. And let the promised boon which thou Wast pleased to grant the queen ere now, Be hers in full. Be true, O King, Kind giver of each precious thing. Thy spoken word I still will heed, Obeying all thy lips decreed: And fourteen years in woods will dwell With those who live in glade and dell. No hopes of power my heart can touch, No selfish joys attract so much As son of Raghu, to fulfil With heart and soul my father’s will. Dismiss, dismiss thy needless woe, Nor let those drowning torrents flow: The Lord of Rivers in his pride Keeps to the banks that bar his tide. Here in thy presence I declare; By thy good deeds, thy truth, I swear; Nor lordship, joy, nor lands I prize; Life, heaven, all blessings I despise. I wish to see thee still remain Most true, O King, and free from stain. It must not, Sire, it must not be: I cannot rest one hour with thee. Then bring this sorrow to an end, For naught my settled will can bend. I gave a pledge that binds me too, And to that pledge I still am true. Kaikeyí bade me speed away: She prayed me, and I answered yea. Pine not for me, and weep no more; The wood for us has joy in store, Filled with the wild deer’s peaceful herds And voices of a thousand birds. A father is the God of each, Yea, e’en of Gods, so Scriptures teach: And I will keep my sire’s decree, For as a God I honour thee. O best of men, the time is nigh, The fourteen years will soon pass by And to thine eyes thy son restore: Be comforted, and weep no more. Thou with thy firmness shouldst support These weeping crowds who throng the court; Then why, O chief of high renown, So troubled, and thy soul cast down?”




Canto XXXV. Kaikeyí Reproached.


Wild with the rage he could not calm, Sumantra, grinding palm on palm, His head in quick impatience shook, And sighed with woe he could not brook. He gnashed his teeth, his eyes were red, From his changed face the colour fled. In rage and grief that knew no law, The temper of the king he saw. With his word-arrows swift and keen He shook the bosom of the queen. With scorn, as though its lightning stroke Would blast her body, thus he spoke: “Thou, who, of no dread sin afraid, Hast Daśaratha’s self betrayed, Lord of the world, whose might sustains Each thing that moves or fixed remains, What direr crime is left thee now? Death to thy lord and house art thou, Whose cruel deeds the king distress, Mahendra’s peer in mightiness, Firm as the mountain’s rooted steep, Enduring as the Ocean’s deep. Despise not Daśaratha, he Is a kind lord and friend to thee. A loving wife in worth outruns The mother of ten million sons. Kings, when their sires have passed away, Succeed by birthright to the sway. Ikshváku’s son still rules the state, Yet thou this rule wouldst violate. Yea, let thy son, Kaikeyí, reign, Let Bharat rule his sire’s domain. Thy will, O Queen, shall none oppose: We all will go where Ráma goes. No Bráhman, scorning thee, will rest Within the realm thou governest, But all will fly indignant hence: So great thy trespass and offence. I marvel, when thy crime I see, Earth yawns not quick to swallow thee; And that the Bráhman saints prepare No burning scourge thy soul to scare, With cries of shame to smite thee, bent Upon our Ráma’s banishment. The Mango tree with axes fell, And tend instead the Neem tree well, Still watered with all care the tree Will never sweet and pleasant be. Thy mother’s faults to thee descend, And with thy borrowed nature blend. True is the ancient saw: the Neem Can ne’er distil a honeyed stream. Taught by the tale of long ago Thy mother’s hateful sin we know. A bounteous saint, as all have heard, A boon upon thy sire conferred, And all the eloquence revealed That fills the wood, the flood, the field. No creature walked, or swam, or flew, But he its varied language knew. One morn upon his couch he heard The chattering of a gorgeous bird. And as he marked its close intent He laughed aloud in merriment. Thy mother furious with her lord, And fain to perish by the cord, Said to her husband: “I would know, O Monarch, why thou laughest so.” The king in answer spake again: “If I this laughter should explain, This very hour would be my last, For death, be sure would follow fast.” Again thy mother, flushed with ire, To Kekaya spake, thy royal sire: “Tell me the cause; then live or die: I will not brook thy laugh, not I.” Thus by his darling wife addressed, The king whose might all earth confessed, To that kind saint his story told Who gave the wondrous gift of old. He listened to the king’s complaint, And thus in answer spoke the saint: “King, let her quit thy home or die, But never with her prayer comply.” The saint’s reply his trouble stilled, And all his heart with pleasure filled. Thy mother from his home he sent, And days like Lord Kuvera’s spent. So thou wouldst force the king, misled By thee, in evil paths to tread, And bent on evil wouldst begin, Through folly, this career of sin. Most true, methinks, in thee is shown The ancient saw so widely known: The sons their fathers’ worth declare And girls their mothers’ nature share. So be not thou. For pity’s sake Accept the word the monarch spake. Thy husband’s will, O Queen, obey, And be the people’s hope and stay, O, do not, urged by folly, draw The king to tread on duty’s law. The lord who all the world sustains, Bright as the God o’er Gods who reigns. Our glorious king, by sin unstained, Will never grant what fraud obtained; No shade of fault in him is seen: Let Ráma be anointed, Queen. Remember, Queen, undying shame Will through the world pursue thy name, If Ráma leave the king his sire, And, banished, to the wood retire. Come, from thy breast this fever fling: Of his own realm be Ráma king. None in this city e’er can dwell To tend and love thee half so well. When Ráma sits in royal place, True to the custom of his race Our monarch of the mighty bow A hermit to the woods will go.”(310)

  Sumantra thus, palm joined to palm, Poured forth his words of bane and balm, With keen reproach, with pleading kind, Striving to move Kaikeyí’s mind. In vain he prayed, in vain reproved, She heard unsoftened and unmoved. Nor could the eyes that watched her view One yielding look, one change of hue.




Canto XXXVI. Siddhárth’s Speech.


Ikshváku’s son with anguish torn For the great oath his lips had sworn, With tears and sighs of sharpest pain Thus to Sumantra spake again: “Prepare thou quick a perfect force, Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse, To follow Raghu’s scion hence Equipped with all magnificence. Let traders with the wealth they sell, And those who charming stories tell, And dancing-women fair of face, The prince’s ample chariots grace. On all the train who throng his courts, And those who share his manly sports, Great gifts of precious wealth bestow, And bid them with their master go. Let noble arms, and many a wain, And townsmen swell the prince’s train; And hunters best for woodland skill Their places in the concourse fill. While elephants and deer he slays, Drinking wood honey as he strays, And looks on streams each fairer yet, His kingdom he may chance forget. Let all my gold and wealth of corn With Ráma to the wilds be borne; For it will soothe the exile’s lot To sacrifice in each pure spot, Deal ample largess forth, and meet Each hermit in his calm retreat. The wealth shall Ráma with him bear, Ayodhyá shall be Bharat’s share.”

  As thus Kakutstha’s offspring spoke, Fear in Kaikeyí’s breast awoke. The freshness of her face was dried, Her trembling tongue was terror-tied. Alarmed and sad, with bloodless cheek, She turned to him and scarce could speak: “Nay, Sire, but Bharat shall not gain An empty realm where none remain. My Bharat shall not rule a waste Reft of all sweets to charm the taste— The wine-cup’s dregs, all dull and dead, Whence the light foam and life are fled.”

  Thus in her rage the long-eyed dame Spoke her dire speech untouched by shame. Then, answering, Daśaratha spoke: “Why, having bowed me to the yoke, Dost thou, must cruel, spur and goad Me who am struggling with the load? Why didst thou not oppose at first This hope, vile Queen, so fondly nursed?”

  Scarce could the monarch’s angry speech The ears of the fair lady reach, When thus, with double wrath inflamed, Kaikeyí to the king exclaimed:

  “Sagar, from whom thy line is traced, Drove forth his eldest son disgraced, Called Asamanj, whose fate we know: Thus should thy son to exile go.”

  “Fie on thee, dame!” the monarch said; Each of her people bent his head, And stood in shame and sorrow mute: She marked not, bold and resolute. Then great Siddhárth, inflamed with rage, The good old councillor and sage On whose wise rede the king relied, To Queen Kaikeyí thus replied: “But Asamanj the cruel laid His hands on infants as they played, Cast them to Sarjú’s flood, and smiled For pleasure when he drowned a child.”(311) The people saw, and, furious, sped Straight the the king his sire and said: “Choose us, O glory of the throne, Choose us, or Asamanj alone.” “Whence comes this dread?” the monarch cried; And all the people thus replied: “In folly, King, he loves to lay Fierce hands upon our babes at play, Casts them to Sarjú’s flood and joys To murder our bewildered boys.” With heedful ear the king of men Heard each complaining citizen. To please their troubled minds he strove, And from the state his son he drove. With wife and gear upon a car He placed him quick, and sent him far. And thus he gave commandment, “He Shall all his days an exile be.” With basket and with plough he strayed O’er mountain heights, through pathless shade, Roaming all lands a weary time, An outcast wretch defiled with crime. Sagar, the righteous path who held, His wicked offspring thus expelled. But what has Ráma done to blame? Why should his sentence be the same? No sin his stainless name can dim; We see no fault at all in him. Pure as the moon, no darkening blot On his sweet life has left a spot. If thou canst see one fault, e’en one, To dim the fame of Raghu’s son, That fault this hour, O lady, show, And Ráma to the wood shall go. To drive the guiltless to the wild, Truth’s constant lover, undefiled, Would, by defiance of the right, The glory e’en of Indra blight. Then cease, O lady, and dismiss Thy hope to ruin Ráma’s bliss, Or all thy gain, O fair of face, Will be men’s hatred, and disgrace.”




Canto XXXVII. The Coats Of Bark.


Thus spake the virtuous sage: and then Ráma addressed the king of men. In laws of meek behaviour bred, Thus to his sire he meekly said:

  “King, I renounce all earthly care, And live in woods on woodland fare. What, dead to joys, have I to do With lordly train and retinue! Who gives his elephant and yet Upon the girths his heart will set? How can a cord attract his eyes Who gives away the nobler prize? Best of the good, with me be led No host, my King with banners spread. All wealth, all lordship I resign: The hermit’s dress alone be mine. Before I go, have here conveyed A little basket and a spade. With these alone I go, content, For fourteen years of banishment.”

  With her own hands Kaikeyí took The hermit coats of bark, and, “Look,” She cried with bold unblushing brow Before the concourse, “Dress thee now.” That lion leader of the brave Took from her hand the dress she gave, Cast his fine raiment on the ground, And round his waist the vesture bound. Then quick the hero Lakshmaṇ too His garment from his shoulders threw, And, in the presence of his sire, Indued the ascetic’s rough attire. But Sítá, in her silks arrayed, Threw glances, trembling and afraid, On the bark coat she had to wear, Like a shy doe that eyes the snare. Ashamed and weeping for distress From the queen’s hand she took the dress. The fair one, by her husband’s side Who matched heaven’s minstrel monarch,(312) cried: “How bind they on their woodland dress, Those hermits of the wilderness?”

  There stood the pride of Janak’s race Perplexed, with sad appealing face. One coat the lady’s fingers grasped, One round her neck she feebly clasped, But failed again, again, confused By the wild garb she ne’er had used. Then quickly hastening Ráma, pride Of all who cherish virtue, tied The rough bark mantle on her, o’er The silken raiment that she wore.

  Then the sad women when they saw Ráma the choice bark round her draw, Rained water from each tender eye, And cried aloud with bitter cry: “O, not on her, beloved, not On Sítá falls thy mournful lot. If, faithful to thy father’s will, Thou must go forth, leave Sítá still. Let Sítá still remaining here Our hearts with her loved presence cheer. With Lakshmaṇ by thy side to aid Seek thou, dear son, the lonely shade. Unmeet, one good and fair as she Should dwell in woods a devotee. Let not our prayers be prayed in vain: Let beauteous Sítá yet remain; For by thy love of duty tied Thou wilt not here thyself abide.”

  Then the king’s venerable guide Vaśishṭha, when he saw each coat Enclose the lady’s waist and throat, Her zeal with gentle words repressed, And Queen Kaikeyí thus addressed: “O evil-hearted sinner, shame Of royal Kekaya’s race and name; Who matchless in thy sin couldst cheat Thy lord the king with vile deceit; Lost to all sense of duty, know Sítá to exile shall not go. Sítá shall guard, as ’twere her own, The precious trust of Ráma’s throne. Those joined by wedlock’s sweet control Have but one self and common soul. Thus Sítá shall our empress be, For Ráma’s self and soul is she. Or if she still to Ráma cleave And for the woods the kingdom leave: If naught her loving heart deter, We and this town will follow her. The warders of the queen shall take Their wives and go for Ráma’s sake, The nation with its stores of grain, The city’s wealth shall swell his train. Bharat, Śatrughna both will wear Bark mantles, and his lodging share, Still with their elder brother dwell In the wild wood, and serve him well. Rest here alone, and rule thy state Unpeopled, barren, desolate; Be empress of the land and trees, Thou sinner whom our sorrows please. The land which Ráma reigns not o’er Shall bear the kingdom’s name no more: The woods which Ráma wanders through Shall be our home and kingdom too. Bharat, be sure, will never deign O’er realms his father yields, to reign. Nay, if the king’s true son he be, He will not, sonlike, dwell with thee. Nay, shouldst thou from the earth arise, And send thy message from the skies, To his forefathers’ custom true No erring course would he pursue. So hast thou, by thy grievous fault, Offended him thou wouldst exalt. In all the world none draws his breath Who loves not Ráma, true to death. This day, O Queen, shalt thou behold Birds, deer, and beasts from lea and fold Turn to the woods in Ráma’s train. And naught save longing trees remain.”




Canto XXXVIII. Care For Kausalyá


Then when the people wroth and sad Saw Sítá in bark vesture clad, Though wedded, like some widowed thing, They cried out, “Shame upon thee, King!” Grieved by their cry and angry look The lord of earth at once forsook All hope in life that still remained, In duty, self, and fame unstained. Ikshváku’s son with burning sighs On Queen Kaikeyí bent his eyes, And said: “But Sítá must not flee In garments of a devotee. My holy guide has spoken truth: Unfit is she in tender youth, So gently nurtured, soft and fair, The hardships of the wood to share. How has she sinned, devout and true,     The noblest monarch’s child,   That she should garb of bark indue     And journey to the wild?   That she should spend her youthful days     Amid a hermit band,   Like some poor mendicant who strays     Sore troubled, through the land?   Ah, let the child of Janak throw     Her dress of bark aside,   And let the royal lady go     With royal wealth supplied.   Not such the pledge I gave before,     Unfit to linger here:   The oath, which I the sinner swore     Is kept, and leaves her clear.   Won from her childlike love this too     My instant death would be,   As blossoms on the old bamboo     Destroy the parent tree.(313) If aught amiss by Ráma done Offend thee, O thou wicked one, What least transgression canst thou find In her, thou worst of womankind? What shade of fault in her appears, Whose full soft eye is like the deer’s? What canst thou blame in Janak’s child, So gentle, modest, true, and mild? Is not one crime complete, that sent My Ráma forth to banishment? And wilt thou other sins commit, Thou wicked one, to double it? This is the pledge and oath I swore, What thou besoughtest, and no more, Of Ráma—for I heard thee, dame— When he for consecration came. Now with this limit not content, In hell should be thy punishment, Who fain the Maithil bride wouldst press To clothe her limbs with hermit dress.”

  Thus spake the father in his woe; And Ráma, still prepared to go, To him who sat with drooping head Spake in return these words and said:

  “Just King, here stands my mother dear, Kauśalyá, one whom all revere. Submissive, gentle, old is she, And keeps her lips from blame of thee, For her, kind lord, of me bereft A sea of whelming woe is left. O, show her in her new distress Still fonder love and tenderness. Well honoured by thine honoured hand Her grief for me let her withstand, Who wrapt in constant thought of me In me would live a devotee. Peer of Mahendra, O, to her be kind, And treat I pray, my gentle mother so, That, when I dwell afar, her life resigned, She may not pass to Yáma’s realm for woe.”




Canto XXXIX. Counsel To Sítá.


Scarce had the sire, with each dear queen, Heard Ráma’s pleading voice, and seen His darling in his hermit dress Ere failed his senses for distress. Convulsed with woe, his soul that shook, On Raghu’s son he could not look; Or if he looked with failing eye He could not to the chief reply. By pangs of bitter grief assailed, The long-armed monarch wept and wailed, Half dead a while and sore distraught, While Ráma filled his every thought. “This hand of mine in days ere now Has reft her young from many a cow, Or living things has idly slain: Hence comes, I ween, this hour of pain. Not till the hour is come to die Can from its shell the spirit fly. Death comes not, and Kaikeyí still Torments the wretch she cannot kill, Who sees his son before him quit The fine soft robes his rank that fit, And, glorious as the burning fire, In hermit garb his limbs attire. Now all the people grieve and groan Through Queen Kaikeyí’s deed alone, Who, having dared this deed of sin, Strives for herself the gain to win.”

  He spoke. With tears his eyes grew dim, His senses all deserted him. He cried, O Ráma, once, then weak And fainting could no further speak. Unconscious there he lay: at length Regathering his sense and strength, While his full eyes their torrents shed, To wise Sumantra thus he said: “Yoke the light car, and hither lead Fleet coursers of the noblest breed, And drive this heir of lofty fate Beyond the limit of the state. This seems the fruit that virtues bear, The meed of worth which texts declare— The sending of the brave and good By sire and mother to the wood.’”

  He heard the monarch, and obeyed, With ready feet that ne’er delayed, And brought before the palace gate The horses and the car of state. Then to the monarch’s son he sped, And raising hands of reverence said That the light car which gold made fair, With best of steeds, was standing there. King Daśaratha called in haste The lord o’er all his treasures placed. And spoke, well skilled in place and time, His will to him devoid of crime: “Count all the years she has to live Afar in forest wilds, and give To Sítá robes and gems of price As for the time may well suffice.” Quick to the treasure-room he went, Charged by that king most excellent, Brought the rich stores, and gave them all To Sítá in the monarch’s hall. The Maithil dame of high descent Received each robe and ornament, And tricked those limbs, whose lines foretold High destiny, with gems and gold. So well adorned, so fair to view, A glory through the hall she threw: So, when the Lord of Light upsprings, His radiance o’er the sky he flings. Then Queen Kauśalyá spake at last, With loving arms about her cast, Pressed lingering kisses on her head, And to the high-souled lady said: “Ah, in this faithless world below When dark misfortune comes and woe, Wives, loved and cherished every day, Neglect their lords and disobey. Yes, woman’s nature still is this:— After long days of calm and bliss When some light grief her spirit tries, She changes all her love, or flies. Young wives are thankless, false in soul, With roving hearts that spurn control. Brooding on sin and quickly changed, In one short hour their love estranged. Not glorious deed or lineage fair, Not knowledge, gift, or tender care In chains of lasting love can bind A woman’s light inconstant mind. But those good dames who still maintain What right, truth, Scripture, rule ordain— No holy thing in their pure eyes With one beloved husband vies. Nor let thy lord my son, condemned To exile, be by thee contemned, For be he poor or wealthy, he Is as a God, dear child, to thee.”

  When Sítá heard Kauśalyá’s speech Her duty and her gain to teach, She joined her palms with reverent grace And gave her answer face to face: “All will I do, forgetting naught, Which thou, O honoured Queen, hast taught. I know, have heard, and deep have stored The rules of duty to my lord. Not me, good Queen, shouldst thou include Among the faithless multitude. Its own sweet light the moon shall leave Ere I to duty cease to cleave. The stringless lute gives forth no strain, The wheelless car is urged in vain; No joy a lordless dame, although Blest with a hundred sons, can know. From father, brother, and from son A measured share of joy is won: Who would not honour, love, and bless Her lord, whose gifts are measureless? Thus trained to think, I hold in awe Scripture’s command and duty’s law. Him can I hold in slight esteem? Her lord is woman’s God, I deem.” Kauśalyá heard the lady’s speech, Nor failed those words her heart to reach. Then, pure in mind, she gave to flow The tear that sprang of joy and woe. Then duteous Ráma forward came And stood before the honoured dame, And joining reverent hands addressed The queen in rank above the rest: “O mother, from these tears refrain; Look on my sire and still thy pain. To thee my days afar shall fly As if sweet slumber closed thine eye, And fourteen years of exile seem To thee, dear mother, like a dream. On me returning safe and well, Girt by my friends, thine eyes shall dwell.”

  Thus for their deep affection’s sake The hero to his mother spake, Then to the half seven hundred too, Wives of his sire, paid reverence due. Thus Daśaratha’s son addressed That crowd of matrons sore distressed: “If from these lips, while here I dwelt, One heedless taunt you e’er have felt, Forgive me, pray. And now adieu, I bid good-bye to all of you.” Then straight, like curlews’ cries, upwent The voices of their wild lament, While, as he bade farewell, the crowd Of royal women wept aloud, And through the ample hall’s extent. Where erst the sound of tabour, blent With drum and shrill-toned instrument,   In joyous concert rose, Now rang the sound of wailing high, The lamentation and the cry, The shriek, the choking sob, the sigh   That told the ladies’ woes.




Canto XL. Ráma’s Departure.


Then Ráma, Sítá, Lakshmaṇ bent At the king’s feet, and sadly went Round him with slow steps reverent. When Ráma of the duteous heart Had gained his sire’s consent to part, With Sítá by his side he paid Due reverence to the queen dismayed. And Lakshmaṇ, with affection meet, Bowed down and clasped his mother’s feet. Sumitrá viewed him as he pressed Her feet, and thus her son addressed: “Neglect not Ráma wandering there, But tend him with thy faithful care. In hours of wealth, in time of woe, Him, sinless son, thy refuge know. From this good law the just ne’er swerve, That younger sons the eldest serve, And to this righteous rule incline All children of thine ancient line— Freely to give, reward each rite, Nor spare their bodies in the fight. Let Ráma Daśaratha be, Look upon Sítá as on me, And let the cot wherein you dwell Be thine Ayodhyá. Fare thee well.” Her blessing thus Sumitrá gave To him whose soul to Ráma clave, Exclaiming, when her speech was done, “Go forth, O Lakshmaṇ, go, my son. Go forth, my son to win success, High victory and happiness. Go forth thy foemen to destroy, And turn again at last with joy.”

  As Mátali his charioteer Speaks for the Lord of Gods to hear, Sumantra, palm to palm applied, In reverence trained, to Ráma cried: “O famous Prince, my car ascend,— May blessings on thy course attend,— And swiftly shall my horses flee And place thee where thou biddest me. The fourteen years thou hast to stay Far in the wilds, begin to-day; For Oueen Kaikeyí cries, Away.”

  Then Sítá, best of womankind, Ascended, with a tranquil mind, Soon as her toilet task was done, That chariot brilliant as the sun. Ráma and Lakshmaṇ true and bold Sprang on the car adorned with gold. The king those years had counted o’er, And given Sítá robes and store Of precious ornaments to wear When following her husband there. The brothers in the car found place For nets and weapons of the chase, There warlike arms and mail they laid, A leathern basket and a spade. Soon as Sumantra saw the three Were seated in the chariot, he Urged on each horse of noble breed, Who matched the rushing wind in speed. As thus the son of Raghu went Forth for his dreary banishment, Chill numbing grief the town assailed, All strength grew weak, all spirit failed, Ayodhyá through her wide extent Was filled with tumult and lament: Steeds neighed and shook the bells they bore, Each elephant returned a roar. Then all the city, young and old, Wild with their sorrow uncontrolled, Rushed to the car, as, from the sun The panting herds to water run. Before the car, behind, they clung, And there as eagerly they hung, With torrents streaming from their eyes, Called loudly with repeated cries: “Listen, Sumantra: draw thy rein; Drive gently, and thy steeds restrain. Once more on Ráma will we gaze, Now to be lost for many days. The queen his mother has, be sure, A heart of iron, to endure To see her godlike Ráma go, Nor feel it shattered by the blow. Sítá, well done! Videha’s pride, Still like his shadow by his side; Rejoicing in thy duty still As sunlight cleaves to Meru’s hill. Thou, Lakshmaṇ, too, hast well deserved, Who from thy duty hast not swerved, Tending the peer of Gods above, Whose lips speak naught but words of love. Thy firm resolve is nobly great, And high success on thee shall wait. Yea, thou shalt win a priceless meed— Thy path with him to heaven shall lead.” As thus they spake, they could not hold The tears that down their faces rolled, While still they followed for a space Their darling of Ikshváku’s race.

  There stood surrounded by a ring Of mournful wives the mournful king; For, “I will see once more,” he cried, “Mine own dear son,” and forth he hied. As he came near, there rose the sound Of weeping, as the dames stood round. So the she-elephants complain When their great lord and guide is slain. Kakutstha’s son, the king of men, The glorious sire, looked troubled then, As the full moon is when dismayed By dark eclipse’s threatening shade. Then Daśaratha’s son, designed For highest fate of lofty mind, Urged to more speed the charioteer, “Away, away! why linger here? Urge on thy horses,” Rama cried, And “Stay, O stay,” the people sighed. Sumantra, urged to speed away, The townsmen’s call must disobey, Forth as the long-armed hero went, The dust his chariot wheels up sent Was laid by streams that ever flowed From their sad eyes who filled the road. Then, sprung of woe, from eyes of all The women drops began to fall, As from each lotus on the lake The darting fish the water shake. When he, the king of high renown, Saw that one thought held all the town, Like some tall tree he fell and lay, Whose root the axe has hewn away. Then straight a mighty cry from those Who followed Ráma’s car arose, Who saw their monarch fainting there Beneath that grief too great to bear. Then “Ráma, Ráma!” with the cry Of “Ah, his mother!” sounded high, As all the people wept aloud Around the ladies’ sorrowing crowd. When Ráma backward turned his eye, And saw the king his father lie With troubled sense and failing limb, And the sad queen, who followed him, Like some young creature in the net, That will not, in its misery, let Its wild eyes on its mother rest, So, by the bonds of duty pressed, His mother’s look he could not meet. He saw them with their weary feet, Who, used to bliss, in cars should ride, Who ne’er by sorrow should be tried, And, as one mournful look he cast, “Drive on,” he cried, “Sumantra, fast.” As when the driver’s torturing hook Goads on an elephant, the look Of sire and mother in despair Was more than Ráma’s heart could bear. As mother kine to stalls return Which hold the calves for whom they yearn, So to the car she tried to run As a cow seeks her little one. Once and again the hero’s eyes Looked on his mother, as with cries Of woe she called and gestures wild, “O Sítá, Lakshmaṇ, O my child!” “Stay,” cried the king, “thy chariot stay:” “On, on,” cried Ráma, “speed away.” As one between two hosts, inclined To neither was Sumantra’s mind. But Ráma spake these words again: “A lengthened woe is bitterest pain. On, on; and if his wrath grow hot, Thine answer be, ‘I heard thee not.’ ” Sumantra, at the chief’s behest, Dismissed the crowd that toward him pressed, And, as he bade, to swiftest speed Urged on his way each willing steed. The king’s attendants parted thence, And paid him heart-felt reverence: In mind, and with the tears he wept, Each still his place near Ráma kept. As swift away the horses sped, His lords to Daśaratha said: “To follow him whom thou again Wouldst see returning home is vain.”   With failing limb and drooping mien     He heard their counsel wise:   Still on their son the king and queen     Kept fast their lingering eyes.(314)




Canto XLI. The Citizens’ Lament.


The lion chief with hands upraised Was born from eyes that fondly gazed. But then the ladies’ bower was rent With cries of weeping and lament: “Where goes he now, our lord, the sure Protector of the friendless poor, In whom the wretched and the weak Defence and aid were wont to seek? All words of wrath he turned aside, And ne’er, when cursed, in ire replied. He shared his people’s woe, and stilled The troubled breast which rage had filled. Our chief, on lofty thoughts intent, In glorious fame preëminent: As on his own dear mother, thus He ever looked on each of us. Where goes he now? His sire’s behest, By Queen Kaikeyí’s guile distressed, Has banished to the forest hence Him who was all the world’s defence. Ah, senseless King, to drive away The hope of men, their guard and stay, To banish to the distant wood Ráma the duteous, true, and good!” The royal dames, like cows bereaved Of their young calves, thus sadly grieved. The monarch heard them as they wailed, And by the fire of grief assailed For his dear son, he bowed his head, And all his sense and memory fled.

  Then were no fires of worship fed, Thick darkness o’er the sun was spread. The cows their thirsty calves denied, And elephants flung their food aside. Triśanku,(315) Jupiter looked dread, And Mercury and Mars the red, In direful opposition met, The glory of the moon beset. The lunar stars withheld their light, The planets were no longer bright, But meteors with their horrid glare, And dire Viśákhás(316) lit the air. As troubled Ocean heaves and raves When Doom’s wild tempest sweeps the waves, Thus all Ayodhyá reeled and bent When Ráma to the forest went. And chilling grief and dark despair Fell suddenly on all men there. Their wonted pastime all forgot, Nor thought of food, or touched it not. Crowds in the royal street were seen With weeping eye and troubled mien: No more a people gay and glad, Each head and heart was sick and sad. No more the cool wind softly blew, The moon no more was fair to view, No more the sun with genial glow Cherished the world now plunged in woe. Sons, brothers, husbands, wedded wives Forgot the ties that joined their lives; No thought for kith and kin was spared, But all for only Ráma cared. And Ráma’s friends who loved him best, Their minds disordered and distressed. By the great burthen of their woes Turned not to slumber or repose. Like Earth with all her hills bereft     Of Indra’s guiding care.   Ayodhyá in her sorrow left     By him, the high souled heir,   Was bowed by fear and sorrow’s force,     And shook with many a throe,   While warrior, elephant, and horse     Sent up the cry of woe.




Canto XLII. Dasaratha’s Lament.


While yet the dust was seen afar That marked the course of Ráma’s car, The glory of Ikshváku’s race Turned not away his eager face. While yet his duteous son he saw He could not once his gaze withdraw, But rooted to the spot remained With eyes that after Ráma strained. But when that dust no more he viewed, Fainting he fell by grief subdued. To his right hand Kauśalyá went, And ready aid the lady lent, While Bharat’s loving mother tried To raise him on the other side. The king, within whose ordered soul Justice and virtue held control, To Queen Kaikeyí turned and said, With every sense disquieted: “Touch me not, thou whose soul can plot All sin. Kaikeyí, touch me not. No loving wife, no friend to me, I ne’er again would look on thee; Ne’er from this day have aught to do With thee and all thy retinue; Thee whom no virtuous thoughts restrain, Whose selfish heart seeks only gain. The hand I laid in mine, O dame, The steps we took around the flame,(317) And all that links thy life to mine Here and hereafter I resign. If Bharat too, thy darling son, Joy in the rule thy art has won, Ne’er may the funeral offerings paid By his false hand approach my shade.”

  Then while the dust upon him hung, The monarch to Kauśalyá clung, And she with mournful steps and slow Turned to the palace, worn with woe. As one whose hand has touched the fire, Or slain a Bráhman in his ire, He felt his heart with sorrow torn Still thinking of his son forlorn. Each step was torture, as the road The traces of the chariot showed, And as the shadowed sun grows dim So care and anguish darkened him. He raised a cry, by woe distraught, As of his son again he thought. And judging that the car had sped Beyond the city, thus he said: “I still behold the foot-prints made By the good horses that conveyed My son afar: these marks I see, But high-souled Ráma, where is he? Ah me, my son! my first and best, On pleasant couches wont to rest, With limbs perfumed with sandal, fanned By many a beauty’s tender hand: Where will he lie with log or stone Beneath him for a pillow thrown, To leave at morn his earthy bed, Neglected, and with dust o’erspread, As from the flood with sigh and pant Comes forth the husband elephant? The men who make the woods their home Shall see the long-armed hero roam Roused from his bed, though lord of all, In semblance of a friendless thrall. Janak’s dear child who ne’er has met With aught save joy and comfort yet, Will reach to-day the forest, worn And wearied with the brakes of thorn. Ah, gentle girl, of woods unskilled, How will her heart with dread be filled At the wild beasts’ deep roaring there, Whose voices lift the shuddering hair! Kaikeyí, glory in thy gain, And, widow queen, begin to reign: No will, no power to live have I When my brave son no more is nigh.”

  Thus pouring forth laments, the king Girt by the people’s crowded ring, Entered the noble bower like one New-bathed when funeral rites are done. Where’er he looked naught met his gaze But empty houses, courts, and ways. Closed were the temples: countless feet No longer trod the royal street, And thinking of his son he viewed Men weak and worn and woe-subdued. As sinks the sun into a cloud, So passed he on, and wept aloud, Within that house no more to be The dwelling of the banished three, Brave Ráma, his Vedehan bride, And Lakshmaṇ by his brother’s side: Like broad still waters, when the king Of all the birds that ply the wing Has swooped from heaven and borne away The glittering snakes that made them gay. With choking sobs and voice half spent The king renewed his sad lament: With broken utterance faint and low Scarce could he speak these words of woe: “My steps to Ráma’s mother guide, And place me by Kauśalyá’s side: There, only there my heart may know Some little respite from my woe.”

  The warders of the palace led The monarch, when his words were said, To Queen Kauśalyá’s bower, and there Laid him with reverential care. But while he rested on the bed Still was his soul disquieted. In grief he tossed his arms on high Lamenting with a piteous cry: “O Ráma, Ráma,” thus said he, “My son, thou hast forsaken me. High bliss awaits those favoured men Left living in Ayodhyá then, Whose eyes shall see my son once more Returning when the time is o’er.” Then came the night, whose hated gloom Fell on him like the night of doom. At midnight Daśaratha cried To Queen Kauśalyá by his side: “I see thee not, Kauśalyá; lay Thy gentle hand in mine, I pray. When Ráma left his home my sight Went with him, nor returns to-night.”




Canto XLIII. Kausalyá’s Lament.


Kauśalyá saw the monarch lie With drooping frame and failing eye, And for her banished son distressed With these sad words her lord addressed: “Kaikeyí, cruel, false, and vile Has cast the venom of her guile On Ráma lord of men, and she Will ravage like a snake set free; And more and more my soul alarm, Like a dire serpent bent on harm, For triumph crowns each dark intent, And Ráma to the wild is sent. Ah, were he doomed but here to stray Begging his food from day to day, Or do, enslaved, Kaikeyí’s will, This were a boon, a comfort still. But she, as chose her cruel hate, Has hurled him from his high estate, As Bráhmans when the moon is new Cast to the ground the demons’ due.(318) The long-armed hero, like the lord Of Nágas, with his bow and sword Begins, I ween, his forest life With Lakshmaṇ and his faithful wife. Ah, how will fare the exiles now, Whom, moved by Queen Kaikeyí, thou Hast sent in forests to abide, Bred in delights, by woe untried? Far banished when their lives are young, With the fair fruit before them hung, Deprived of all their rank that suits, How will they live on grain and roots? O, that my years of woe were passed, And the glad hour were come at last When I shall see my children dear, Ráma, his wife, and Lakshmaṇ here! When shall Ayodhyá, wild with glee, Again those mighty heroes see, And decked with wreaths her banners wave To welcome home the true and brave? When will the beautiful city view With happy eyes the lordly two Returning, joyful as the main When the dear moon is full again? When, like some mighty bull who leads The cow exulting through the meads, Will Ráma through the city ride, Strong-armed, with Sítá at his side? When will ten thousand thousand meet And crowd Ayodhyá’s royal street, And grain in joyous welcome throw Upon my sons who tame the foe? When with delight shall youthful bands Of Bráhman maidens in their hands Bear fruit and flowers in goodly show, And circling round Ayodhyá go? With ripened judgment of a sage, And godlike in his blooming age, When shall my virtuous son appear, Like kindly rain, our hearts to cheer? Ah, in a former life, I ween, This hand of mine, most base and mean, Has dried the udders of the kine And left the thirsty calves to pine. Hence, as the lion robs the cow, Kaikeyí makes me childless now, Exulting from her feebler foe To rend the son she cherished so. I had but him, in Scripture skilled, With every grace his soul was filled. Now not a joy has life to give, And robbed of him I would not live: Yea, all my days are dark and drear If he, my darling, be not near, And Lakshmaṇ brave, my heart to cheer. As for my son I mourn and yearn, The quenchless flames of anguish burn   And kill me with the pain, As in the summer’s noontide blaze The glorious Day-God with his rays   Consumes the parching plain.”




Canto XLIV. Sumitrá’s Speech.


Kauśalyá ceased her sad lament, Of beauteous dames most excellent. Sumitrá who to duty clave, In righteous words this answer gave: “Dear Queen, all noble virtues grace Thy son, of men the first in place. Why dost thou shed these tears of woe With bitter grief lamenting so? If Ráma, leaving royal sway Has hastened to the woods away, ’Tis for his high-souled father’s sake That he his premise may not break. He to the path of duty clings Which lordly fruit hereafter brings— The path to which the righteous cleave— For him, dear Queen, thou shouldst not grieve. And Lakshmaṇ too, the blameless-souled, The same high course with him will hold, And mighty bliss on him shall wait, So tenderly compassionate. And Sítá, bred with tender care, Well knows what toils await her there, But in her love she will not part From Ráma of the virtuous heart. Now has thy son through all the world The banner of his fame unfurled; True, modest, careful of his vow, What has he left to aim at now? The sun will mark his mighty soul, His wisdom, sweetness, self-control, Will spare from pain his face and limb, And with soft radiance shine for him. For him through forest glades shall spring A soft auspicious breeze, and bring Its tempered heat and cold to play Around him ever night and day. The pure cold moonbeams shall delight The hero as he sleeps at night, And soothe him with the soft caress Of a fond parent’s tenderness. To him, the bravest of the brave, His heavenly arms the Bráhman gave, When fierce Suváhu dyed the plain With his life-blood by Ráma slain. Still trusting to his own right arm Thy hero son will fear no harm: As in his father’s palace, he In the wild woods will dauntless be. Whene’er he lets his arrows fly His stricken foemen fall and die: And is that prince of peerless worth Too weak to keep and sway the earth? His sweet pure soul, his beauty’s charm, His hero heart, his warlike arm, Will soon redeem his rightful reign When from the woods he comes again. The Bráhmans on the prince’s head King-making drops shall quickly shed, And Sítá, Earth, and Fortune share The glories which await the heir. For him, when forth his chariot swept, The crowd that thronged Ayodhyá wept, With agonizing woe distressed. With him in hermít’s mantle dressed In guise of Sítá Lakshmí went, And none his glory may prevent. Yea, naught to him is high or hard, Before whose steps, to be his guard, Lakshmaṇ, the best who draws the bow, With spear, shaft, sword rejoiced to go. His wanderings in the forest o’er, Thine eyes shall see thy son once more, Quit thy faint heart, thy grief dispel, For this, O Queen, is truth I tell. Thy son returning, moonlike, thence, Shall at thy feet do reverence, And, blest and blameless lady, thou Shalt see his head to touch them bow, Yea, thou shalt see thy son made king When he returns with triumphing, And how thy happy eyes will brim With tears of joy to look on him! Thou, blameless lady, shouldst the whole Of the sad people here console: Why in thy tender heart allow This bitter grief to harbour now? As the long banks of cloud distil Their water when they see the hill, So shall the drops of rapture run From thy glad eyes to see thy son Returning, as he lowly bends To greet thee, girt by all his friends.”

  Thus soothing, kindly eloquent, With every hopeful argument Kauśalyá’s heart by sorrow rent,   Fair Queen Sumitrá ceased. Kauśalyá heard each pleasant plea, And grief began to leave her free, As the light clouds of autumn flee,   Their watery stores decreased.




Canto XLV. The Tamasá.


Their tender love the people drew To follow Ráma brave and true, The high-souled hero, as he went Forth from his home to banishment. The king himself his friends obeyed, And turned him homeward as they prayed. But yet the people turned not back, Still close on Ráma’s chariot track. For they who in Ayodhyá dwelt For him such fond affection felt, Decked with all grace and glories high, The dear full moon of every eye. Though much his people prayed and wept, Kakutstha’s son his purpose kept, And still his journey would pursue To keep the king his father true. Deep in the hero’s bosom sank Their love, whose signs his glad eye drank. He spoke to cheer them, as his own Dear children, in a loving tone: “If ye would grant my fond desire, Give Bharat now that love entire And reverence shown to me by all Who dwell within Ayodhyá’s wall. For he, Kaikeyí’s darling son, His virtuous career will run, And ever bound by duty’s chain Consult your weal and bliss and gain. In judgment old, in years a child, With hero virtues meek and mild, A fitting lord is he to cheer His people and remove their fear. In him all kingly gifts abound, More noble than in me are found: Imperial prince, well proved and tried— Obey him as your lord and guide. And grant, I pray, the boon I ask: To please the king be still your task, That his fond heart, while I remain Far in the wood, may feel no pain.”

  The more he showed his will to tread The path where filial duty led, The more the people, round him thronged, For their dear Ráma’s empire longed. Still more attached his followers grew, As Ráma, with his brother, drew The people with his virtues’ ties, Lamenting all with tear-dimmed eyes. The saintly twice-born, triply old In glory, knowledge, seasons told, With hoary heads that shook and bowed, Their voices raised and spake aloud: “O steeds, who best and noblest are, Who whirl so swiftly Ráma’s car, Go not, return: we call on you: Be to your master kind and true. For speechless things are swift to hear, And naught can match a horse’s ear, O generous steeds, return, when thus You hear the cry of all of us. Each vow he keeps most firm and sure, And duty makes his spirit pure. Back with our chief! not wood-ward hence; Back to his royal residence!”

  Soon as he saw the aged band. Exclaiming in their misery, stand, And their sad cries around him rang, Swift from his chariot Ráma sprang. Then, still upon his journey bent, With Sítá and with Lakshmaṇ went The hero by the old men’s side Suiting to theirs his shortened stride. He could not pass the twice-born throng As weariedly they walked along: With pitying heart, with tender eye, He could not in his chariot fly. When the steps of Ráma viewed That still his onward course pursued, Woe shook the troubled heart of each, And burnt with grief they spoke this speech—

  “With thee, O Ráma, to the wood All Bráhmans go and Bráhmanhood: Borne on our aged shoulders, see, Our fires of worship go with thee. Bright canopies that lend their shade In Vájapeya(319) rites displayed, In plenteous store are borne behind Like cloudlets in the autumn wind. No shelter from the sun hast thou, And, lest his fury burn thy brow, These sacrificial shades we bear Shall aid thee in the noontide glare. Our hearts, who ever loved to pore On sacred text and Vedic lore, Now all to thee, beloved, turn, And for a life in forests yearn. Deep in our aged bosoms lies The Vedas’ lore, the wealth we prize, There still, like wives at home, shall dwell, Whose love and truth protect them well. To follow thee our hearts are bent; We need not plan or argument. All else in duty’s law we slight, For following thee is following right. O noble Prince, retrace thy way: O, hear us, Ráma, as we lay, With many tears and many prayers, Our aged heads and swan-white hairs Low in the dust before thy feet; O, hear us, Ráma, we entreat. Full many of these who with thee run, Their sacred rites had just begun. Unfinished yet those rites remain; But finished if thou turn again. All rooted life and things that move To thee their deep affection prove. To them, when warmed by love, they glow And sue to thee, some favour show, Each lowly bush, each towering tree Would follow too for love of thee. Bound by its root it must remain; But—all it can—its boughs complain, As when the wild wind rushes by It tells its woe in groan and sigh. No more through air the gay birds flit, But, foodless, melancholy sit Together on the branch and call To thee whose kind heart feels for all.”

  As wailed the aged Bráhmans, bent To turn him back, with wild lament, Seemed Tamasá herself to aid, Checking his progress, as they prayed. Sumantra from the chariot freed With ready hand each weary steed; He groomed them with the utmost heed,

  Their limbs he bathed and dried, Then led them forth to drink and feed At pleasure in the grassy mead That fringed the river side.




Canto XLVI. The Halt.


When Ráma, chief of Raghu’s race, Arrived at that delightful place, He looked on Sítá first, and then To Lakshmaṇ spake the lord of men: “Now first the shades of night descend Since to the wilds our steps we bend. Joy to thee, brother! do not grieve For our dear home and all we leave. The woods unpeopled seem to weep Around us, as their tenants creep Or fly to lair and den and nest, Both bird and beast, to seek their rest. Methinks Ayodhyá’s royal town Where dwells my sire of high renown, With all her men and dames to-night Will mourn us vanished from their sight. For, by his virtues won, they cling In fond affection to their king, And thee and me, O brave and true, And Bharat and Śatrughna too. I for my sire and mother feel Deep sorrow o’er my bosom steal, Lest mourning us, oppressed with fears, They blind their eyes with endless tears. Yet Bharat’s duteous love will show Sweet comfort in their hours of woe, And with kind words their hearts sustain, Suggesting duty, bliss, and gain. I mourn my parents now no more: I count dear Bharat’s virtues o’er, And his kind love and care dispel The doubts I had, and all is well. And thou thy duty wouldst not shun, And, following me, hast nobly done; Else, bravest, I should need a band Around my wife as guard to stand. On this first night, my thirst to slake, Some water only will I take: Thus, brother, thus my will decides, Though varied store the wood provides.”

  Thus having said to Lakshmaṇ, he Addressed in turn Sumantra: “Be Most diligent to-night, my friend, And with due care thy horses tend.” The sun had set: Sumantra tied His noble horses side by side, Gave store of grass with liberal hand, And rested near them on the strand. Each paid the holy evening rite, And when around them fell the night, The charioteer, with Lakshmaṇ’s aid, A lowly bed for Ráma laid. To Lakshmaṇ Ráma bade adieu, And then by Sítá’s side he threw His limbs upon the leafy bed Their care upon the bank had spread. When Lakshmaṇ saw the couple slept, Still on the strand his watch he kept, Still with Sumantra there conversed, And Ráma’s varied gifts rehearsed. All night he watched, nor sought repose, Till on the earth the sun arose: With him Sumantra stayed awake, And still of Ráma’s virtues spake. Thus, near the river’s grassy shore Which herds unnumbered wandered o’er, Repose, untroubled, Ráma found, And all the people lay around. The glorious hero left his bed, Looked on the sleeping crowd, and said To Lakshmaṇ, whom each lucky line Marked out for bliss with surest sign:

  “O brother Lakshmaṇ, look on these Reclining at the roots of trees; All care of house and home resigned, Caring for us with heart and mind, These people of the city yearn To see us to our home return: To quit their lives will they consent, But never leave their firm intent. Come, while they all unconscious sleep, Let us upon the chariot leap, And swiftly on our journey speed Where naught our progress may impede, That these fond citizens who roam Far from Ikshváku’s ancient home, No more may sleep ’neath bush and tree, Following still for love of me. A prince with tender care should heal The self-brought woes his people feel, And never let his subjects share The burthen he is forced to bear.”

  Then Lakshmaṇ to the chief replied, Who stood like Justice by his side: “Thy rede, O sage, I well commend: Without delay the car ascend.” Then Ráma to Sumantra spoke: “Thy rapid steeds, I pray thee, yoke. Hence to the forest will I go: Away, my lord, and be not slow.”

  Sumantra, urged to utmost speed, Yoked to the car each generous steed, And then, with hand to hand applied, He came before the chief and cried: “Hail, Prince, whom mighty arms adorn, Hail, bravest of the chariot-borne! With Sítá and thy brother thou Mayst mount: the car is ready now.”

  The hero clomb the car with haste: His bow and gear within were placed, And quick the eddying flood he passed Of Tamasá whose waves run fast. Soon as he touched the farther side, That strong-armed hero, glorified, He found a road both wide and clear, Where e’en the timid naught could fear. Then, that the crowd might be misled, Thus Ráma to Sumantra said: “Speed north a while, then hasten back, Returning in thy former track, That so the people may not learn The course I follow: drive and turn.”

  Sumantra, at the chief’s behest, Quick to the task himself addressed; Then near to Ráma came, and showed The chariot ready for the road. With Sítá, then, the princely two, Who o’er the line of Raghu threw A glory ever bright and new,   Upon the chariot stood. Sumantra fast and faster drove His horses, who in fleetness strove Still onward to the distant grove,   The hermit-haunted wood.




Canto XLVII. The Citizens’ Return.


The people, when the morn shone fair, Arose to find no Ráma there. Then fear and numbing grief subdued The senses of the multitude. The woe-born tears were running fast As all around their eyes they cast, And sadly looked, but found no trace Of Ráma, searching every place. Bereft of Ráma good and wise, With drooping cheer and weeping eyes, Each woe-distracted sage gave vent To sorrow in his wild lament: “Woe worth the sleep that stole our sense With its beguiling influence, That now we look in vain for him Of the broad chest and stalwart limb! How could the strong-armed hero, thus Deceiving all, abandon us? His people so devoted see, Yet to the woods, a hermit, flee? How can he, wont our hearts to cheer, As a fond sire his children dear,— How can the pride of Raghu’s race Fly from us to some desert place! Here let us all for death prepare, Or on the last great journey fare;(320) Of Ráma our dear lord bereft, What profit in our lives is left? Huge trunks of trees around us lie, With roots and branches sere and dry, Come let us set these logs on fire And throw our bodies on the pyre. What shall we speak? How can we say We followed Ráma on his way, The mighty chief whose arm is strong, Who sweetly speaks, who thinks no wrong? Ayodhyá’s town with sorrow dumb, Without our lord will see us come, And hopeless misery will strike Elder, and child, and dame alike. Forth with that peerless chief we came, Whose mighty heart is aye the same: How, reft of him we love, shall we Returning dare that town to see?”

  Complaining thus with varied cry They tossed their aged arms on high, And their sad hearts with grief were wrung, Like cows who sorrow for their young. A while they followed on the road Which traces of his chariot showed, But when at length those traces failed, A deep despair their hearts assailed. The chariot marks no more discerned, The hopeless sages backward turned: “Ah, what is this? What can we more? Fate stops the way, and all is o’er.” With wearied hearts, in grief and shame They took the road by which they came, And reached Ayodhyá’s city, where From side to side was naught but care. With troubled spirits quite cast down They looked upon the royal town, And from their eyes, oppressed with woe, Their tears again began to flow. Of Ráma reft, the city wore No look of beauty as before, Like a dull river or a lake By Garuḍ robbed of every snake. Dark, dismal as the moonless sky, Or as a sea whose bed is dry, So sad, to every pleasure dead, They saw the town, disquieted. On to their houses, high and vast, Where stores of precious wealth were massed, The melancholy Bráhmans passed,   Their hearts with anguish cleft: Aloof from all, they came not near To stranger or to kinsman dear, Showing in faces blank and drear   That not one joy was left.




Canto XLVIII. The Women’s Lament.


When those who forth with Ráma went Back to the town their steps had bent, It seemed that death had touched and chilled Those hearts which piercing sorrow filled. Each to his several mansion came, And girt by children and his dame, From his sad eyes the water shed That o’er his cheek in torrents spread. All joy was fled: oppressed with cares No bustling trader showed his wares. Each shop had lost its brilliant look, Each householder forbore to cook. No hand with joy its earnings told, None cared to win a wealth of gold, And scarce the youthful mother smiled To see her first, her new-born child. In every house a woman wailed, And her returning lord assailed With keen taunt piercing like the steel That bids the tusked monster kneel: “What now to them is wedded dame, What house and home and dearest aim, Or son, or bliss, or gathered store, Whose eyes on Ráma look no more! There is but one in all the earth, One man alone of real worth, Lakshmaṇ, who follows, true and good, Ráma, with Sítá, through the wood. Made holy for all time we deem Each pool and fountain, lake and stream, If great Kakutstha’s son shall choose Their water for his bath to use. Each forest, dark with lovely trees, Shall yearn Kakutstha’s son to please; Each mountain peak and woody hill, Each mighty flood and mazy rill, Each rocky height, each shady grove Where the blest feet of Ráma rove, Shall gladly welcome with the best Of all they have their honoured guest. The trees that clustering blossoms bear, And bright-hued buds to gem their hair, The heart of Ráma shall delight, And cheer him on the breezy height. For him the upland slopes will show The fairest roots and fruit that grow, And all their wealth before him fling Ere the due hour of ripening. For him each earth-upholding hill Its crystal water shall distil, And all its floods shall be displayed In many a thousand-hued cascade. Where Ráma stands is naught to fear, No danger comes if he be near; For all who live on him depend, The world’s support, and lord, and friend. Ere in too distant wilds he stray, Let us to Ráma speed away, For rich reward on those will wait Who serve a prince of soul so great. We will attend on Sítá there; Be Raghu’s son your special care.”

The city dames, with grief distressed, Thus once again their lords addressed: “Ráma shall be your guard and guide, And Sítá will for us provide. For who would care to linger here, Where all is sad and dark and drear? Who, mid the mourners, hope for bliss In a poor soulless town like this? If Queen Kaikeyí’s treacherous sin, Our lord expelled, the kingdom win, We heed not sons or golden store, Our life itself we prize no more. If she, seduced by lust of sway, Her lord and son could cast away, Whom would she leave unharmed, the base Defiler of her royal race? We swear it by our children dear, We will not dwell as servants here; If Queen Kaikeyí live to reign, We will not in her realm remain. Bowed down by her oppressive hand, The helpless, lordless, godless land, Cursed for Kaikeyí’s guilt will fall, And swift destruction seize it all. For, Ráma forced from home to fly, The king his sire will surely die, And when the king has breathed his last Ruin will doubtless follow fast. Sad, robbed of merits, drug the cup And drink the poisoned mixture up, Or share the exiled Ráma’s lot, Or seek some land that knows her not. No reason, but a false pretence Drove Ráma, Sítá, Lakshmaṇ hence, And we to Bharat have been given Like cattle to the shambles driven.”

  While in each house the women, pained At loss of Ráma, still complained, Sank to his rest the Lord of Day, And night through all the sky held sway. The fires of worship all were cold, No text was hummed, no tale was told, And shades of midnight gloom came down Enveloping the mournful town. Still, sick at heart, the women shed, As for a son or husband fled, For Ráma tears, disquieted:   No child was loved as he. And all Ayodhyá, where the feast, Music, and song, and dance had ceased,   And merriment and glee, Where every merchant’s store was closed That erst its glittering wares exposed,   Was like a dried up sea.




Canto XLIX. The Crossing Of The Rivers.


Now Ráma, ere the night was fled, O’er many a league of road had sped, Till, as his course he onward held, The morn the shades of night dispelled. The rites of holy dawn he paid, And all the country round surveyed. He saw, as still he hurried through With steeds which swift as arrows flew, Hamlets and groves with blossoms fair, And fields which showed the tillers’ care, While from the clustered dwellings near The words of peasants reached his ear: “Fie on our lord the king, whose soul Is yielded up to love’s control! Fie on the vile Kaikeyí! Shame On that malicious sinful dame, Who, keenly bent on cruel deeds, No bounds of right and virtue heeds, But with her wicked art has sent So good a prince to banishment, Wise, tender-hearted, ruling well His senses, in the woods to dwell. Ah cruel king! his heart of steel For his own son no love could feel, Who with the sinless Ráma parts, The darling of the people’s hearts.”

  These words he heard the peasants say, Who dwelt in hamlets by the way, And, lord of all the realm by right, Through Kośala pursued his flight. Through the auspicious flood, at last, Of Vedaśrutí’s stream he passed, And onward to the place he sped By Saint Agastya tenanted. Still on for many an hour he hied, And crossed the stream whose cooling tide Rolls onward till she meets the sea, The herd-frequented Gomatí.(321) Borne by his rapid horses o’er, He reached that river’s further shore. And Syandiká’s, whose swan-loved stream Resounded with the peacock’s scream. Then as he journeyed on his road To his Videhan bride he showed The populous land which Manu old To King Ikshváku gave to hold. The glorious prince, the lord of men Looked on the charioteer, and then Voiced like a wild swan, loud and clear, He spake these words and bade him hear: “When shall I, with returning feet My father and my mother meet? When shall I lead the hunt once more In bloomy woods on Sarjú’s shore? Most eagerly I long to ride Urging the chase on Sarjú’s side. For royal saints have seen no blame In this, the monarch’s matchless game.”

  Thus speeding on,—no rest or stay,— Ikshváku’s son pursued his way. Oft his sweet voice the silence broke, And thus on varied themes he spoke.




Canto L. The Halt Under The Ingudí.(322)


So through the wide and fair extent Of Kośala the hero went. Then toward Ayodhyá back he gazed, And cried, with suppliant hands upraised: “Farewell, dear city, first in place, Protected by Kakutstha’s race! And Gods, who in thy temples dwell, And keep thine ancient citadel! I from his debt my sire will free, Thy well-loved towers again will see, And, coming from my wild retreat, My mother and my father meet.”

Then burning grief inflamed his eye, As his right arm he raised on high, And, while hot tears his cheek bedewed, Addressed the mournful multitude: “By love and tender pity moved, Your love for me you well have proved; Now turn again with joy, and win Success in all your hands begin.”

  Before the high souled chief they bent, With circling steps around him went, And then with bitter wailing, they Departed each his several way. Like the great sun engulfed by night, The hero sped beyond their sight, While still the people mourned his fate And wept aloud disconsolate. The car-borne chieftain passed the bound Of Kośala’s delightful ground, Where grain and riches bless the land, And people give with liberal hand: A lovely realm unvexed by fear, Where countless shrines and stakes(323) appear: Where mango-groves and gardens grow, And streams of pleasant water flow: Where dwells content a well-fed race, And countless kine the meadows grace: Filled with the voice of praise and prayer: Each hamlet worth a monarch’s care. Before him three-pathed Gangá rolled Her heavenly waters bright and cold; O’er her pure breast no weeds were spread, Her banks were hermit-visited. The car-borne hero saw the tide That ran with eddies multiplied, And thus the charioteer addressed: “Here on the bank to-day we rest. Not distant from the river, see! There grows a lofty Ingudí With blossoms thick on every spray: There rest we, charioteer, to-day. I on the queen of floods will gaze, Whose holy stream has highest praise, Where deer, and bird, and glittering snake, God, Daitya, bard their pastime take.”

  Sumantra, Lakshmaṇ gave assent, And with the steeds they thither went. When Ráma reached the lovely tree, With Sítá and with Lakshmaṇ, he Alighted from the car: with speed Sumantra loosed each weary steed. And, hand to hand in reverence laid, Stood near to Ráma in the shade. Ráma’s dear friend, renowned by fame, Who of Nisháda lineage came, Guha, the mighty chief, adored Through all the land as sovereign lord, Soon as he heard that prince renowned Was resting on Nisháda ground, Begirt by counsellor and peer And many an honoured friend drew near. Soon as the monarch came in view, Ráma and Lakshmaṇ toward him flew. Then Guha, at the sight distressed, His arms around the hero pressed, Laid both his hands upon his head Bowed to those lotus feet, and said: “O Ráma, make thy wishes known, And be this kingdom as thine own. Who, mighty-armed, will ever see A guest so dear as thou to me?”

  He placed before him dainty fare Of every flavour, rich and rare, Brought forth the gift for honoured guest, And thus again the chief addressed: “Welcome, dear Prince, whose arms are strong; These lands and all to thee belong. Thy servants we, our lord art thou; Begin, good king, thine empire now. See, various food before thee placed, And cups to drink and sweets to taste For thee soft beds are hither borne, And for thy horses grass and corn.”

  To Guha as he pressed and prayed, Thus Raghu’s son his answer made: “’Twas aye thy care my heart to please With honour, love, and courtesies, And friendship brings thee now to greet Thy guest thus humbly on thy feet.”

  Again the hero spake, as round The king his shapely arms he wound: “Guha, I see that all is well With thee and those who with thee dwell; That health and bliss and wealth attend Thy realm, thyself, and every friend. But all these friendly gifts of thine, Bound to refuse, I must decline. Grass, bark, and hide my only wear, And woodland roots and fruit my fare, On duty all my heart is set; I seek the woods, an anchoret. A little grass and corn to feed The horses—this is all I need. So by this favour, King, alone Shall honour due to me be shown. For these good steeds who brought me here Are to my sire supremely dear; And kind attention paid to these Will honour me and highly please.”

  Then Guha quickly bade his train Give water to the steeds, and grain. And Ráma, ere the night grew dark, Paid evening rites in dress of bark, And tasted water, on the strand, Drawn from the stream by Lakshmaṇ’s hand. And Lakshmaṇ with observance meet Bathed his beloved brother’s feet, Who rested with his Maithil spouse: Then sat him down ’neath distant boughs. And Guha with his bow sat near To Lakshmaṇ and the charioteer, And with the prince conversing kept His faithful watch while Ráma slept. As Daśaratha’s glorious heir, Of lofty soul and wisdom rare, Reclining with his Sítá there   Beside the river lay— He who no troubles e’er had seen, Whose life a life of bliss had been— That night beneath the branches green   Passed pleasantly away.




Canto LI. Lakshman’s Lament.


As Lakshmaṇ still his vigil held By unaffected love impelled, Guha, whose heart the sight distressed, With words like these the prince addressed: “Beloved youth, this pleasant bed Was brought for thee, for thee is spread; On this, my Prince, thine eyelids close, And heal fatigue with sweet repose. My men are all to labour trained, But hardship thou hast ne’er sustained. All we this night our watch will keep And guard Kakutstha’s son asleep. In all the world there breathes not one More dear to me than Raghu’s son. The words I speak, heroic youth, Are true: I swear it by my truth. Through his dear grace supreme renown Will, so I trust, my wishes crown. So shall my life rich store obtain Of merit, blest with joy and gain. While Raghu’s son and Sítá lie Entranced in happy slumber, I Will, with my trusty bow in hand, Guard my dear friend with all my band. To me, who oft these forests range, Is naught therein or new or strange. We could with equal might oppose A four-fold army led by foes.”

  Then royal Lakshmaṇ made reply: “With thee to stand as guardian nigh, Whose faithful soul regards the right, Fearless we well might rest to-night. But how, when Ráma lays his head With Sítá on his lowly bed,— How can I sleep? how can I care For life, or aught that’s bright and fair? Behold the conquering chief, whose might Is match for Gods and fiends in fight; With Sítá now he rests his head Asleep on grass beneath him spread. Won by devotion, text, and prayer, And many a rite performed with care, Chief of our father’s sons he shines Well marked, like him, with favouring signs. Brief, brief the monarch’s life will be Now his dear son is forced to flee; And quickly will the widowed state Mourn for her lord disconsolate. Each mourner there has wept her fill; The cries of anguish now are still: In the king’s hall each dame, o’ercome With weariness of woe is dumb. This first sad night of grief, I ween, Will do to death each sorrowing queen: Scarce is Kauśalyá left alive; My mother, too, can scarce survive. If when her heart is fain to break, She lingers for Śatrughna’s sake, Kauśalyá, mother of the chief, Must sink beneath the chilling grief. That town which countless thousands fill, Whose hearts with love of Ráma thrill,— The world’s delight, so rich and fair,— Grieved for the king, his death will share. The hopes he fondly cherished, crossed Ayodhyá’s throne to Ráma lost,— With mournful cries, Too late, too late! The king my sire will meet his fate. And when my sire has passed away, Most happy in their lot are they, Allowed, with every pious care, Part in his funeral rites to bear. And O, may we with joy at last,— These years of forest exile past,— Turn to Ayodhyá’s town to dwell With him who keeps his promise well!”

  While thus the hero mighty-souled, In wild lament his sorrow told, Faint with the load that on him lay, The hours of darkness passed away. As thus the prince, impelled by zeal For his loved brother, prompt to feel Strong yearnings for the people’s weal,   His words of truth outspake, King Guha grieved to see his woe, Heart-stricken, gave his tears to flow, Tormented by the common blow,   Sad, as a wounded snake.




Canto LII. The Crossing Of Gangá.


Soon as the shades of night had fled, Uprising from his lowly bed, Ráma the famous, broad of chest, His brother Lakshmaṇ thus addressed: “Now swift upsprings the Lord of Light, And fled is venerable night. That dark-winged bird the Koïl now Is calling from the topmost bough, And sounding from the thicket nigh Is heard the peacock’s early cry. Come, cross the flood that seeks the sea, The swiftly flowing Jáhnaví.”(324)

  King Guha heard his speech, agreed, And called his minister with speed: “A boat,” he cried, “swift, strong, and fair, With rudder, oars, and men, prepare, And place it ready by the shore To bear the pilgrims quickly o’er.” Thus Guha spake: his followers all Bestirred them at their master’s call; Then told the king that ready manned A gay boat waited near the strand. Then Guha, hand to hand applied, With reverence thus to Ráma cried: “The boat is ready by the shore: How, tell me, can I aid thee more? O lord of men, it waits for thee To cross the flood that seeks the sea. O godlike keeper of thy vow, Embark: the boat is ready now.”

  Then Ráma, lord of glory high, Thus to King Guha made reply: “Thanks for thy gracious care, my lord: Now let the gear be placed on board.” Each bow-armed chief, in mail encased, Bound sword and quiver to his waist, And then with Sítá near them hied Down the broad river’s shelving side. Then with raised palms the charioteer, In lowly reverence drawing near, Cried thus to Ráma good and true: “Now what remains for me to do?”   With his right hand, while answering     The hero touched his friend:   “Go back,” he said, “and on the king     With watchful care attend. Thus far, Sumantra, thou wast guide; Now to Ayodhyá turn,” he cried: “Hence seek we leaving steeds and car, On foot the wood that stretches far.”

  Sumantra, when, with grieving heart, He heard the hero bid him part, Thus to the bravest of the brave, Ikshváku’s son, his answer gave: “In all the world men tell of naught, To match thy deed, by heroes wrought— Thus with thy brother and thy wife Thrall-like to lead a forest life. No meet reward of fruit repays Thy holy lore, thy saintlike days, Thy tender soul, thy love of truth, If woe like this afflicts thy youth. Thou, roaming under forest boughs With thy dear brother and thy spouse Shalt richer meed of glory gain Than if three worlds confessed thy reign. Sad is our fate, O Ráma: we, Abandoned and repelled by thee, Must serve as thralls Kaikeyí’s will, Imperious, wicked, born to ill.”

  Thus cried the faithful charioteer, As Raghu’s son, in rede his peer, Was fast departing on his road,— And long his tears of anguish flowed. But Ráma, when those tears were dried His lips with water purified, And in soft accents, sweet and clear, Again addressed the charioteer: “I find no heart, my friend, like thine, So faithful to Ikshváku’s line. Still first in view this object keep, That ne’er for me my sire may weep. For he, the world’s far-ruling king, Is old, and wild with sorrow’s sting; With love’s great burthen worn and weak: Deem this the cause that thus I speak Whate’er the high-souled king decrees His loved Kaikeyí’s heart to please, Yea, be his order what it may, Without demur thou must obey, For this alone great monarchs reign, That ne’er a wish be formed in vain. Then, O Sumantra, well provide That by no check the king be tried: Nor let his heart in sorrow pine: This care, my faithful friend, be thine. The honoured king my father greet, And thus for me my words repeat To him whose senses are controlled, Untired till now by grief, and old; “I, Sítá, Lakshmaṇ sorrow not, O Monarch, for our altered lot: The same to us, if here we roam, Or if Ayodhyá be our home, The fourteen years will quickly fly, The happy hour will soon be nigh When thou, my lord, again shalt see Lakshmaṇ, the Maithil dame, and me.” Thus having soothed, O charioteer, My father and my mother dear, Let all the queens my message learn, But to Kaikeyí chiefly turn. With loving blessings from the three, From Lakshmaṇ, Sítá, and from me, My mother, Queen Kauśalyá, greet With reverence to her sacred feet. And add this prayer of mine: “O King; Send quickly forth and Bharat bring, And set him on the royal throne Which thy decree has made his own. When he upon the throne is placed, When thy fond arms are round him laced, Thine aged heart will cease to ache With bitter pangs for Ráma’s sake.” And say to Bharat: “See thou treat The queens with all observance meet: What care the king receives, the same Show thou alike to every dame. Obedience to thy father’s will Who chooses thee the throne to fill, Will earn for thee a store of bliss Both in the world to come and this.’ ”

  Thus Ráma bade Sumantra go With thoughtful care instructed so. Sumantra all his message heard, And spake again, by passion stirred: “O, should deep feeling mar in aught The speech by fond devotion taught, Forgive whate’er I wildly speak: My love is strong, my tongue is weak. How shall I, if deprived of thee, Return that mournful town to see: Where sick at heart the people are Because their Ráma roams afar. Woe will be theirs too deep to brook When on the empty car they look, As when from hosts, whose chiefs are slain, One charioteer comes home again. This very day, I ween, is food Forsworn by all the multitude, Thinking that thou, with hosts to aid, Art dwelling in the wild wood’s shade. The great despair, the shriek of woe They uttered when they saw thee go, Will, when I come with none beside, A hundred-fold be multiplied. How to Kauśalyá can I say: “O Queen, I took thy son away, And with thy brother left him well: Weep not for him; thy woe dispel?” So false a tale I cannot frame, Yet how speak truth and grieve the dame? How shall these horses, fleet and bold, Whom not a hand but mine can hold, Bear others, wont to whirl the car Wherein Ikshváku’s children are! Without thee, Prince, I cannot, no, I cannot to Ayodhyá go. Then deign, O Ráma, to relent, And let me share thy banishment. But if no prayers can move thy heart, If thou wilt quit me and depart, The flames shall end my car and me, Deserted thus and reft of thee. In the wild wood when foes are near, When dangers check thy vows austere, Borne in my car will I attend, All danger and all care to end. For thy dear sake I love the skill That guides the steed and curbs his will: And soon a forest life will be As pleasant, for my love of thee. And if these horses near thee dwell, And serve thee in the forest well, They, for their service, will not miss The due reward of highest bliss. Thine orders, as with thee I stray, Will I with heart and head obey, Prepared, for thee, without a sigh, To lose Ayodhyá or the sky. As one defiled with hideous sin, I never more can pass within Ayodhyá, city of our king, Unless beside me thee I bring. One wish is mine, I ask no more, That, when thy banishment is o’er I in my car may bear my lord, Triumphant, to his home restored. The fourteen years, if spent with thee, Will swift as light-winged moments flee; But the same years, without thee told, Were magnified a hundred-fold. Do not, kind lord, thy servant leave, Who to his master’s son would cleave, And the same path with him pursue, Devoted, tender, just and true.”

  Again, again Sumantra made His varied plaint, and wept and prayed. Him Raghu’s son, whose tender breast Felt for his servants, thus addressed: “O faithful servant, well my heart Knows how attached and true thou art. Hear thou the words I speak, and know Why to the town I bid thee go. Soon as Kaikeyí, youngest queen, Thy coming to the town has seen, No doubt will then her mind oppress That Ráma roams the wilderness. And so the dame, her heart content With proof of Ráma’s banishment, Will doubt the virtuous king no more As faithless to the oath he swore. Chief of my cares is this, that she, Youngest amid the queens, may see Bharat her son securely reign O’er rich Ayodhyá’s wide domain. For mine and for the monarch’s sake Do thou thy journey homeward take, And, as I bade, repeat each word That from my lips thou here hast heard.”

  Thus spake the prince, and strove to cheer The sad heart of the charioteer, And then to royal Guha said These words most wise and spirited: “Guha, dear friend, it is not meet That people throng my calm retreat: For I must live a strict recluse, And mould my life by hermits’ use. I now the ancient rule accept By good ascetics gladly kept. I go: bring fig-tree juice that I In matted coils my hair may tie.”

  Quick Guha hastened to produce, For the king’s son, that sacred juice. Then Ráma of his long locks made, And Lakshmaṇ’s too, the hermit braid. And the two royal brothers there With coats of bark and matted hair, Transformed in lovely likeness stood To hermit saints who love the wood. So Ráma, with his brother bold, A pious anchorite enrolled, Obeyed the vow which hermits take, And to his friend, King Guha, spake: “May people, treasure, army share, And fenced forts, thy constant care: Attend to all: supremely hard The sovereign’s task, to watch and guard.”

  Ikshváku’s son, the good and brave, This last farewell to Guha gave, And then, with Lakshmaṇ and his bride, Determined, on his way he hied. Soon as he viewed, upon the shore, The bark prepared to waft them o’er Impetuous Gangá’s rolling tide, To Lakshmaṇ thus the chieftain cried: “Brother, embark; thy hand extend, Thy gentle aid to Sítá lend: With care her trembling footsteps guide, And place the lady by thy side.” When Lakshmaṇ heard, prepared to aid, His brother’s words he swift obeyed. Within the bark he placed the dame, Then to her side the hero came. Next Lakshmaṇ’s elder brother, lord Of brightest glory, when on board, Breathing a prayer for blessings, meet For priest or warrior to repeat, Then he and car-borne Lakshmaṇ bent, Well-pleased, their heads, most reverent, Their hands, with Sítá, having dipped, As Scripture bids, and water sipped, Farewell to wise Sumantra said, And Guha, with the train he led. So Ráma took, on board, his stand, And urged the vessel from the land. Then swift by vigorous arms impelled Her onward course the vessel held, And guided by the helmsman through The dashing waves of Gangá flew. Half way across the flood they came, When Sítá, free from spot and blame, Her reverent hands together pressed, The Goddess of the stream addressed: “May the great chieftain here who springs From Daśaratha, best of kings, Protected by thy care, fulfil His prudent father’s royal will. When in the forest he has spent His fourteen years of banishment, With his dear brother and with me His home again my lord shall see. Returning on that blissful day, I will to thee mine offerings pay, Dear Queen, whose waters gently flow, Who canst all blessed gifts bestow. For, three-pathed Queen, though wandering here, Thy waves descend from Brahmá’s sphere, Spouse of the God o’er floods supreme, Though rolling here thy glorious stream. To thee, fair Queen, my head shall bend, To thee shall hymns of praise ascend, When my brave lord shall turn again, And, joyful, o’er his kingdom reign. To win thy grace, O Queen divine, A hundred thousand fairest kine, And precious robes and finest meal Among the Bráhmans will I deal. A hundred jars of wine shall flow, When to my home, O Queen, I go; With these, and flesh, and corn, and rice, Will I, delighted, sacrifice. Each hallowed spot, each holy shrine That stands on these fair shores of thine, Each fane and altar on thy banks Shall share my offerings and thanks. With me and Lakshmaṇ, free from harm, May he the blameless, strong of arm, Reseek Ayodhyá from the wild, O blameless Lady undefiled!”

  As, praying for her husband’s sake, The faultless dame to Gangá spake, To the right bank the vessel flew With her whose heart was right and true. Soon as the bark had crossed the wave, The lion leader of the brave, Leaving the vessel on the strand, With wife and brother leapt to land. Then Ráma thus the prince addressed Who filled with joy Sumitrá’s breast: “Be thine alike to guard and aid In peopled spot, in lonely shade. Do thou, Sumitrá’s son, precede: Let Sítá walk where thou shalt lead. Behind you both my place shall be, To guard the Maithil dame and thee. For she, to woe a stranger yet, No toil or grief till now has met; The fair Videhan will assay The pains of forest life to-day. To-day her tender feet must tread Rough rocky wilds around her spread: No tilth is there, no gardens grow, No crowding people come and go.”

  The hero ceased: and Lakshmaṇ led Obedient to the words he said: And Sítá followed him, and then Came Raghu’s pride, the lord of men. With Sítá walking o’er the sand They sought the forest, bow in hand, But still their lingering glances threw Where yet Sumantra stood in view. Sumantra, when his watchful eye The royal youths no more could spy, Turned from the spot whereon he stood Homeward with Guha from the wood. Still on the brothers forced their way Where sweet birds sang on every spray, Though scarce the eye a path could find Mid flowering trees where creepers twined. Far on the princely brothers pressed, And stayed their feet at length to rest Beneath a fig tree’s mighty shade With countless pendent shoots displayed. Reclining there a while at ease, They saw, not far, beneath fair trees A lake with many a lotus bright That bore the name of Lovely Sight. Ráma his wife’s attention drew, And Lakshmaṇ’s, to the charming view: “Look, brother, look how fair the flood Glows with the lotus, flower and bud!”

  They drank the water fresh and clear, And with their shafts they slew a deer. A fire of boughs they made in haste, And in the flame the meat they placed. So Raghu’s sons with Sítá shared The hunter’s meal their hands prepared, Then counselled that the spreading tree Their shelter and their home should be.




Canto LIII. Ráma’s Lament.


When evening rites were duly paid, Reclined beneath the leafy shade, To Lakshmaṇ thus spake Ráma, best Of those who glad a people’s breast: “Now the first night has closed the day That saw us from our country stray, And parted from the charioteer; Yet grieve not thou, my brother dear. Henceforth by night, when others sleep, Must we our careful vigil keep, Watching for Sítá’s welfare thus, For her dear life depends on us. Bring me the leaves that lie around, And spread them here upon the ground, That we on lowly beds may lie, And let in talk the night go by.”

  So on the ground with leaves o’erspread, He who should press a royal bed, Ráma with Lakshmaṇ thus conversed, And many a pleasant tale rehearsed: “This night the king,” he cried, “alas! In broken sleep will sadly pass. Kaikeyí now content should be, For mistress of her wish is she. So fiercely she for empire yearns, That when her Bharat home returns, She in her greed, may even bring Destruction on our lord the king. What can he do, in feeble eld, Reft of all aid and me expelled, His soul enslaved by love, a thrall Obedient to Kaikeyí’s call? As thus I muse upon his woe And all his wisdoms overthrow, Love is, methinks, of greater might To stir the heart than gain and right. For who, in wisdom’s lore untaught, Could by a beauty’s prayer be bought To quit his own obedient son, Who loves him, as my sire has done! Bharat, Kaikeyí’s child, alone Will, with his wife, enjoy the throne, And blissfully his rule maintain O’er happy Kośala’s domain. To Bharat’s single lot will fall The kingdom and the power and all, When fails the king from length of days, And Ráma in the forest strays. Whoe’er, neglecting right and gain, Lets conquering love his soul enchain, To him, like Daśaratha’s lot, Comes woe with feet that tarry not. Methinks at last the royal dame, Dear Lakshmaṇ, has secured her aim, To see at once her husband dead, Her son enthroned, and Ráma fled. Ah me! I fear, lest borne away By frenzy of success, she slay Kauśalyá, through her wicked hate Of me, bereft, disconsolate; Or her who aye for me has striven Sumitrá, to devotion given. Hence, Lakshmaṇ, to Ayodhyá speed, Returning in the hour of need. With Sítá I my steps will bend Where Daṇḍak’s mighty woods extend. No guardian has Kauśalyá now: O, be her friend and guardian thou. Strong hate may vile Kaikeyí lead To many a base unrighteous deed, Treading my mother ’neath her feet When Bharat holds the royal seat. Sure in some antenatal time Were children, by Kauśalyá’s crime, Torn from their mothers’ arms away, And hence she mourns this evil day. She for her child no toil would spare Tending me long with pain and care; Now in the hour of fruitage she Has lost that son, ah, woe is me. O Lakshmaṇ, may no matron e’er A son so doomed to sorrow bear As I, my mother’s heart who rend With anguish that can never end. The Sáriká,(325) methinks, possessed More love than glows in Ráma’s breast. Who, as the tale is told to us, Addressed the stricken parrot thus: “Parrot, the capturer’s talons tear, While yet alone thou flutterest there, Before his mouth has closed on me:” So cried the bird, herself to free. Reft of her son, in childless woe, My mother’s tears for ever flow: Ill-fated, doomed with grief to strive, What aid can she from me derive? Pressed down by care, she cannot rise From sorrow’s