[ADA-ramayana  —  part 8 of 12, continuation of part 7]
============================================================

Returning to the cavern found His brother chief in sorrow drowned, And pitying the woes that broke The spirit of the hero spoke:

  “Why cast thy strength of soul away, And weakly yield to passion’s sway? Arise, my brother, do and dare Ere action perish in despair. Recall the firmness of thy heart, And nerve thee for a hero’s part. Whose is the hand unscathed to sieze The red flame quickened by the breeze? Where is the foe will dare to wrong Or keep the Maithil lady long?” Then with pale lips that sorrow dried The son of Raghu thus replied: “Lord Indra thousand-eyed, has sent The sweet rain from the firmament, Sees the rich promise of the grain, And turns him to his rest again. The clouds with voices loud and deep, Veiling each tree upon the steep, Up on the thirsty earth have shed Their precious burden and are fled. Now in kings’ hearts ambition glows: They rush to battle with their foes;(633) But in Sugríva’s sloth I see No care for deeds of chivalry. See, Lakshmaṇ, on each breezy height A thousand autumn blooms are bright. See how the wings of wild swans gleam On every islet of the stream. Four months of flood and rain are past: A hundred years they seemed to last To me whom toil and trouble tried, My Sítá severed from my side. She, gentlest woman, weak and young, Still to her lord unwearied clung. Still by the exile’s side she stood In the wild ways of Daṇḍak wood, Like a fond bird disconsolate If parted from her darling mate. Sugríva, lapped in soft repose, Untouched by pity for my woes, Scorns the poor exile, dispossessed, By Rávaṇ’s mightier arm oppressed, The wretch who comes to sue and pray From his lost kingdom far away. Hence falls on me the Vánar’s scorn, A suitor friendless and forlorn. The time is come: with heedless eye He sees the hour of action fly,— Unmindful, now his hopes succeed, Of promise made in stress of need. Go seek him sunk in bliss and sloth, Forgetful of his royal oath, And as mine envoy thus upbraid The monarch for his help delayed: “Vile is the wretch who will not pay The favour of an earlier day, Hope in the supplicant’s breast awakes, And then his plighted promise breaks. Noblest, mid all of women born, Who keeps the words his lips have sworn, Yea, if those words be good or ill, Maintains his faith unbroken still. The thankless who forget to aid The friend who helped them when they prayed, Dishonoured in their death shall lie, And dogs shall pass their corpses by. Sure thou wouldst see my strained arm hold My bow of battle backed with gold, Wouldst gaze upon its awful form Like lightning flashing through the storm, And hear the clanging bowstring loud As thunder from a labouring cloud.”

  His valour and his strength I know: But pleasure’s sway now sinks them low, With thee, my brother, for ally That strength and valour I defy. He promised, when the rains should end, The succour of his arm to lend. Those months are past: he dares forget, And, lapped in pleasure, slumbers yet. No thought disturbs his careless breast For us impatient and distressed, And, while we sadly wait and pine, Girt by his lords he quaffs the wine. Go, brother, go, his palace seek, And boldly to Sugríva speak, Thus give the listless king to know What waits him if my anger glow: Still open, to the gloomy God, Lies the sad path that Báli trod. “Still to thy plighted word be true, Lest thou, O King, that path pursue. I launched the shaft I pointed well. And Báli, only Báli, fell. But, if from truth thou dare to stray, Both thee and thine this hand shall slay.” Thus be the Vánar king addressed, Then add thyself what seems the best.”




Canto XXXI. The Envoy.


Thus Ráma spoke, and Lakshmaṇ then Made answer to the prince of men: “Yea, if the Vánar, undeterred By fear of vengeance, break his word, Loss of his royal power ere long Shall pay the traitor for the wrong. Nor deem I him so void of sense To brave the bitter consequence. But if enslaved to joy he lie, And scorn thy grace with blinded eye, Then let him join his brother slain: Unmeet were such a wretch to reign. Quick rises, kindling in my breast, The wrath that will not be repressed, And bids me in my fury slay The breaker of his faith to-day. Let Báli’s son thy consort trace With bravest chiefs of Vánar race.”

  Thus spoke the hero, and aglow With rage of battle seized his bow. But Ráma thus in gentler mood With fitting words his speech renewed: “No hero with a soul like thine To paths of sin will e’er incline, He who his angry heart can tame Is worthiest of a hero’s name. Not thine, my brother, be the part So alien from the tender heart, Nor let thy feet by wrath misled Forsake the path they loved to tread. From harsh and angry words abstain: With gentle speech a hearing gain, And tax Sugríva with the crime Of failing faith and wasted time.”

  Then Lakshmaṇ, bravest of the brave, Obeyed the hest that Ráma gave, To whom devoting every thought The Vánar’s royal town he sought. As Mandar’s mountain heaves on high His curved peak soaring to the sky, So Lakshmaṇ showed, his dread bow bent Like Indra’s(634) in the firmament. His brother’s wrath, his brother’s woe Inflamed his soul to fiercest glow. The tallest trees to earth were cast As furious on his way he passed, And where he stepped, so fiercely fleet, The stones were shivered by his feet. He reached Kishkindhá’s city deep Embosomed where the hills were steep, Where street and open square were lined With legions of the Vánar kind. Then, as his lips with fury swelled, The lord of Raghu’s line beheld A stream of Vánar chiefs outpoured To do obeisance to their lord. But when the mighty prince in view Of the thick coming Vánars drew, They turned them in amaze to seize Crags of the rock and giant trees. He saw, and fiercer waxed his ire, As oil lends fury to the fire. Scarce had the Vánar chieftains seen That wrathful eye, that troubled mien Fierce as the God’s who rules the dead, When, turned in wild affright, they fled. Speeding in breathless terror all Sought King Sugríva’s council hall, And there made known their tale of fear, That Lakshmaṇ wild with rage, was near. The king, untroubled by alarms, Held Tárá in his amorous arms, And in the distant bower with her Heard not each clamorous messenger. Then, summoned at the lords’ behest Forth from the city portals pressed, Each like some elephant or cloud, The Vánars in a trembling crowd: Fierce warriors all with massive jaws And terrors of their tiger claws, Some matched ten elephants, and some A hundred’s strength could overcome. Some chieftains, mightier than the rest, Ten times a hundred’s force possessed. With eyes of fury Lakshmaṇ viewed The Vánars’ tree-armed multitude. Thus garrisoned from side to side The city walls assault defied. Beyond the moat that girt the wall Advanced the Vánar chiefs; and all Upon the plain in firm brigade, Impetuous warriors, stood arrayed. Red at the sight flashed Lakshmaṇ’s eyes, His bosom heaved tumultuous sighs, And forth the fire of fury broke Like flame that flashes through the smoke. Like some fierce snake the hero stood: His bow recalled the expanded hood, And in his shaft-head bright and keen The flickering of its tongue was seen: And in his own all-conquering might The venom of its deadly bite. Prince Angad marked his angry look, And every hope his heart forsook. Then, his large eyes with fury red, To Angad Lakshmaṇ turned and said:

  “Go tell the king that Lakshmaṇ waits For audience at the city gates, Whose heart, O tamer of thy foes, Is heavy with his brother’s woes. Bid him to Ráma’s word attend, And ask if he will aid his friend. Go, let the king my message learn: Then hither with all speed return.”

  Prince Angad heard and wild with grief Cried as he looked upon the chief: “’Tis Lakshmaṇ’s self: impelled by ire He seeks the city of my sire.” At the fierce words and furious look Of Raghu’s son he quailed and shook. Back through the city gates he sped, And, laden with the tale of dread, Sought King Sugríva, filled his ears And Rumá’s with his doubts and fears. To Rumá and the king he bent, And clasped their feet most reverent, Clasped the dear feet of Tárá, too, And told the startling tale anew.

  But King Sugríva’s ear was dulled, By love and wine and languor lulled, Nor did the words that Angad spake The slumberer from his trance awake. But soon as Raghu’s son came nigh The startled Vánars raised a cry, And strove to win his grace, while dread Each anxious heart disquieted. They saw, and, as they gathered round, Rose from the mighty throng a sound Like torrents when they downward dash, Or thunder with the lightning’s flash. The shouting of the Vánars broke Sugríva’s slumber, and he woke: Still with the wine his eyes were red, His neck with flowers was garlanded. Roused at the voice of Angad came Two Vánar lords of rank and fame; One Yaksha, one Prabháva hight,— Wise counsellors of gain and right. They came and raised their voices high, And told that Raghu’s son was nigh: “Two brothers steadfast in their truth, Each glorious in the bloom of youth, Worthy of rule, have left the skies, And clothed their forms in men’s disguise. One at thy gates, in warlike hands Holding his mighty weapon, stands. His message is the charioteer That brings the eager envoy near, Urged onward by his bold intent, And by the hest of Ráma sent.” The gathered Vánars saw and fled, And raised aloud their cry of dread. Son of Queen Tárá, Angad ran To parley with the godlike man. Still fiery-eyed with rage and hate Stands Lakshmaṇ at the city gate, And trembling Vánars scarce can fly Scathed by the lightning of his eye. “Go with thy son, thy kith and kin, The favour of the prince to win, And bow thy reverent head that so His fiery wrath may cease to glow. What righteous Ráma bids thee, do, And to thy plighted word be true.”




Canto XXXII. Hanumán’s Counsel.


Sugríva heard, and, trained and tried In counsel, to his lords replied: “No deed of mine, no hasty word The anger of the prince has stirred. But haply some who hate me still And watch their time to work me ill, Have slandered me to Raghu’s son, Accused of deeds I ne’er have done. Now, O my lords—for you are wise— Speak truly what your hearts advise, And, pondering each event, inquire The reason of the prince’s ire. No fear have I of Lakshmaṇ: none: No dread of Raghu’s mightier son. But wrath, that fires a friendly breast Without due cause, disturbs my rest. With labour light is friendship gained, But with severest toil maintained. And doubt is strong, and faith is weak, And friendship dies when traitors speak. Hence is my troubled bosom cold With fear of Ráma lofty-souled; For heavy on my spirit weigh His favours I can ne’er repay.”

  He ceased: and Hanumán of all The Vánars in the council hall In wisdom first, and rank, expressed The thoughts that filled his prudent breast: “No marvel thou rememberest yet The service thou shouldst ne’er forget, How the brave prince of Raghu’s seed Thy days from fear and peril freed; And Báli for thy sake o’erthrew, Whom Indra’s self might scarce subdue. I doubt not Ráma’s anger burns For the scant love thy heart returns. For this he sends his brother, him Whose glory never waxes dim. Sunk in repose thy careless eye Marks not the seasons as they fly, Nor sees that autumn has begun With dark blooms opening to the sun. Clear is the sky: no cloudlet mars The splendour of the shining stars. The balmy air is soft and still, And clear and bright are lake and rill. Thou heedest not with blinded eyes The hour for warlike enterprise. Hence Lakshmaṇ hither comes to break Thy slothful trance and bid thee wake. Then, Monarch, with a patient ear The high-souled Ráma’s message hear, Which, reft of wife and realm and friends, Thus by another’s mouth he sends. Thou, Vánar King, hast done amiss: And now I see no way but this: Before his envoy humbly stand And sue for peace with suppliant hand. High duty bids a courtier seek His master’s weal, and freely speak. So by no thought of fear controlled My speech, O King, is free and bold, For Ráma, if his anger glow, Can, with the terrors of his bow This earth with all the Gods subdue, Gandharvas,(635) and the demon crew. Unwise to stir his wrathful mood Whose favour must again be wooed. And, most of all, unwise for one Grateful like thee for service done. Go with thy son and kinsmen: bend Thy humble head and greet thy friend. And, like a fond obedient spouse, Be faithful to thy plighted vows.”




Canto XXXIII. Lakshman’s Entry.


Through the fair city Lakshmaṇ came, Invited in Sugríva’s name. Within the gates the guardian bands, Of Vánars raised their suppliant hands, And in their ordered ranks, amazed, Upon the princely hero gazed, They marked each burning breath he drew, The fury of his soul they knew. Their hearts were chilled with sudden fear: They gazed, but dared not venture near, Before his eyes the city, gay With gems and flowery gardens, lay, Where fane and palace rose on high, And things of beauty charmed the eye. Where trees of every blossom grew Yielding their fruit in season due To Vánars of celestial seed Who wore each varied form at need, Fair-faced and glorious with the shine Of heavenly robes and wreaths divine. There sandal, aloe, lotus bloomed, And there delicious breath perfumed The city’s broad street, redolent Of sugary mead(636) and honey scent. There many a lofty palace rose Like Vindhya or the Lord of Snows, And with sweet murmur sparkling rills Leapt lightly down the sheltering hills. On many a glorious palace, raised For prince and noble,(637) Lakshmaṇ gazed: Like clouds of paly hue they shone With fragrant wreaths that hung thereon: There wealth of jewels was enshrined, And fairer gems of womankind. There gleamed, of noble height and size, Like Indra’s mansion in the skies, Protected by a crystal fence Of rock, the royal residence, With roof and turret high and bright Like Mount Kailása’s loftiest height. There blooming trees, Mahendra’s gift, High o’er the walls were seen to lift Their golden fruited boughs, that made With leaf and flower delicious shade. He saw a band of Vánars wait, Wielding their weapons, at the gate Where golden portals flashed between Celestial garlands red and green. Within Sugríva’s fair abode Unchecked the mighty hero strode, As when the sun of autumn shrouds His glory in a pile of clouds. Through seven wide courts he quickly passed, And reached the royal tower at last, Where seats were set with couch and bed Of gold and silver richly spread. While the young chieftain’s feet drew near The sound of music reached his ear, As the soft breathings of the flute Came blending with the voice and lute. Then beauty showed her youth and grace And varied charm of form and face: Soft bright-eyed creatures, fair and young,— Gay garlands round their necks were hung, And greater charms to each were lent By richest dress and ornament. He saw the calm attendants wait About their lord in careless state, Heard women’s girdles chime in sweet Accordance with their tinkling feet. He heard the anklet’s silvery sound, He saw the calm that reigned around, And o’er him, as he listened, came A rush of rage, a flood of shame. He drew his bowstring: with the clang From ease to west the welkin rang: Then in his modest mood withdrew A little from the ladies’ view. And sternly silent stood apart, While wrath for Ráma filled his heart. Sugríva knew the sounding string, And at the call the Vánar king Sprang swiftly from his golden seat, And feared the coming prince to meet. Then with cold lips that terror dried To beauteous Tárá thus he cried: “What cause of anger, O my spouse Fair with the charm of lovely brows, Sets Lakshmaṇ’s gentle breast on fire, And brings him in unwonted ire? Say, canst thou see, O faultless dame, A cause to fill his soul with flame? For there must be a reason when Such fury stirs the king of men. Reveal the sin, if sin of mine Anger the lord of Raghu’s line. Or go thyself, his rage subdue, And with soft words his favour woo. Soon as on thee his eyes are set His heart this anger will forget, For men like him of lofty mind Are never stern with womankind. First let thy gentle speech disarm His fury, and his spirit charm, And I, from fear of peril free, The conqueror of his foes will see.”

  She heard: with faltering steps and slow, With eyes that shone with trembling glow, With gold-girt body gently bent To meet the stranger prince she went. When Lakshmaṇ saw the Vánar queen With tranquil eyes and modest mien, Before the dame he bent his head, And anger, at her presence, fled. Made bold by draughts of wine, and cheered By Lakshmaṇ’s look no more she feared, And in the trust his favour lent She thus addressed him eloquent: “Whence springs thy burning fury? say: Who dares thy will to disobey? Who checks the maddened flames that seize On forests full of withered trees?”

  Then Lakshmaṇ spoke, her mind to ease, His kind reply in words like these:

  “Thy lord his days in pleasure spends, Heedless of duty and of friends, Nor dost thou mark, though fondly true, The evil path his steps pursue. He cares not for affairs of state, Nor us forlorn and desolate, But sits a mere spectator still, A sensual slave to pleasure’s will. Four months were fixed, the time agreed When he should help us in our need: But, bound in toils of pleasure fast, He sees not that the months are past. Where beats the heart which draughts of wine To virtue or to gain incline? Hast thou not heard those draughts destroy Virtue and gain and love and joy? For those who, helped at need, refuse Their aid in turn, their virtue lose: And they who scorn a friend disdain A treasure naught may buy again. Thy lord has cast his friend away, Nor feared from virtue’s path to stray, If this be true, declare, O dame Who knowest duty’s every claim, What further work remains for us Deceived and disappointed thus.”

  She listened, for his words were kind, Where virtue showed with gain combined, And thus in turn the prince addressed, As hope was rising in his breast: “No time, no cause of wrath I see With those who live and honour thee: And thou shouldst bear without offence Thy servant’s fitful negligence. I know the seasons glide away, While Ráma maddens at delay I know what deed our thanks has earned, I know that grace should be returned. But still I know, whate’er befall, That conquering love is lord of all; Know where Sugríva’s thoughts, possessed By one absorbing passion, rest. But he whom sensual joys debase Heeds not the claim of time and place, And sees not with his blinded sight His duty or his gain aright. O pardon him who loves me! spare The Vánar caught in pleasure’s snare, And once again let Ráma grace With favour him who rules our race. E’en royal saints, whose chief delight Was penance and austerest rite, At love’s commandment have unbent, Beguiled by sweetest blandishment. And know, Sugríva, roused at last, The order to his lords has passed, And, long by love and bliss delayed, Wakes all on fire your hopes to aid. A countless host his city fills, New-gathered from a thousand hills: Impetuous chiefs, who wear at need Each varied form, his legions lead. Come then, O hero, kept aloof By modest awe, nor fear reproof: A faithful friend untouched by blame May look upon another’s dame.”

  He passed within, by Tárá pressed, And by his own impatient breast, Refulgent there in sunlike sheen Sugríva on his throne was seen. Gay garlands round his neck were twined, And Rumá by her lord recline.




Canto XXXIV. Lakshman’s Speech.


Sugríva started from his rest With doubt and terror in his breast. He heard the prince’s furious tread He saw his eyes glow fiercely red. Swift sprang the monarch to his feet Upstarting from his golden seat. Rose Rumá and her fellows, too, And closely round Sugríva drew, As round the moon’s full glory stand Attendant stars in glittering band. Sugríva glanced with reddened eyes, Raised his joined hands in suppliant guise Flew to the door, and rooted there Stood like the tree that grants each prayer.(638) And Lakshmaṇ saw, and, fiercely moved, With angry speech the king reproved:

  “Famed is the prince who loves the truth, Whose soul is touched with tender ruth, Who, liberal, keeps each sense subdued, And pays the debt of gratitude. But all unmeet a king to be, The meanest of the mean is he Who basely breaks the promise made To trusting friends who lent him aid. He sins who for a steed has lied, As if a hundred steeds had died: Or if he lie, a cow to win, Tenfold as heavy is the sin. But if the lie a man betray, Both he and his shall all decay.(639) O Vánar King, the thankless man Is worthy of the general ban, Who takes assistance of his friends, And in his turn no service lends. This verse of old by Brahmá sung Is echoed now by every tongue. Hear what He cried in angry mood Bewailing man’s ingratitude: “For draughts of wine, for slaughtered cows, For treacherous theft, for broken vows A pardon is ordained: but none For thankless scorn of service done.” Ungrateful, Vánar King, art thou, And faithless to thy plighted vow. For Ráma brought thee help, and yet Thou shunnest to repay the debt: Or, grateful, thou hadst surely pressed To aid the hero in his quest. Thou art, in vulgar pleasures drowned, False to thy bond in honour bound. Nor yet has Ráma’s guileless heart Discerned thee for the thing thou art— A snake who holds the frogs that cries And lures fresh victims as it dies. Brave Ráma, born for glorious fate, Has set thee in thy high estate, And to the Vánars’ throne restored, Great-souled himself, their mean-souled lord. Now if thy pride disown what he, High thoughted prince, has done for thee, Struck by his arrows shalt thou fall, And Báli meet in Yáma’s hall. Still open, to the gloomy God, Lies the sad path thy brother trod. Then to thy plighted word be true, Nor let thy steps that path pursue. Methinks the shafts of Ráma, shot Like thunderbolts, thou heedest not, Who canst, absorbed in sensual bliss, Thy promise from thy mind dismiss.”




Canto XXXV. Tárá’s Speech.


He ceased: and Tárá starry-eyed Thus to the angry prince replied: “Not to my lord shouldst thou address A speech so fraught with bitterness: Not thus reproached my lord should be, And least of all, O Prince, by thee. He is no thankless coward—no— With spirit dead to valour’s glow. From paths of truth he never strays, Nor wanders in forbidden ways. Ne’er will Sugríva’s heart forget, By Ráma saved, the lasting debt. Still in his grateful breast will live The succour none but he could give. Restored to fame by Ráma’s grace, To empire o’er the Vánar race, From ceaseless dread and toil set free, Restored to Rumá and to me: By grief and care and exile tried, New to the bliss so long denied, Like Viśvámitra once, alas, He marks not how the seasons pass. That saint ten thousand years remained, By sweet Ghritáchí’s(640) love enchained, And deemed those years, that flew away So lightly, but a single day. O, if those years unheeded flew By him who times and seasons knew, Unequalled for his lofty mind, What marvel meaner eyes are blind? Then be not angry, Raghu’s son, And let thy brother feel for one Who many a weary year has spent Stranger to love and blandishment. Let not this wrath thy soul inflame, Like some mean wretch unknown to fame: For high and noble hearts like thine Love mercy and to ruth incline, Calm and deliberate, and slow With anger’s raging fire to glow. At length, O righteous prince, relent, Nor let my words in vain be spent, This sudden blaze of fury slake, I pray thee for Sugríva’s sake. He would renounce at Ráma’s call Rumá and Angad, me and all Who call him lord: his gold and grain, The favour of his friend to gain. His arm shall slay the fiend more base In soul than all his impious race, And happy Ráma reunite To Sítá, rival in delight Of the triumphant Moon when he Rejoins his darling Rohiṇí.(641) Ten million million demons guard The gates of Lanká firmly barred. All hope until that host be slain, To smite the robber king is vain. Nor with Sugríva’s aid alone May king and host be overthrown. Thus ere he died—for well he knew— Spake Báli, and his words are true. I know not what his proofs might be, But speak the words he spake to me. Hence far and wide our lords are sent To raise the mightiest armament, For their return Sugríva waits Ere he can sally from his gates. Still is the oath Sugríva swore Kept firmly even as before: And the great host this day will be Assembled by the king’s decree, Ten thousand thousand troops, who wear The form of monkey and of bear, Prepared for thee the war to wage: Then let thy wrath no longer rage. The matrons of the Vánar race See marks of fury in thy face; They see thine eyes like blood are red, And will not yet be comforted.”




Canto XXXVI. Sugríva’s Speech.


She ceased: and Lakshmaṇ gave assent, Won by her gentle argument. So Tárá’s pleading, just and mild, His softening heart had reconciled. His altered mood Sugríva saw, And cast aside the fear and awe Like raiment heavy with the rain Which on his troubled soul had lain. Then quickly to the ground he threw His flowery garland, bright of hue, Which round his royal neck he wore, And, sobered, was himself once more. Then turning to the princely man In soothing words the king began: “My glory, wealth, and royal sway To other hands had passed away: But Ráma to my rescue came, And gave me back my power and fame. O Lakshmaṇ, say, whose grateful heart Could nurse the hope to pay in part, By service of a life, the deed Of Ráma sprung of heavenly seed? His foeman Rávaṇ shall be slain, And Sítá shall be his again. The hero’s side I will not leave, But he the conquest shall achieve. What need of help has he who drew His bow, and one great arrow flew Through seven tall trees, a mountain rent, And cleft the earth with force unspent? What aid needs he who shook his bow, And at the sound the earth below With hill and wood and rooted rock Quaked feverous with the thunder shock? Yet all my legions will I bring, And follow close the warrior king Marching on his impetuous way Fierce Rávaṇ and his hosts to slay. If I be guilty of offence, Careless through love or negligence, Let him his loyal slave forgive; For error cleaves to all who live.”

  Thus king Sugríva, good and brave, In humble words his answer gave, Softened was Lakshmaṇ’s angry mood Who thus his friendly speech renewed: “My brother, Vánar King, will see A champion and a friend in thee. So strong art thou, so brave and bold, So pure in thought, so humble-souled, That thou deservest well to reign And all a monarch’s bliss to gain. Lend thou my brother aid, and all His foes beneath his arm will fall. Full well the words thou speakest suit A chieftain wise and resolute. With grateful heart that loves the right, And foot that never yields in fight. O come, and my sad brother cheer Who mourns the wife he holds so dear. O pardon, friend, my harsh address, And Ráma’s frantic bitterness.”




Canto XXXVII. The Gathering.


He ceased: and King Sugríva cried To sage Hanúmán(642) by his side: “Summon the Vánar legions, those Who dwell about the Lord of Snows: Those who in Vindhyan groves delight, Kailása’s, or Mahendra’s height, Dwell on the Five bright Peaks, or where Mandar’s white summit cleaves the air: Wherever they are wandring free In highlands by the western sea, On that east hill whence springs the sun, Or where he sinks when day is done. Call the great chiefs whose legions fill The forests of the Lotus Hill,(643) Where every one in strength and size With the stupendous Anjan(644) vies. Call those, with tints of burnished gold Whom Maháśaila’s caverns hold: Those who on Dhúmra roam, or hide In the wild woods on Meru’s side. Call those who, brilliant as the sun, On high Maháruṇ leap and run, Quaffing sweet juices that distil From odorous trees upon the hill, Call those whom tranquil haunts delight, Where dwell the sage and anchorite In groves that through their wide extent Exhale a thousand blossoms’ scent. Send out, send out: from coast to coast Assemble all the Vánar host: With force, with words, with gifts of price Compel, admonish and entice. Already envoys have been sent To warn them of their lord’s intent. Let others urged by thee repeat My mandate that their steps be fleet. Those lords who yielding to the sway Of love’s delight would fain delay, Urge hither with the utmost speed, Or with thee to my presence lead: And those who linger to the last Until ten days be come and passed, And dare their sovereign to defy, For their offence shall surely die. Thousands, yea millions, shall there be, Obedient to their king’s decree, The lions of the Vánar race, Assembled from each distant place, Forth shall they haste like hills in size, Or mighty clouds that veil the skies, And swiftly speeding on their way Bring all our legions in array.” He ceased: the son of Váyu(645) heard, Submissive to his sovereign’s word; And sent his rapid envoys forth To east and west and south and north. They bent their airy course afar Along the paths of bird and star, And sped through ether farther yet Where Vishṇu’s splendid sphere is set.(646) By sea, on hill, by wood and lake They called to arms for Ráma’s sake, As each with terror in his breast Obeyed his awful king’s behest. Three million Vánars, fierce and strong As Anjan’s self, a wondrous throng Sped from the spot where Ráma still Gazed restless from the woody hill. Ten million others, brave and bold, With coats that shone like burning gold, Came flying from the mountain crest Where sinks the weary sun to rest. Impetuous from the northern skies, Where Mount Kailása’s summits rise, Ten hundred millions hasted, hued Like manes of lions, ne’er subdued: The dwellers on Himálaya’s side, Whose food his roots and fruit supplied, With rangers of the Vindhyan chain And neighbours of the Milky Main.(647) Some from the palm groves where they fed, Some from the woods of betel sped: In countless numbers, fierce and brave, They came from mountain, lake, and cave.

  As on their way the Vánars went To rouse each distant armament, They chanced that wondrous tree to view That on Himálaya’s summit grew. Of old upon that sacred height Was wrought Maheśvar’s(648) glorious rite, Which every God in heaven beheld, And his glad heart with triumph swelled. There from pure seed at random sown Bright plants with luscious fruit had grown, And, sweet as Amrit to the taste, The summit of the mountain graced. Who once should eat the virtuous fruit That sprang from so divine a root, One whole revolving moon should be From every pang of hunger free. The Vánars culled the fruit they found Ripe on the sacrificial ground With rare celestial odours sweet, To lay them at Sugríva’s feet. Those noble envoys scoured the land To summon every Vánar band Then swiftly homeward at the head Of countless armaments they sped. They gathered by Kishkindhá’s wall. They thronged Sugríva’s palace hall, And, richly laden, bare within That fruit of heavenly origin. Their gifts before their king they spread, And thus in tones of triumph said:

  “Through every land our way we took To visit hill and wood and brook, And all thy hosts from east to west Flock hither at their lord’s behest.” Sugríva with delighted look The present of his envoys took, Then bade them go, with gracious speech Rewarding and dismissing each.




Canto XXXVIII. Sugríva’s Departure.


Thus all the princely Vánars, true To their appointed tasks, withdrew. Sugríva deemed already done The work he planned for Raghu’s son. Then Lakshmaṇ gently spoke and cheered Sugríva for his valour feared: “Now, chieftain, if thy will be so, Forth from Kishkindhá let us go.” Sugríva’s heart swelled high with pride As to the prince he thus replied: “Come, speed we forth without delay: ’Tis mine thy mandate to obey.” Sugríva bade the dames adieu, And Tárá and the rest withdrew. Then at their chieftain’s summons came The Vánars first in rank and fame, A trusty brave and reverent band, Meet e’en before a queen to stand. They at his call made haste to bring The litter of the glorious king. “Mount, O my friend.” Sugríva cried, And straight Sumitrá’s son complied. Then took by Lakshmaṇ’s side his place The sovereign of the woodland race, Upraised by Vánars, fleet and strong, Who bore the glittering load along. On high above his royal head A paly canopy was spread, And chouries white in many a hand The forehead of the monarch fanned, And shell and drum and song and shout Pealed round him as the king passed out. About the monarch went a throng Of Vánar warriors brave and strong, As onward to the mountain shade Where Ráma dwelt his way he made. Soon as the lovely spot he viewed Where Ráma lived in solitude, The Vánar monarch, far-renowed, With Lakshmaṇ, lightly stepped to ground, And to the son of Raghu went Joining his raised hands reverent. As their great leader raised his hands, So suppliant stood the Vánar bands. Well pleased the son of Raghu saw Those legions, hushed in reverent awe, Stand silent like the tranquil floods That raise their hands of lotus buds. But Ráma, when the king, to greet His friend, had bowed him at his feet, Raised him who ruled the Vánar race, And held him in a close embrace: Then, when his arms he had unknit, Besought him by his side to sit, And thus with gentle words the best Of men the Vánar king addressed:

  “The prince who well his days divides, And knows aright the times and tides To follow duty, joy, or gain, He, only he, deserves to reign. But he who wealth and virtue leaves, And every hour to pleasure cleaves, Falls from his bliss like him who wakes From slumber on a branch that breaks. True king is he who smites his foes, And favour to his servants shows, And of that fruit makes timely use Which virtue, wealth, and joy produce. The hour is come that bids thee rise To aid me in my enterprise. Then call thy nobles to debate, And with their help deliberate.”

  “Lost was my power,” the king replied, “All strength had fled, all hope had died. The Vánars owned another lord, But by thy grace was all restored. All this, O conqueror of the foe, To thee and Lakshmaṇ’s aid I owe. And his should be the villain’s shame Who durst deny the sacred claim. These Vánar chiefs of noblest birth Have at my bidding roamed the earth, And brought from distant regions all Our legions at their monarch’s call: Fierce bears with monkey troops combined, And apes of every varied kind, Terrific in their forms, who dwell In grove and wood and bosky dell: The bright Gandharvas’ brood, the seed Of Gods,(649) they change their shapes at need. Each with his legions in array, Hither, O Prince, they make their way. They come: and tens of millions swell To numbers that no tongue may tell.(650) For thee their armies will unite With chiefs, Mahendra’s peers in might. From Meru and from Vindhya’s chain They come like clouds that bring the rain. These round thee to the war will go, To smite to earth thy demon foe; Will slay the Rákshas and restore Thy consort when the fight is o’er.”




Canto XXXIX. The Vánar Host.


Then Ráma, best of all who guide Their steps by duty, thus replied: “What marvel if Lord Indra send The kindly rain, O faithful friend? If, thousand-rayed, the God of Day Drive every darksome cloud away? Or, rising high, the Lord of Night Flood the broad heaven with silver light? What marvel, King, that one like thee The glory of his friends should be? No marvel, O my lord, that thou Hast shown thy noble nature now. Thy heart, Sugríva, well I know: Naught from thy lips but truth may flow, With thee for friend and champion all My foes beneath my arm will fall. The Rákshas, when my queen he stole, Brought sure destruction on his soul, Like Anuhláda(651) who beguiled Queen Śachí called Puloma’s child. Yes, near, Sugríva, is the day When I my demon foe shall slay, As conquering Indra in his ire Slew Queen Paulomí’s haughty sire.”(652) He ceased: thick clouds of dust rose high To every quarter of the sky: The very sun grew faint and pale Behind the darkly-gathering veil. The mighty clouds that hung o’erhead From east to west thick darkness spread, And earth to her foundations shook With hill and forest, lake and brook. Then hidden was the ground beneath Fierce warriors armed with fearful teeth, Hosts numberless, each lord in size A match for him who rules the skies: From many a sea and distant hill, From rock and river, lake and rill. Some like the morning sun were bright, Some, like the moon, were silver white: These green as lotus fibres, those White-coated from their native snows.(653) Then Śatabali came in view Girt by a countless retinue. Like some gold mountain high in air Tárá’s illustrious sire(654) was there. There Rumá‘s father,(655) far-renowned, With tens of thousands ranged around. There, tinted like the tender green Of lotus filaments, was seen, Compassed by countless legions, one Whose face was as the morning sun, Hanúmán’s father good and great, Kesarí,(656) wisest in debate. There the proud king Gaváksha, feared For his strong warrior arm, appeared. There Dhúmra, mighty lord, the dread Of foes, his ursine legions led. There Panas, first for warlike fame, With twenty million warriors came. There glorious Níla, dark of hue, Arrayed his countless troops in view. There moved lord Gavaya brave and bold, Resplendent like a hill of gold, And near him Darímukha stood With millions from the hill and wood And Dwivid famed for strength and speed, And Mamda, both of Aśvin seed. There Gaja, strong and glorious, led The countless troops around him spread, And Jámbaván(657) the king whose sway The bears delighted to obey, With swarming myriads onward pressed True to his lord Sugríva’s hest; And princely Ruman, dear to fame, Led millions whom no hosts could tame, All these and many a chief beside(658) Came onward fierce in warlike pride. They covered all the plain, and still Pressed forward over wood and hill. In rows for many a league around They rested on the grassy ground; Or to Sugríva made their way, Like clouds about the Lord of Day, And to the king their proud heads bent In power and might preeminent. Sugríva then to Ráma sped, And raised his reverent hands, and said That every chief from coast to coast Was present with his warrior host.




Canto XL. The Army Of The East.


With practised eye the king reviewed The Vánars’ countless multitude, And, joying that his hest was done, Thus spake to Raghu’s mighty son: “See, all the Vánar hosts who fear My sovereign might are gathered here. Chiefs strong as Indra’s self, who speed Wher’er they list, these armies lead. Fierce and terrific to the view As Daityas or the Dánav(659) crew, Famed in all lands for souls afire With lofty thoughts, they never tire, O’er hill and vale they wander free, And islets of the distant sea. And these gathered myriads, all Will serve thee, Ráma, at thy call. Whate’er thy heart advises, say: Thy mandates will the host obey.”

  Then answered Ráma, as he pressed The Vánar monarch to his breast: “O search for my lost Sítá, strive To find her if she still survive: And in thy wondrous wisdom trace Fierce Rávaṇ to his dwelling-place. And when by toil and search we know Where Sítá lies and where the foe, With thee, dear friend, will I devise Fit means to end the enterprise. Not mine, not Lakshmaṇ’s is the power To guide us in the doubtful hour. Thou, sovereign of the Vánars, thou Must be our hope and leader now.”

  He ceased: at King Sugríva’s call Near came a Vánar strong and tall. Huge as a towering mountain, loud As some tremendous thunder cloud, A prince who warlike legions led: To him his sovereign turned and said: “Go, take ten thousand(660) of our race Well trained in lore of time and place, And search the eastern region; through Groves, woods, and hills thy way pursue. There seek for Sítá, trace the spot Where Rávaṇ hides, and weary not. Search for the captive in the caves Of mountains, and by woods and waves. To Sarjú,(661) Kauśikí,(662) repair, Bhagírath’s daughter(663) fresh and fair. Search mighty Yamun’s(664) peak, explore Swift Yamuná’s(665) delightful shore, Sarasvati(666) and Sindhu’s(667) tide, And rapid Śona’s(668) pebbly side. Then roam afar by Mahí’s(669) bed Where Kálamahí’s groves are spread. Go where the silken tissue shines, Go to the land of silver mines.(670) Visit each isle and mountain steep And city circled by the deep, And distant villages that high About the peaks of Mandar lie. Speed over Yavadwipa’s land,(671) And see Mount Śiśir(672) proudly stand Uplifting to the skies his head By Gods and Dánavs visited. Search each ravine and mountain pass, Each tangled thicket deep in grass. Search every cave with utmost care If haply Ráma’s queen be there. Then pass beyond the sounding sea Where heavenly beings wander free, And Śona’s(673) waters swift and strong With ruddy billows foam along. Search where his shelving banks descend, Search where the hanging woods extend. Try if the pathless thickets screen The robber and the captive queen. Search where the torrent floods that rend The mountain to the plains descend: Search dark abysses where they rave, Search mountain slope and wood and cave Then on with rapid feet and gain The inlands of the fearful main Where, tortured by the tempest’s lash, Against rude rocks the billows dash: An ocean like a sable cloud, Whose margent monstrous serpents crowd: An ocean rising with a roar To beat upon an iron shore. On, onward still! your feet shall tread Shores of the sea whose waves are red, Where spreading wide your eyes shall see The guilt-tormenting cotton tree(674) And the wild spot where Garuḍ(675) dwells Which gems adorn and ocean shells, High as Kailása, nobly decked, Wrought by the heavenly architect.(676) Huge giants named Mandehas(677) there In each foul shape they love to wear, Numbing the soul with terror’s chill, Hang from the summit of the hill. When darts the sun his earliest beam They plunge them in the ocean stream, New vigour from his rays obtain, And hang upon the rocks again. Speed onward still: your steps shall be At length beside the Milky Sea Whose every ripple as it curls Gleams glorious with its wealth of pearls. Amid that sea like pale clouds spread The white Mount Rishabh(678) rears his head. About the mountain’s glorious waist Woods redolent of bloom are braced. A lake where lotuses unfold Their silver buds with threads of gold, Sudarśan ever bright and fair Where white swans sport, lies gleaming there, The wandering Kinnar’s(679) dear resort, Where heavenly nymphs and Yakshas(680) sport. On! leave the Milky Sea behind: Another flood your search shall find, A waste of waters, wild and drear, That chills each living heart with fear. There see the horse’s awful head, Wrath-born, that flames in Ocean’s bed.(681) There rises up a fearful cry From the sea things that move thereby, When, helpless, powerless for flight, They gaze upon the horrid sight. Past to the northern shore, and then Beyond the flood three leagues and ten Your wondering glances will behold Mount Játarúpa(682) bright with gold. There like the young moon pale of hue The monstrous serpent(683) will ye view, The earth’s supporter, whose bright eyes Resemble lotus leaves in size. He rests upon the mountain’s brow, And all the Gods before him bow. Ananta with a thousand heads His length in robes of azure spreads. A triple-headed palm of gold— Meet standard for the lofty-souled— Springs towering from the mountain’s crest Beneath whose shade he loves to rest, So that in eastern realms each God May use it as a measuring-rod. Beyond, with burning gold aglow, The eastern steep his peaks will show, Which in unrivalled glory rise A hundred leagues to pierce the skies, And all the neighbouring air is bright With golden trees that clothe the height. A lofty peak uprises there Ten leagues in height and one league square Saumanas, wrought of glistering gold, Ne’er to be loosened from its hold. There his first step Lord Vishṇu placed When through the universe he paced, And with his second lightly pressed The loftiest peak of Meru’s crest. When north of Jambudwíp(684) the sun A portion of his course has run, And hangs above this mountain height, Then creatures see the genial light. Vaikhánases,(685) saints far renowned, And Bálakhilyas(686) love the ground Where in their glory half divine, Touched by the morning glow, they shine The light that flashes from that steep Illumines all Sudarśandwíp,(687) And on each creature, as it glows, The sight and strength of life bestows. Search well that mountain’s woody side If Rávaṇ there his captive hide. The rising sun, the golden hill The air with growing splendours fill, Till flashes from the east the red Of morning with the light they shed. This, where the sun begins his state, Is earth and heaven’s most eastern gate. Through all the mountain forest seek By waterfall and cave and peak. Search every nook and bosky dell, If Rávaṇ there with Sítá dwell. There, Vánars, there your steps must stay: No farther eastward can ye stray. Beyond no sun, no moon gives light, But all is sunk in endless night. Thus far, O Vánar lords, may you O’er sea and land your search pursue. But wild and dark and known to none Is the drear space beyond the sun. That mountain whence the sun ascends Your long and weary journey ends.(688) Now go, and in a month return, And let success my praises earn. He who beyond tho month shall stay Will with his life the forfeit pay.”




Canto XLI. The Army Of The South.


He gathered next a chosen band For service in the southern land. He summoned Níla son of Fire, And, offspring of the eternal Sire, Jámbaván bold and strong and tall, And Hanumán, the best of all, And many a valiant lord beside,(689) With Angad for their chief and guide. “Go forth,” he cried, “with all this host Exploring to the southern coast: The thousand peaks that Vindhya shows Where every tree and creeper grows: Where Narmadá’s(690) sweet waters run, And serpents bask them in the sun: Where Krishṇaveṇí’s(691) currents flee, And sparkles fair Godávarí.(692) Through Mekhal(693) pass and Utkal’s(694) land: Go where Daśárṇa’s(695) cities stand. Avantí(696) seek, of high renown, And Abravanti’s(697) glorious town. Search every hill and brook and cave Where Daṇḍak’s woods their branches wave Ayomukh’s(698) woody hill explore Whose sides are bright with richest ore, Lifting his glorious head on high From bloomy groves that round him lie. Search well his forests where the breeze Blows fragrant from the sandal trees. Then will you see Káverí’s(699) stream Whose pleasant waters glance and gleam, And to the lovely banks entice The sportive maids of Paradise. High on the top of Malaya’s(700) hill, In holy musing, calm and still, Sits, radiant as the Lord of Light, Agastya,(701) noblest anchorite. Soon as that lofty-thoughted lord His high permission shall accord, Pass Támraparṇí’s(702) flood whose isles Are loved by basking crocodiles. The sandal woods that fringe her side Those islets and her waters hide; While, like an amorous matron, she Speeds to her own dear lord the sea. Thence hasting on your way behold The Páṇḍyas’(703) gates of pearl and gold. Then, with your task maturely planned, On ocean’s shore your feet will stand. Where, by Agastya’s high decree, Mahendra,(704) planted in the sea, With tinted peaks against the tide Rises in solitary pride, And glorious in his golden glow Spurns back the waves that beat below. Fair mountain, bright with creepers’ bloom And every tint that trees assume, Where Yaksha, God, and heavenly maid Meet wandering in the lovely shade, At changing moon and solemn tide By Indra’s presence glorified. One hundred leagues in fair extent An island(705) fronts the continent: No man may tread its glittering shore, With utmost heed that isle explore, For the fair country owns the sway Of Rávaṇ whom we burn to slay. A mighty monster stands to keep The passage of the southern deep. Lifting her awful arms on high She grasps e’en shadows as they fly. Speed through that isle, and onward still Where in mid sea the Flowery Hill(706) Raises on high his bloomy head By saints and angels visited. There, with a hundred gleaming peaks Bright as the sun, the sky he seeks, One glorious peak the Lord of Day Gilds ever with his loving ray; Thereon ne’er yet the glances fell Of thankless wretch or infidel. Bow to that hill in reverence due, And then once more your search pursue. Beyond that glorious mountain hie, And Súryaván,(707) proud hill is nigh. Your rapid course yet farther bend Where Vaidyut’s(708) airy peaks ascend. There trees of noblest sort, profuse Of wealth, their kindly gifts produce. Their precious fruits, O Vánars, taste, The honey sip, and onward haste. Next will ye see Mount Kunjar rise, Who cheers with beauty hearts and eyes. There is Agastya’s(709) mansion, decked By heaven’s all moulding architect. Near Bhogavatí(710) stands, the place Where dwell the hosts of serpent race: A broad-wayed city, walled and barred, Which watchful legions keep and guard, The fiercest of the serpent youth, Each awful for his venomed tooth: And throned in his imperial hall Is Vásuki(711) who rules them all. Explore the serpent city well, Search town and tower and citadel, And scan each field and wood that lies Around it, with your watchful eyes. Beyond that spot your way pursue: A noble mountain shall ye view, Named Rishabh, like a mighty bull, With gems made bright and beautiful. All trees of sandal flourish there Of heavenly fragrance, rich and rare. But, though they tempt your longing eyes, Avoid to touch them, and be wise. For Rohitas, a guardian band Of fierce Gandharvas, round them stand, Who five bright sovereign lords(712) obey, In glory like the God of Day. Here by good deeds a home is won With shapes like fire, the moon, the sun. Here they who merit heaven by worth Dwell on the confines of the earth. There stay: beyond it, dark and drear, Lies the departed spirits’ sphere, And, girt with darkness, far from bliss, Is Yáma’s sad metropolis.(713) So far, my lords, o’er land and sea Your destined course is plain and free. Beyond your steps you may not set, Where living thing ne’er journeyed yet. With utmost care these realms survey, And all you meet upon the way. And, when the lady’s course is traced, Back to your king, O Vánars, haste. And he who tells me he has seen. After long search, the Maithil queen, Shall gain a noble guerdon: he In power and bliss shall equal me. Dear as my very life, above His fellows in his master’s love; I call him, yea though stained with crime. My kinsman from that happy time.”




Canto XLII. The Army Of The West.


Then to Susheṇ Sugríva bent, And thus addressed him reverent: “Two hundred thousand of our best With thee, my lord, shall seek the west. Explore Suráshṭra’s(714)] distant plain, Explore Váhlíka’s(715) wild domain, And all the pleasant brooks that flee Through mountains to the western sea. Search clustering groves on mountain heights, And woods the home of anchorites. Search where the breezy hills are high, Search where the desert regions lie. Search all the western land beset With woody mountains like a net. The country‘s farthest limit reach, And stand upon the ocean beach. There wander through the groves of palm Where the soft air is full of balm. Through grassy dell and dark ravine Seek Rávaṇ and the Maithil queen. Go visit Somagiri’s(716) steep Where Sindhu(717) mingles with the deep. There lions, borne on swift wings, roam The levels of their mountain home, And elephants and monsters bear, Caught from the ocean, to their lair. You Vánars, changing forms at will, With rapid search must scour the hill, And his sky-kissing peak of gold Where loveliest trees their blooms unfold. There golden-peaked, ablaze with light, Uprises Páriyátra’s(718) height Where wild Gandharvas, fierce and fell, In bands of countless myriads dwell. Pluck ye no fruit within the wood; Beware the impious neighbourhood, Where, very mighty, strong, and hard To overcome, the fruit they guard. Yet search for Janak’s daughter still, For Vánars there need fear no ill. Near, bright as turkis, Vajra(719) named, There stands a hill of diamond framed. Soaring a hundred leagues in pride, With trees and creepers glorified. Search there each cave and dark abyss By waterfall and precipice. Far in that sea the wild waves beat On Chakraván’s(720) firm-rooted feet. Where the great discus,(721) thousand rayed, By Vísvakarmá’s(722) art was made. When Panchajan(723) the fiend was slain. And Hayagríva,(724) fierce in vain, Thence taking shell and discus went Lord Vishṇu, God preëminent. On! sixty thousand hills of gold With wondering eyes shall ye behold, Where in his glory every one Is brilliant as the morning sun. Full in the midst King Meru,(725) best Of mountains, lifts his lofty crest, On whom of yore, as all have heard, The sun well-pleased this boon conferred: “On thee, O King, on thee and thine Light, day and night, shall ever shine. Gandharvas, Gods who love thee well And on thy sacred summits dwell, Undimmed in lustre, bright and fair, The golden sheen shall ever share.” The Viśvas,(726) Vasus,(727) they who ride The tempest,(728) every God beside, Draw nigh to Meru’s lofty crest When evening darkens in the west, And to the parting Lord of Day The homage of their worship pay, Ere yet a while, unseen of all, Behind Mount Asta’s(729) peaks he fall. Wrought by the heavenly artist’s care A glorious palace glitters there, And round about it sweet birds sing Where the gay trees are blossoming: The home of Varuṇ(730) high-souled lord, Wrist-girded with his deadly cord.(731) With ten tall stems, a palm between Meru and Asta’s hill is seen: Pure silver from the base it springs, And far and wide its lustre flings. Seek Rávaṇ and the dame by brook, In pathless glen, in leafy nook On Meru’s crest a hermit lives Bright with the light that penance gives: Sávarṇi(732) is he named, renowned As Brahmá’s peer, with glory crowned. There bowing down in reverence speak And ask him of the dame you seek. Thus far the splendid Lord of Day Pursues through heaven his ceaseless way, Shedding on every spot his light; Then sinks behind Mount Asta’s height, Thus far advance: the sunless sea Beyond is all unknown to me. Susheṇ of mighty arm, long tried In peril, shall your legions guide. Receive his words with high respect, And ne’er his lightest wish neglect. He is my consort’s sire, and hence Deserves the utmost reverence.”




Canto XLIII. The Army Of The North.


Forth went the legions of the west: And wise Sugríva addressed Śatabal, summoned from the crowd. To whom the sovereign cried aloud: “Go forth, O Vánar chief, go forth, Explore the regions of the north. Thy host a hundred thousand be, And Yáma’s sons(733) attend on thee. With dauntless courage, strength, and skill Search every river, wood, and hill. Through every land in order go Right onward to the Hills of Snow. Search mid the peaks that shine afar, In woods of Lodh and Deodár.(734) Search if with Janak’s daughter, screened By sheltering rocks, there lie the fiend. The holy grounds of Soma tread By Gods and minstrels visited. Reach Kála’s mount, and flats that lie Among the peaks that tower on high. Then leave that hill that gleams with ore, And fair Sudarśan’s heights explore. Then on to Devasakhá(735) hie, Loved by the children of the sky. A dreary land you then will see Without a hill or brook or tree, A hundred leagues, bare, wild, and dread In lifeless desolation, spread. Pursue your onward way, and haste Through the dire horrors of the waste Until triumphant with delight You reach Kailása’s glittering height. There stands a palace decked with gold, For King Kuvera(736) wrought of old, A home the heavenly artist planned And fashioned with his cunning hand. There lotuses adorn the flood With full-blown flower and opening bud Where swans and mallards float, and gay Apsarases(737) come down to play. There King Vaiśravaṇ’s(738) self, the lord By all the universe adored, Who golden gifts to mortals sends, Lives with the Guhyakas(739) his friends. Search every cavern in the steep, And green glens where the moonbeams sleep, If haply in that distant ground The robber and the dame be found. Then on to Krauncha’s hill,(740) and through His fearful pass your way pursue: Though dark and terrible the vale Your wonted courage must not fail. There through abyss and cavern seek, On lofty ridge, and mountain peak, On, on! pursue your journey still By valley, lake, and towering hill. Reach the North Kurus’ land, where rest The holy spirits of the blest: Where golden buds of lilies gleam Resplendent on the silver stream, And leaves of azure turkis throw Soft splendour on the waves below. Bright as the sun at early morn Fair pools that happy clime adorn, Where shine the loveliest flowers on stems Of crystal and all valued gems. Blue lotuses through all the land The glories of their blooms expand, And the resplendent earth is strown With peerless pearl and precious stone. There stately trees can scarce uphold The burthen of their fruits of gold, And ever flaunt their gay attire Of flower and leaf like flames of fire. All there sweet lives untroubled spend In bliss and joy that know not end, While pearl-decked maidens laugh, or sing To music of the silvery string.(741) Still on your forward journey keep, And rest you by the northern deep, Where springing from the billows high Mount Somagiri(742) seeks the sky, And lightens with perpetual glow The sunless realm that lies below. There, present through all life’s extent, Dwells Brahmá Lord preëminent, And round the great God, manifest In Rudra(743) forms high sages rest. Then turn, O Vánars: search no more, Nor tempt the sunless, boundless shore.”




Canto XLIV. The Ring.


But special counselling he gave To Hanumán the wise and brave: To him on whom his soul relied, With friendly words the monarch cried: “O best of Vánars, naught can stay By land or sea thy rapid way, Who through the air thy flight canst bend, And to the Immortals’ home ascend. All realms, I ween, are known to thee With every mountain, lake, and sea. In strength and speed which naught can tire Thou, worthy rival of thy sire The mighty monarch of the wind, Where’er thou wilt a way canst find. Exert thy power, O swift and strong, Bring back the lady lost so long, For time and place, O thou most wise, Lie open to thy searching eyes.”

  When Ráma heard that special hest To Hanumán above the rest, He from the monarch’s favour drew Hope of success and trust anew That he on whom his lord relied, In toil and peril trained and tried, Would to a happy issue bring The task commanded by the king. He gave the ring that bore his name, A token for the captive dame, That the sad lady in her woe The missive of her lord might know. “This ring,” he said, “my wife will see, Nor fear an envoy sent by me. Thy valour and thy skill combined, Thy resolute and vigorous mind, And King Sugríva’s high behest, With joyful hopes inspire my breast.”




Canto XLV. The Departure.


Away, away the Vánars sped Like locusts o’er the land outspread. To northern realms where rising high The King of Mountains cleaves the sky, Fierce Śatabal with vast array Of Vánar warriors led the way. Far southward, as his lord decreed, Wise Hanumán, the Wind-God’s seed, With Angad his swift way pursued, And Tára’s warlike multitude, Strong Vinata with all his band Betook him to the eastern land, And brave Susheṇ in eager quest Sped swiftly to the gloomy west. Each Vánar chieftain sought with speed The quarter by his king decreed, While from his legions rose on high The shout and boast and battle cry: “We will restore the dame and beat The robber down beneath our feet. My arm alone shall win the day From Rávaṇ met in single fray, Shall rob the robber of his life, And rescue Ráma’s captive wife All trembling in her fear and woe. Here, comrades, rest: no farther go: For I will vanquish hell, and she Shall by this arm again be free. The rooted mountains will I rend, The mightiest trees will break and bend, Earth to her deep foundations cleave, And make the calm sea throb and heave. A hundred leagues from steep to steep In desperate bound my feet shall leap. My steps shall tread unchecked and free, Through woods, o’er land and hill and sea, Range as they list from flood to fell, And wander through the depths of hell.”




Canto XLVI. Sugríva’s Tale.


“How, King,” cried Ráma, “didst thou gain Thy lore of sea and hill and plain?” “I told thee how,” Sugríva said, “From Báli’s arm Máyáví fled(744) To Malaya’s hill, and strove to save His life by hiding in the cave. I told how Báli sought, to kill His foe, the hollow of the hill; Nor need I, King, again unfold The wondrous tale already told. Then, wandering forth, my way I took By many a town and wood and brook. I roamed the earth from place to place, Till, like a mirror’s polished face, The whole broad disk, that lies between Its farthest bounds, mine eyes had seen. I wandered first to eastern skies Where fairest trees rejoiced mine eyes, And many a cave and wooded hill Where lilies robed the lake and rill. There metal dyes that hill(745) adorn Whence springs the sun to light the morn. There, too, I viewed the Milky sea, Where nymphs of heaven delight to be. Then to the south I made my way From regions of the rising day, And roamed o’er Vindhya, where the breeze Is odorous of sandal trees. Still in my fear I found no rest: I sought the regions of the west, And gazed on Asta,(746) where the sun Sinks when his daily course is run. Then from that noblest hill I fled And to the northern country sped, Saw Himaván,(747) and Meru’s steep, And stood beside the northern deep. But when, by Báli’s might oppressed, E’en in those wilds I could not rest, Came Hanumán the wise and brave, And thus his prudent counsel gave: “’I told thee how Matanga(748) cursed Thy tyrant, that his head should burst In pieces, should he dare invade The precincts of that tranquil shade. There may we dwell in peace and be From thy oppressor’s malice free.” We went to Rishyamúka’s hill, And spent our days secure from ill Where, with that curse upon his head, The cruel Báli durst not tread.”




Canto XLVII. The Return.


Thus forth in quest of Sítá went The legions King Sugríva sent. To many a distant town they hied By many a lake and river’s side. As their great sovereign’s order taught, Through valleys, plains, and groves they sought. They toiled unresting through the day: At night upon the ground they lay Where the tall trees, whose branches swayed Beneath their fruit, gave pleasant shade. Then, when a weary month was spent, Back to Praśravaṇ’s hill they went, And stood with faces of despair Before their king Sugríva there. Thus, having wandered through the east, Great Vinata his labours ceased, And weary of the fruitless pain Returned to meet the king again, Brave Śatabali to the north Had led his Vánar legions forth. Now to Sugríva he sped With all his host dispirited. Susheṇ the western realms had sought, And homeward now his legions brought. All to Sugríva came, where still He sat with Ráma on the hill. Before their sovereign humbly bent And thus addressed him reverent: “On every hill our steps have been, By wood and cave and deep ravine; And all the wandering brooks we know Throughout the land that seaward flow, Our feet by thy command have traced The tangled thicket and the waste, And dens and dingles hard to pass for creeping plants and matted grass. Well have we searched with toil and pain, And monstrous creatures have we slain But Hanumán of noblest mind The Maithil lady yet will find; For to his quarter of the sky(749) The robber fiend was seen to fly.”




Canto XLVIII. The Asur’s Death.


But Hanumán still onward pressed With Tára, Angad, and the rest, Through Vindhya’s pathless glens he sped And left no spot unvisited. He gazed from every mountain height, He sought each cavern dark as night, And wandered through the bloomy shade By pool and river and cascade, But, though they sought in every place, Of Sítá yet they found no trace. On fruit and woodland berries fed Through many a lonely wild they sped, And reached at last, untouched by fear, A desert terrible and drear: A fruitless waste, a land of gloom Where trees were bare of leaf and bloom, Where every scanty stream was dried, And niggard earth her roots denied. No elephants through all the ground, No buffaloes or deer are found. There roams no tiger, pard, or bear, No creature of the wood is there. No bird displays his glittering wings, No tree, no shrub, no creeper springs. There rise no lilies from the flood, Resplendent with their flower and bud, Where the delighted bees may throng About the fragrance with their song. There lived a hermit Kaṇdu named, For truth and wealth of penance famed. Whom fervent zeal and holy rite Had dowered with all-surpassing might. His little son, a ten year child— So chanced it—perished in the wild. His death with fury stirred the sage, Who cursed the forest in his rage, Doomed from that hour to shelter none, A waste for bird and beast to shun. They searched by every forest edge, They searched each cave and mountain ledge, And thickets whence the water fell Wandering through the tangled dell. Striving to do Sugríva’s will They roamed along each leafy rill. But vain were all endeavours, vain The careful search, the toil and pain. Through one dark grove they scarce could wind, So thick were creepers intertwined. There as they struggled through the wood Before their eyes an Asur(750) stood. High as a towering hill, his pride The very Gods in heaven defied. When on the fiend their glances fell Each braced him for the combat well. The demon raised his arm on high, And rushed upon them with a cry. Him Angad smote,—for, sure, he thought This was the fiend they long had sought. From his huge mouth by Angad felled, The blood in rushing torrents welled, As, like a mountain from his base Uptorn, he dropped upon his face. Thus fell the mighty fiend: and they Through the thick wood pursued their way; Then, weary with the toil, reclined Where leafy boughs to shade them twined.




Canto XLIX. Angad’s Speech.


Then Angad spake: “We Vánars well Have searched each valley, cave, and dell, And hill, and brook, and dark recess, And tangled wood, and wilderness. But all in vain: no eye has seen The robber or the Maithil queen. A dreary time has passed away, And stern is he we all obey. Come, cast your grief and sloth aside: Again be every effort tried; So haply may our toil attain The sweet success that follows pain. Laborious effort, toil, and skill, The firm resolve, the constant will Secure at last the ends we seek: Hence, O my friends, I boldly speak. Once more then, noble hearts, once more Let us to-day this wood explore, And, languor and despair subdued, Purchase success with toil renewed. Sugríva is a king austere, And Ráma’s wrath we needs must fear. Come, Vánars, ye think it wise, And do the thing that I advise.”

  Then Gandhamádan thus replied With lips that toil and thirst had dried; “Obey his words, for wise and true Is all that he has counselled you. Come, let your hosts their toil renew And search each grove and desert through, Each towering hill and forest glade. By lake and brook and white cascade, Till every spot, as our great lord Commanded, be again explored.”

  Uprose the Vánars one and all, Obedient to the chieftain’s call, And over the southern region sped Where Vindhya’s tangled forests spread. They clomb that hill that towers on high Like a huge cloud in autumn’s sky, Where many a cavern yawns, and streaks Of radiant silver deck the peaks. In eager search they wandered through The forests where the Lodh trees grew, Where the dark leaves were thick and green, But found not Ráma’s darling queen. Then faint with toil, their hearts depressed, Descending from the mountain’s crest, Their weary limbs a while to ease They lay beneath the spreading trees.




Canto L. The Enchanted Cave.


Angad and Tára by his side, Again rose Hanumán and tried Each mountain cavern, dark and deep, And stony pass and wooded steep, The lion’s and the tiger’s home, By rushing torrents white with foam. Then with new ardour, south and west, O’er Vindhya’s height the search they pressed. The day prescribed was near and they Still wandered on their weary way. They reached the southern land beset With woody mountains like a net. At length a mighty cave they spied That opened in a mountain’s side. Where many a verdant creeper grew And o’er the mouth its tendrils threw. Thence issued crane, and swan, and drake, And trooping birds that love the lake. The Vánars rushed within to cool Their fevered lips in spring or pool. Vast was the cavern dark and dread, Where not a ray of light was shed; Yet not the more their eyesight failed, Their courage sank or valour quailed. On through the gloom the Vánars pressed With hunger, thirst, and toil distressed, Poor helpless wanderers, sad, forlorn, With wasted faces wan and worn. At length, when life seemed lost for aye, They saw a splendour as of day, A wondrous forest, fair and bright, Where golden trees shot flamy light. And lotus-covered pools were there With pleasant waters fresh and fair, And streams their rippling currents rolled By seats of silver and of gold. Fair houses reared their stately height Of burnished gold and lazulite, And glorious was the lustre thrown Through lattices of precious stone. And there were flowers and fruit on stems Of coral decked with rarest gems, And emerald leaves on silver trees, And honeycomb and golden bees. Then as the Vánars nearer drew, A holy woman met their view, Around her form was duly tied A garment of the blackdeer’s hide.(751) Pure votaress she shone with light Of fervent zeal and holy rite. Then Hanumán before the rest With reverent words the dame addressed: “Who art thou? say: and who is lord Of this vast cave with treasures stored?”




Canto LI. Svayamprabhá.


“Assailed by thirst and hunger, dame, Within a gloomy vault we came. We saw the cavern opening wide, And straight within its depths we hied. But utterly amazed are we At all the marvels that we see. Whose are the golden trees that gleam With splendour like the morning’s beam? These cates of noblest sort? these roots? This wondrous store of rarest fruits? Whose are these calm and cool retreats, These silver homes and golden seats, And lattices of precious stones? Who is the happy lord that owns The golden trees, of rarest scent, Neath loads of fruit and blossom bent? Who, strong in holy zeal, had power To deck the streams with richest dower, And bade the lilies bright with gold The glory of their blooms unfold, Where fish in living gold below The sheen of changing colours show? Thine is the holy power, I ween, That beautified the wondrous scene; But if another’s, lady, deign To tell us, and the whole explain.”

  To him the lady of the cave In words like these her answer gave: “Skilled Maya framed in days of old This magic wood of growing gold. The chief artificer in place Was he of all the Dánav race. He, for his wise enchantments famed, This glorious dwelling planned and framed He for a thousand years endured The sternest penance, and secured From Brahmá of all boons the best, The knowledge Uśanas(752) possessed. Lord, by that boon, of all his will, He fashioned all with perfect skill; And, with his blissful state content, In this vast grove a season spent. By Indra’s jealous bolt he fell For loving Hemá’s(753) charms too well. And Brahmá on that nymph bestowed The treasures of this fair abode, Wherein her tranquil days to spend In happiness that ne’er may end. Sprung of a lineage old and high, Merusávarṇi’s(754) daughter, I Guard ever for that heavenly dame This home, Svayamprabhá(755) my name,— For I have loved the lady long, So skilled in arts of dance and song. But say what cause your steps has led The mazes of this grove to tread. How, strangers did ye chance to spy The wood concealed from wanderer’s eye? Tell clearly why ye come: but first Eat of this fruit and quench your thirst.”




Canto LII. The Exit.


“Ráma,” he cried, “a prince whose sway All peoples of the earth obey, To Daṇḍak’s tangled forest came With his brave brother and his dame. From that dark shade of forest boughs The giant Rávaṇ stole his spouse. Our king Sugríva’s orders send These Vánars forth to aid his friend, That so the lady be restored Uninjured to her sorrowing lord. With Angad and the rest, this band Has wandered through the southern land, With careful search in every place The lady and the fiend to trace. We roamed the southern region o’er, And stood upon the ocean’s shore. By hunger pressed our strength gave way; Beneath the spreading trees we lay, And cried, worn out with toil and woe, “No farther, comrades, can we go.” Then as our sad eyes looked around We spied an opening in the ground, Where all was gloomy dark behind The creeping plants that o’er it twined. Forth trooping from the dark-recess Came swans and mallards numberless, With drops upon their shining wings As newly bathed where water springs. “On, comrades, to the cave,” I cried And all within the portal hied. Each clasping fast another’s hand Far onward pressed the Vánar band; And still, as thirst and hunger drove, We traced the mazes of the grove. Here thou with hospitable care Hast fed us with the noblest fare, Preserving us, about to die, With this thy plentiful supply. But how, O pious lady, say, May we thy gracious boon repay?”

  He ceased: the ascetic dame replied: “Well, Vánars, am I satisfied. A life of holy works I lead, And from your hands no service need.” Then spake again the Vánar chief: “We came to thee and found relief. Now listen to a new distress, And aid us, holy votaress. Our wanderings in this vasty cave Exhaust the time Sugríva gave. Once more then, lady, grant release, And let thy suppliants go in peace Again upon their errand sped, For King Sugríva’s ire we dread. And the great task our sovereign set, Alas, is unaccomplished yet.”

  Thus Hanumán their leader prayed, And thus the dame her answer made: “Scarce may the living find their way Returning hence to light of day; But I will free you through the might Of penance, fast, and holy rite. Close for a while your eyes, or ne’er May you return to upper air.” She ceased: the Vánars all obeyed; Their fingers on their eyes they laid, And, ere a moment’s time had fled, Were through the mazy cavern led. Again the gracious lady spoke, And joy in every bosom woke: “Lo, here again is Vindhya’s hill, Whose valleys trees and creepers fill; And, by the margin of the sea, Praśravaṇ where you fain would be.” With blessings then she bade adieu, And swift within the cave withdrew.




Canto LIII. Angad’s Counsel.


They looked upon the boundless main The awful seat of Varuṇ’s reign. And heard his waters roar and rave Terrific with each crested wave. Then, in the depths of sorrow drowned, They sat upon the bosky ground, And sadly, as they pondered, grieved For days gone by and naught achieved. Pain pierced them through with sharper sting When, gazing on the trees of spring, They saw each waving bough that showed The treasures of its glorious load, And helpless, fainting with the weight Of woe they sank disconsolate. Then, lion-shouldered, stout and strong, The noblest of the Vánar throng, Angad the prince imperial rose, And, deeply stricken by the woes That his impetuous spirit broke, Thus gently to the chieftains spoke: “Mark ye not, Vánars, that the day Our monarch fixed has passed away? The month is lost in toil and pain, And now, my friends, what hopes remain? On you, in lore of counsel tried, Our king Sugríva most relied. Your hearts, with strong affection fraught, His weal in every labour sought, And the true valour of your band Was blazoned wide in every land. Forth on the toilsome search you sped, By me—for so he willed it—led, To us, of every hope bereft, Death is the only refuge left. For none a happy life may see Who fails to do our king’s decree. Come, let us all from food abstain, And perish thus, since hope is vain. Stern is our king and swift to ire, Imperious, proud, and fierce like fire, And ne’er will pardon us the crime Of fruitless search and wasted time. Far better thus to end our lives, And leave our wealth, our homes and wives, Leave our dear little ones and all, Than by his vengeful hand to fall. Think not Sugríva’s wrath will spare Me Báli’s son, imperial heir: For Raghu’s royal son, not he, To this high place anointed me. Sugríva, long my bitter foe, With eager hand will strike the blow, And, mindful of the old offence, Will slay me now for negligence, Nor will my pitying friends have power To save me in the deadly hour. No—here, O chieftains, will I lie By ocean’s marge, and fast and die.”

  They heard the royal prince declare The purpose of his fixt despair; And all, by common terror moved, His speech in these sad words approved: “Sugríva’s heart is hard and stern, And Ráma’s thoughts for Sítá yearn. Our forfeit lives will surely pay For idle search and long delay, And our fierce king will bid us die The favour of his friend to buy.”

  Then Tára softly spake to cheer The Vánars’ hearts oppressed by fear: “Despair no more, your doubts dispel: Come in this ample cavern dwell. There may we live in blissful ease Mid springs and fruit and bloomy trees, Secure from every foe’s assault, For magic framed the wondrous vault. Protected there we need not fear Though Ráma and our king come near; Nor dread e’en him who batters down The portals of the foeman’s town.”(756)




Canto LIV. Hanumán’s Speech.


But Hanumán, while Tára, best Of splendid chiefs his thought expressed, Perceived that Báli’s princely son A kingdom for himself had won.(757) His keen eye marked in him combined The warrior’s arm, the ruler’s mind, And every noble gift should grace The happy sovereign of his race: Marked how he grew with ripening age More glorious and bold and sage,— Like the young moon that night by night Shines on with ever waxing light,— Brave as his royal father, wise As he who counsels in the skies:(758) Marked how, forwearied with the quest, He heeded not his liege’s hest, But Tára’s every word obeyed Like Indra still by Śukra(759) swayed. Then with his prudent speech he tried To better thoughts the prince to guide, And by division’s skilful art The Vánars and the youth to part: “Illustrious Angad, thou in fight Hast far surpassed thy father’s might, Most worthy, like thy sire of old, The empire of our race to hold. The Vánars’ fickle people range From wish to wish and welcome change. Their wives and babes they will not leave And to their new-made sovereign cleave. No art, no gifts will draw away The Vánars from Sugríva’s sway, Through hope of wealth, through fear of pain Still faithful will they all remain. Thou fondly hopest in this cave The vengeance of the foe to brave. But Lakshmaṇ’s arm a shower will send Of deadly shafts those walls to rend. Like Indra’s bolts his shafts have power To cleave the mountain like a flower. O Angad, mark my counsel well: If in this cave thou choose to dwell, These Vánar hosts with one accord Will quit thee for their lawful lord, And turn again with thirsty eyes To wife and babe and all they prize. Thou in the lonely cavern left Of followers and friends bereft, Wilt be in all thy woe, alas, Weak as a blade of trembling grass: And Lakshmaṇ’s arrows, keen and fierce From his strong bow, thy heart will pierce. But if in lowly reverence meek Sugríva’s court with us thou seek, He, as thy birth demands, will share The kingdom with the royal heir. Thy loving kinsman, true and wise, Looks on thee still with favouring eyes. Firm in his promise, pure is he, And ne’er will vex or injure thee. He loves thy mother, lives for her A faithful friend and worshipper. That mother’s love thou mayst not spurn: Her only child, return, return.”




Canto LV. Angad’s Reply.


“What truth or justice canst thou find,” Cried Angad, “in Sugríva’s mind? Where is his high and generous soul, His purity and self-control? How is he worthy of our trust, Righteous, and true, and wise, and just, Who, shrinking not from sin and shame, Durst take his living brother’s dame? Who, when, in stress of mortal strife His noble brother fought for life, Against the valiant warrior barred The portal which he stood to guard? Can he be grateful—he who took The hand of Ráma, and forsook That friend who saved him in his woes, To whom his life and fame he owes? Ah no! his heart is cold and mean, What bids him search for Ráma’s queen? Not honour’s law, not friendship’s debt, But angry Lakshmaṇ’s timely threat. No prudent heart will ever place Its trust in one so false and base, Who heeds not friendship, kith or kin, Who scorns the law and cleaves to sin. But true or false, whate’er he be, One consequence I clearly see; Me, in my youth anointed heir Against his wish, he will not spare, But strike with eager hand the blow That rids him of a household foe. Shall I of power and friends despoiled, In all my purpose crossed and foiled,— Shall I Kishkindhá seek, and wait, Like some poor helpless thing, my fate? The cruel wretch through lust of sway Will seize upon his hapless prey, And to a prison’s secret gloom The remnant of my years will doom. ’Tis better far to fast and die Than hopeless bound in chains to lie, Your steps, O Vánars, homeward bend And leave me here my life to end. Better to die of hunger here Than meet at home the fate I fear. Go, bow you at Sugríva’s feet, And in my name the monarch greet. Before the sons of Raghu bend, And give the greeting that I send. Greet kindly Rumá too, for she A son’s affection claims from me, And gently calm with friendly care My mother Tárá’s wild despair; Or when she hears her darling’s fate The queen will die disconsolate.”

  Thus Angad bade the chiefs adieu: Then on the ground his limbs he threw Where sacred Darbha(760) grass was spread, And wept as every hope had fled. The moving words of Angad drew Down aged cheeks the piteous dew. And, as the chieftains’ eyes grew dim, They swore to stay and die with him. On holy grass whose every blade Was duly, pointing southward, laid, The Vánars sat them down and bent Their faces to the orient, While “Here, O comrades, let us die With Angad,” was the general cry.




Canto LVI. Sampáti.


Then came the vultures’ mighty king Where sat the Vánars sorrowing,— Sampáti,(761) best of birds that fly On sounding pinions through the sky, Jaṭáyus’ brother, famed of old, Most glorious and strong and bold. Upon the slope of Vindhya’s hill He saw the Vánars calm and still. These words he uttered while the sight Filled his fierce spirit with delight: “Behold how Fate with changeless laws Within his toils the sinner draws, And brings me, after long delay, A rich and noble feast to-day, These Vánars who are doomed to die My hungry maw to satisfy.”

  He spoke no more: and Angad heard The menace of the mighty bird; And thus, while anguish filled his breast, The noble Hanumán addressed: “Vivasvat’s(762) son has sought this place For vengeance on the Vánar race. See, Yáma, wroth for Sítá’s sake, Is come our guilty lives to take. Our king’s decree is left undone, And naught achieved for Raghu’s son. In duty have we failed, and hence Comes punishment for dire offence. Have we not heard the marvels wrought By King Jaṭáyus,(763) how he fought With Rávaṇ’s might, and, nobly brave, Perished, the Maithil queen to save? There is no living creature, none, But loves to die for Raghu’s son, And in long toils and dangers we Have placed our lives in jeopardy. Blest is Jaṭáyus, he who gave His life the Maithil queen to save, And proved his love for Ráma well When by the giant’s hand he fell. Now raised to bliss and high renown He fears not fierce Sugríva’s frown. Alas, alas! what miseries spring From that rash promise of the king!(764) His own sad death, and Ráma sent With Lakshmaṇ forth to banishment: The Maithil lady borne away: Jaṭáyus slain in mortal fray: The fall of Báli when the dart Of Ráma quivered in his heart: And, after toil and pain and care, Our misery and deep despair.”

  He ceased: the feathered monarch heard, His heart with ruth and wonder stirred: “Whose is that voice,” the vulture cried, “That tells me how Jaṭáyus died, And shakes my inmost soul with woe For a loved brother’s overthrow? After long days at length I hear The glorious name of one so dear. Once more, O Vánar chieftains, tell How King Jaṭáyus fought and fell. But first your aid, I pray you, lend, And from this peak will I descend. The sun has burnt my wings, and I No longer have the power to fly.”




Canto LVII. Angad’s Speech.


Though grief and woe his utterance broke They trusted not the words he spoke; But, looking still for secret guile, Reflected in their hearts a while: “If on our mangled limbs he feed, We gain the death ourselves decreed.”

  Then rose the Vánar chiefs, and lent Their arms to aid the bird’s descent; And Angad spake: “There lived of yore A noble Vánar king who bore The name of Riksharajas, great And brave and strong and fortunate. His sons were like their father: fame Knows Báli and Sugríva’s name. Praised in all lands, a glorious king Was Báli, and from him I spring. Brave Ráma, Daśaratha’s heir, A glorious prince beyond compare, His sire and duty’s law obeyed, And sought the depths of Daṇḍak’ shade Sítá his well-beloved dame, And Lakshmaṇ, with the wanderer came. A giant watched his hour, and stole The sweet delight of Ráma’s soul. Jaṭáyus, Daśaratha’s friend, Swift succour to the dame would lend. Fierce Rávaṇ from his car he felled, And for a time the prize withheld. But bleeding, weak with years, and tired, Beneath the demon’s blows expired, Due rites at Ráma’s hands obtained, And bliss that ne’er shall minish, gained. Then Ráma with Sugríva made A covenant for mutual aid, And Báli, to the field defied, By conquering Ráma’s arrow died. Sugríva then, by Ráma’s grace, Was monarch of the Vánar race. By his command a mighty host Seeks Ráma’s queen from coast to coast. Sent forth by him, in every spot We looked for her, but find her not. Vain is the toil, as though by night We sought to find the Day-God’s light. In lands unknown at length we found A spacious cavern under ground, Whose vaults that stretch beneath the hill Were formed by Maya’s magic skill. Through the dark maze our steps were bent, And wandering there a month we spent, And lost, in fruitless error, thus The days our king allotted us. Thus we though faithful have transgressed, And failed to keep our lord’s behest. No chance of safety can we see, No lingering hope of life have we. Sugríva’s wrath and Ráma’s hate Press on our souls with grievous weight: And we, because ’tis vain to fly, Resolve at length to fast and die.”




Canto LVIII. Tidings Of Sítá.


The piteous tears his eye bedewed As thus his speech the bird renewed; “Alas my brother, slain in fight By Rávaṇ’s unresisted might! I, old and wingless, weak and worn, O’er his sad fate can only mourn. Fled is my youth: in life’s decline My former strength no more is mine. Once on the day when Vritra(765) died, We brothers, in ambitious pride, Sought, mounting with adventurous flight, The Day-God garlanded with light. On, ever on we urged our way Where fields of ether round us lay, Till, by the fervent heat assailed, My brother’s pinions flagged and failed. I marked his sinking strength, and spread My stronger wings to screen his head, Till, all my feathers burnt away, On Vindhya’s hill I fell and lay. There in my lone and helpless state I heard not of my brother’s fate.”

  Thus King Sampáti spoke and sighed: And royal Angad thus replied: “If, brother of Jatáyus, thou Hast heard the tale I told but now, Obedient to mine earnest prayer The dwelling of that fiend declare. O, say where cursed Rávaṇ dwells, Whom folly to his death impels.”

  He ceased. Again Sampáti spoke, And hope in every breast awoke: “Though lost my wings, and strength decayed, Yet shall my words lend Ráma aid. I know the worlds where Vishṇu trod,(766) I know the realm of Ocean’s God; How Asurs fought with heavenly foes, And Amrit from the churning rose.(767) A mighty task before me lies, To prosper Ráma’s enterprise, A task too hard for one whom length Of days has rifled of his strength. I saw the cruel Rávaṇ bear A gentle lady through the air. Bright was her form, and fresh and young, And sparkling gems about her hung. “O Ráma, Ráma!” cried the dame, And shrieked in terror Lakshmaṇ’s name, As, struggling in the giant’s hold, She dropped her gauds of gems and gold. Like sun-light on a mountain shone The silken garments she had on, And glistened o’er his swarthy form As lightning flashes through the storm. That giant Rávaṇ, famed of old, Is brother of the Lord of Gold.(768) The southern ocean roars and swells Round Lanká, where the robber dwells In his fair city nobly planned And built by Viśvakarmá’s(769) hand. Within his bower securely barred, With monsters round her for a guard, Still in her silken vesture clad Lies Sítá, and her heart is sad. A hundred leagues your course must be Beyond this margin of the sea. Still to the south your way pursue, And there the giant Rávaṇ view. Then up, O Vánars, and away! For by my heavenly lore I say, There will you see the lady’s face, And hither soon your steps retrace. In the first field of air are borne The doves and birds that feed on corn. The second field supports the crows And birds whose food on branches grows. Along the third in balanced flight Sail the keen osprey and the kite. Swift through the fourth the falcon springs The fifth the slower vulture wings. Up to the sixth the gay swans rise, Where royal Vainateya(770) flies. We too, O chiefs, of vulture race, Our line from Vinatá may trace, Condemned, because we wrought a deed Of shame, on flesh and blood to feed. But all Suparṇa’s(771) wondrous powers And length of keenest sight are ours, That we a hundred leagues away Through fields of air descry our prey. Now from this spot my gazing eye Can Rávaṇ and the dame descry. Devise some plan to overleap This barrier of the briny deep. Find the Videhan lady there, And joyous to your home repair. Me too, O Vánars, to the side Of Varuṇ’s(772) home the ocean, guide, Where due libations shall be paid To my great-hearted brother’s shade.”




Canto LIX. Sampáti’s Story.


They heard his counsel to the close, Then swiftly to their feet they rose; And Jámbaván with joyous breast The vulture king again addressed:

  “Where, where is Sítá? who has seen, Who borne away the Maithil queen? Who would the lightning flight withstand by Lakshmaṇ’s hand?”

  Again Sampáti spoke to cheer The Vánars as they bent to hear: “Now listen, and my words shall show What of the Maithil dame I know, And in what distant prison lies The lady of the long dark eyes. Scorched by the fiery God of Day, High on this mighty hill I lay. A long and weary time had passed, And strength and life were failing fast. Yet, ere the breath had left my frame, My son, my dear Supárśva, came. Each morn and eve he brought me food, And filial care my life renewed. But serpents still are swift to ire, Gandharvas slaves to soft desire, And we, imperial vultures, need A full supply our maws to feed. Once he turned at close of day, Stood by my side, but brought no prey. He looked upon my ravenous eye, Heard my complaint and made reply: “Borne on swift wings ere day was light I stood upon Mahendra’s(773) height, And, far below, the sea I viewed And birds in countless multitude. Before mine eyes a giant flew Whose monstrous form was dark of hue And struggling in his grasp was borne A lady radiant as the morn. Swift to the south his course he bent, And cleft the yielding element. The holy spirits of the air Came round me as I marvelled there, And cried as their bright legions met: “O say, is Sítá living yet?” Thus cried the saints and told the name Of him who held the struggling dame. Then while mine eye with eager look Pursued the path the robber took, I marked the lady’s streaming hair, And heard her cry of wild despair. I saw her silken vesture rent And stripped of every ornament, Thus, O my father, fled the time: Forgive, I pray, the heedless crime.” In vain the mournful tale I heard My pitying heart to fury stirred, What could a helpless bird of air, Reft of his boasted pinions, dare? Yet can I aid with all that will And words can do, and friendly skill.”




Canto LX. Sampáti’s Story.


Then from the flood Sampáti paid Due offerings to his brother’s shade. He bathed him when the rites were done, And spake again to Báli’s son: “Now listen, Prince, while I relate How first I learned the lady’s fate. Burnt by the sun’s resistless might I fell and lay on Vindhya’s height. Seven nights in deadly swoon I passed, But struggling life returned at last. Around I bent my wondering view, But every spot was strange and new. I scanned the sea with eager ken, And rock and brook and lake and glen, I saw gay trees their branches wave, And creepers mantling o’er the cave. I heard the wild birds’ joyous song, And waters as they foamed along, And knew the lovely hill must be Mount Vindhya by the southern sea. Revered by heavenly beings, stood Near where I lay, a sacred wood, Where great Niśakar dwelt of yore And pains of awful penance bore. Eight thousand seasons winged their flight Over the toiling anchorite— Upon that hill my days were spent,— And then to heaven the hermit went. At last, with long and hard assay, Down from that height I made my way, And wandered through the mountain pass Rough with the spikes of Darbha grass. I with my misery worn, and faint Was eager to behold the saint: For often with Jaṭáyus I Had sought his home in days gone by. As nearer to the grove I drew The breeze with cooling fragrance blew, And not a tree that was not fair, With richest flower and fruit was there. With anxious heart a while I stayed Beneath the trees’ delightful shade, And soon the holy hermit, bright With fervent penance, came in sight. Behind him bears and lions, tame As those who know their feeder, came, And tigers, deer, and snakes pursued His steps, a wondrous multitude, And turned obeisant when the sage Had reached his shady hermitage. Then came Niśakar to my side And looked with wondering eyes, and cried: “I knew thee not, so dire a change Has made thy form and feature strange. Where are thy glossy feathers? where The rapid wings that cleft the air? Two vulture brothers once I knew: Each form at will could they endue. They of the vulture race were kings, And flew with Mátariśva’s(774) wings. In human shape they loved to greet Their hermit friend, and clasp his feet. The younger was Jaṭáyus, thou The elder whom I gaze on now. Say, has disease or foeman’s hate Reduced thee from thy high estate?”




Canto LXI. Sampáti’s Story.


“Ah me! o’erwhelmed with shame and weak With wounds,” I cried, “I scarce can speak. My hapless brother once and I Our strength of flight resolved to try. And by our foolish pride impelled Our way through realms of ether held. We vowed before the saints who tread The wilds about Kailása’s head, That we with following wings would chase The swift sun to his resting place. Up on our soaring pinions through The fields of cloudless air we flew. Beneath us far, and far away, Like chariot wheels bright cities lay, Whence in wild snatches rose the song Of women mid the gay-clad throng, With sounds of sweetest music blent And many a tinkling ornament. Then as our rapid wings we strained The pathway of the sun we gained. Beneath us all the earth was seen Clad in her garb of tender green, And every river in her bed Meandered like a silver thread. We looked on Meru far below And Vindhya and the Lord of Snow, Like elephants that bend to cool Their fever in a lilied pool. But fervent heat and toil o’ercame The vigour of each yielding frame, Our weary hearts began to quail, And wildered sense to reel and fail. We knew not, fainting and distressed, The north or south or east or west. With a great strain mine eyes I turned Where the fierce sun before me burned, And seemed to my astonished eyes The equal of the earth in size.(775) At length, o’erpowered, Jaṭáyus fell Without a word to say farewell, And when to earth I saw him hie I followed headlong from the sky.(776) With sheltering wings I intervened And from the sun his body screened, But lost, for heedless folly doomed, My pinions which the heat consumed. In Janasthán, I hear them say, My hapless brother fell and lay. I, pinionless and faint and weak, Dropped upon Vindhya’s woody peak. Now with my swift wings burnt away, Reft of my brother and my sway, From this tall mountain’s summit I Will cast me headlong down and die.”




Canto LXII. Sampáti’s Story.


“As to the saint I thus complained My bitter tears fell unrestrained. He pondered for a while, then broke The silence, and thus calmly spoke: “Forth from thy sides again shall spring, O royal bird, each withered wing, And all thine ancient power and might Return to thee with strength of sight. A noble deed has been foretold In prophecy pronounced of old: Nor dark to me are future things, Seen by the light which penance brings. A glorious king shall rise and reign, The pride of old Ikshváku’s strain. A good and valiant prince, his heir, Shall the dear name of Ráma bear. With his brave brother Lakshmaṇ he An exile in the woods shall be, Where Rávaṇ, whom no God may slay,(777) Shall steal his darling wife away. In vain the captive will be wooed With proffered love and dainty food, She will not hear, she will not taste: But, lest her beauty wane and waste, Lord Indra’s self will come to her With heavenly food, and minister. Then envoys of the Vánar race By Ráma sent will seek this place. To them, O roamer of the air, The lady’s fate shalt thou declare. Thou must not move—so maimed thou art Thou canst not from this spot depart. Await the day and moment due, And thy burnt wings will sprout anew. I might this day the boon bestow And bid again thy pinions grow, But wait until thy saving deed The nations from their fear have freed. Then for this glorious aid of thine The princes of Ikshváku’s line, And Gods above and saints below Eternal gratitude shall owe. Fain would mine aged eyes behold That pair of whom my lips have told, Yet wearied here I must not stay, But leave my frame and pass away.”




Canto LXIII. Sampáti’s Story.


“With this and many a speech beside My failing heart he fortified, With glorious hope my breast inspired, And to his holy home retired. I scaled the mountain height, to view The region round, and looked for you. In ceaseless watchings night and day A hundred seasons passed away, And by the sage’s words consoled I wait the hour and chance foretold. But since Niśakar sought the skies. And cast away all earthly ties, Full many a care and doubt has pressed With grievous weight upon my breast. But for the saint who turned aside My purpose I had surely died. Those hopeful words the hermit spake, That bid me live for Ráma’s sake, Dispel my anguish as the light Of lamp and torch disperse the night.”

  He ceased: and in the Vánars’ view Forth from his side young pinions grew, And boundless rapture filled his breast As thus the chieftains he addressed: “Joy, joy! the pinions, which the Lord Of Day consumed, are now restored Through the dear grace & boundless might Of that illustrious anchorite. The fire of youth within me burns, And all my wonted strength returns. Onward, ye Vánars, toil strive, And you shall find the dame alive. Look on these new-found wings, and hence Be strong in surest confidence.”

  Swift from the crag he sprang to try His pinions in his native sky. His words the chieftains’ doubts had stilled, And every heart with courage filled.(778)




Canto LXIV. The Sea.


Shouts of triumphant joy outrang As to their feet the Vánars sprang: And, on the mighty task intent, Swift to the sea their steps they bent. They stood and gazed upon the deep, Whose billows with a roar and leap On the sea banks ware wildly hurled,— The mirror of the mighty world. There on the strand the Vánars stayed And with sad eyes the deep surveyed, Here, as in play, his billows rose, And there he slumbered in repose. Here leapt the boisterous waters, high As mountains, menacing the sky, And wild infernal forms between The ridges of the waves were seen. They saw the billows rave and swell, And their sad spirits sank and fell; For ocean in their deep despair Seemed boundless as the fields of air. Then noble Angad spake to cheer The Vánars and dispel their fear: “Faint not: despair should never find Admittance to a noble mind. Despair, a serpent’s mortal bite, Benumbs the hero’s power and might.”

  Then passed the weary night, and all Assembled at their prince’s call, And every lord of high estate Was gathered round him for debate. Bright was the chieftains’ glorious band Round Angad on the ocean strand, As when the mighty Storm-Gods meet Round Indra on his golden seat. Then princely Angad looked on each, And thus began his prudent speech: “What chief of all our host will leap A hundred leagues across the deep? Who, O illustrious Vánars, who Will make Sugríva’s promise true, And from our weight of fear set free The leaders of our band and me? To whom, O warriors, shall we owe A sweet release from pain and woe, And proud success, and happy lives With our dear children and our wives, Again permitted by his grace To look with joy on Ráma’s face, And noble Lakshmaṇ, and our lord The king, to our sweet homes restored?”

  Thus to the gathered lords he spoke; But no reply the silence broke. Then with a sterner voice he cried: “O chiefs, the nation’s boast and pride, Whom valour strength and power adorn, Of most illustrious lineage born, Where’er you will you force a way, And none your rapid course can stay. Now come, your several powers declare. And who this desperate leap will dare?”




Canto LXV. The Council.


But none of all the host was found To clear the sea with desperate bound, Though each, as Angad bade, declared His proper power and what he dared.(779) Then spake good Jámbaván the sage, Chief of them all for reverend age; “I, Vánar chieftains, long ago Limbs light to leap could likewise show, But now on frame and spirit weighs The burthen of my length of days. Still task like this I may not slight, When Ráma and our king unite. So listen while I tell, O friends, What lingering strength mine age attends. If my poor leap may aught avail, Of ninety leagues, I will not fail. Far other strength in youth’s fresh prime I boasted, in the olden time, When, at Prahláda’s(780) solemn rite, I circled in my rapid flight Lord Vishṇu, everlasting God, When through the universe he trod. But now my limbs are weak and old, My youth is fled, its fire is cold, And these exhausted nerves to strain In such a task were idle pain.”

  Then Angad due obeisance paid, And to the chief his answer made: “Then I, ye noble Vánars, I Myself the mighty leap will try: Although perchance the power I lack To leap from Lanká’s island back.”

  Thus the impetuous chieftain cried, And Jámbaván the sage replied: “Whate’er thy power and might may be, This task, O Prince, is not for thee. Kings go not forth themselves, but send The servants who their best attend. Thou art the darling and the boast, The honoured lord of all the host. In thee the root, O Angad, lies Of our appointed enterprise; And thee, on whom our hopes depend, Our care must cherish and defend.”

  Then Báli’s noble son replied: “Needs must I go, whate’er betide, For, if no chief this exploit dare, What waits us all save blank despair,— Upon the ground again to lie In hopeless misery, fast, and die? For not a hope of life I see If we neglect our king’s decree.” Then spoke the aged chief again: “Nay our attempt shall not be vain, For to the task will I incite A chieftain of sufficient might.”




Canto LXVI. Hanumán.


The chieftain turned his glances where The legions sat in mute despair; And then to Hanumán, the best Of Vánar lords, these words addressed: “Why still, and silent, and apart, O hero of the dauntless heart? Thou keepest treasured in thy mind The laws that rule the Vánar kind, Strong as our king Sugríva, brave As Ráma’s self to slay or save. Through every land thy praise is heard, Famous as that illustrious bird, Aríshṭanemi’s son,(781) the king Of every fowl that plies the wing. Oft have I seen the monarch sweep With sounding pinions o’er the deep, And in his mighty talons bear Huge serpents struggling through the air. Thy arms, O hero, match in might The ample wings he spreads for flight; And thou with him mayest well compare In power to do, in heart to dare. Why, rich in wisdom, power, and skill, O hero, art thou lingering still? An Apsaras(782) the fairest found Of nymphs for heavenly charms renowned, Sweet Punjikasthalá, became A noble Vánar’s wedded dame. Her heavenly title heard no more, Anjaná was the name she bore, When, cursed by Gods, from heaven she fell In Vánar form on earth to dwell, New-born in mortal shape the child Of Kunjar monarch of the wild. In youthful beauty wondrous fair, A crown of flowers about her hair, In silken robes of richest dye She roamed the hills that kiss the sky. Once in her tinted garments dressed She stood upon the mountain crest, The God of Wind beside her came, And breathed upon the lovely dame. And as he fanned her robe aside The wondrous beauty that he eyed In rounded lines of breast and limb And neck and shoulder ravished him; And captured by her peerless charms He strained her in his amorous arms. Then to the eager God she cried In trembling accents, terrified: “Whose impious love has wronged a spouse So constant in her nuptial vows?” He heard, and thus his answer made: “O, be not troubled, nor afraid, But trust, and thou shalt know ere long My love has done thee, sweet, no wrong, So strong and brave and wise shall be The glorious child I give to thee. Might shall be his that naught can tire, And limbs to spring as springs his sire.” Thus spoke the God; the conquered dame Rejoiced in heart nor feared the shame. Down in a cave beneath the earth The happy mother gave thee birth. Once o’er the summit of the wood Before thine eyes the new sun stood. Thou sprangest up in haste to seize What seemed the fruitage of the trees. Up leapt the child, a wondrous bound, Three hundred leagues above the ground, And, though the angered Day-God shot His fierce beams on him, feared him not. Then from the hand of Indra came A red bolt winged with wrath and flame. The child fell smitten on a rock, His cheek was shattered by the shock, Named Hanumán(783) thenceforth by all In memory of the fearful fall. The wandering Wind-God saw thee lie With bleeding cheek and drooping eye, And stirred to anger by thy woe Forbade each scented breeze to blow. The breath of all the worlds was stilled, And the sad Gods with terror filled Prayed to the Wind, to calm the ire And soothe the sorrow of the sire. His fiery wrath no longer glowed, And Brahmá’s self the boon bestowed That in the brunt of battle none Should slay with steel the Wind-God’s son. Lord Indra, sovereign of the skies, Bent on thee all his thousand eyes, And swore that ne’er the bolt which he Hurls from the heaven should injure thee. ’Tis thine, O mighty chief, to share The Wind-God’s power, his son and heir. Sprung from that glorious father thou, And thou alone, canst aid us now. This earth of yore, through all her climes, I circled one-and-twenty times, And gathered, as the Gods decreed, Great store of herbs from hill and mead, Which, scattered o’er the troubled wave, The Amrit to the toilers gave. But now my days are wellnigh told, My strength is gone, my limbs are old, And thou, the bravest and the best, Art the sure hope of all the rest. Now, mighty chief, the task assay: Thy matchless power and strength display. Rise up, O prince, our second king, And o’er the flood of ocean spring. So shall the glorious exploit vie With his who stepped through earth and sky.”(784)

  He spoke: the younger chieftain heard, His soul to vigorous effort stirred, And stood before their joyous eyes Dilated in gigantic size.




Canto LXVII. Hanumán’s Speech.


Soon as his stature they beheld, Their fear and sorrow were dispelled; And joyous praises loud and long Rang out from all the Vánar throng. On the great chief their eyes they bent In rapture and astonishment, As, when his conquering foot he raised, The Gods upon Náráyaṇ(785) gazed. He stood amid the joyous crowd, Bent to the chiefs, and cried aloud: “The Wind-God, Fire’s eternal friend, Whose blasts the mountain summits rend, With boundless force that none may stay, Takes where he lists his viewless way. Sprung from that glorious father, I In power and speed with him may vie, A thousand times with airy leap Can circle loftiest Meru’s steep: With my fierce arms can stir the sea Till from their bed the waters flee And rush at my command to drown This land with grove and tower and town. I through the fields of air can spring Far swifter than the feathered King, And leap before him as he flies, On sounding pinions through the skies. I can pursue the Lord of Light Uprising from the eastern height, And reach him ere his course be sped With burning beams engarlanded. I will dry up the mighty main, Shatter the rocks and rend the plain. O’er earth and ocean will I bound, And every flower that grows on ground, And bloom of climbing plants shall show Strewn on the ground, the way I go, Bright as the lustrous path that lies Athwart the region of the skies.(786) The Maithil lady will I find,— Thus speaks mine own prophetic mind,— And cast in hideous ruin down The shattered walls of Lanká’s town.”

  Still on the chief in rapt surprise The Vánar legions bent their eyes, And thus again sage Jámbaván Addressed the glorious Hanumán: “Son of the Wind, thy promise cheers The Vánars’ hearts, and calms their fears, Who, rescued from their dire distress, With prospering vows thy way will bless. The holy saints their favour lend, And all our chiefs the deed commend Urging thee forward on thy way: Arise then, and the task assay. Thou art our only refuge; we, Our lives and all, depend on thee.”

  Then sprang the Wind-God’s son the best Of Vánars, on Mahendra’s crest, And the great mountain rocked and swayed By that unusual weight dismayed, As reels an elephant beneath The lion’s spring and rending teeth. The shady wood that crowned him shook, The trembling birds the boughs forsook, And ape and pard and lion fled From brake and lair disquieted.





BOOK V.(787)




Canto I. Hanumán’s Leap.


Thus Rávaṇ’s foe resolved to trace The captive to her hiding-place Through airy pathways overhead Which heavenly minstrels visited. With straining nerve and eager brows, Like some strong husband of the cows, In ready might he stood prepared For the bold task his soul has dared. O’er gem-like grass that flashed and glowed The Vánar like a lion strode. Roused by the thunder of his tread, The beasts to shady coverts fled. Tall trees he crushed or hurled aside, And every bird was terrified. Around him loveliest lilies grew, Pale pink, and red, and white, and blue, And tints of many a metal lent The light of varied ornament. Gandharvas, changing forms at will, And Yakshas roamed the lovely hill, And countless Serpent-Gods were seen Where flowers and grass were fresh and green. As some resplendent serpent takes His pastime in the best of lakes, So on the mountain’s woody height The Vánar wandered with delight. Then, standing on the flowery sod, He paid his vows to saint and God. Svayambhu(788) and the Sun he prayed, And the swift Wind to lend him aid, And Indra, sovereign of the skies, To bless his hardy enterprise. Then once again the chief addressed The Vánars from the mountain crest: “Swift as a shaft from Ráma’s bow To Rávaṇ’s city will I go, And if she be not there will fly And seek the lady in the sky; Or, if in heaven she be not found, Will hither bring the giant bound.”

  He ceased; and mustering his might Sprang downward from the mountain height, While, shattered by each mighty limb, The trees unrooted followed him. The shadow on the ocean cast By his vast form, as on he passed, Flew like a ship before the gale When the strong breeze has filled the sail, And where his course the Vánar held The sea beneath him raged and swelled. Then Gods and all the heavenly train Poured flowerets down in gentle rain; Their voices glad Gandharvas raised, And saints in heaven the Vánar praised. Fain would the Sea his succour lend And Raghu’s noble son befriend. He, moved by zeal for Ráma’s sake, The hill Maináka(789) thus bespake: “O strong Maináka, heaven’s decree In days of old appointed thee To be the Asurs bar, and keep The rebels in the lowest deep. Thou guardest those whom heaven has cursed Lest from their prison-house they burst, And standest by the gates of hell Their limitary sentinel. To thee is given the power to spread Or spring above thy watery bed. Now, best of noble mountains, rise And do the thing that I advise. E’en now above thy buried crest Flies mighty Hanumán, the best Of Vánars, moved for Ráma’s sake A wonderous deed to undertake. Lift up thy head that he may stay And rest him on his weary way.”

  He heard, and from his watery shroud, As bursts the sun from autumn cloud, Rose swifty, crowned with plant and tree, And stood above the foamy sea.(790) There with his lofty peaks upraised Bright as a hundred suns he blazed, And crest and crag of burnished gold Flashed on the flood that round him rolled. The Vánar thought the mountain rose A hostile bar to interpose, And, like a wind-swept cloud, o’erthrew The glittering mountain as he flew. Then from the falling hill rang out A warning voice and joyful shout. Again he raised him high in air To meet the flying Vánar there, And standing on his topmost peak In human form began to speak:(791) “Best of the Vánars’ noblest line, A mighty task, O chief, is thine. Here for a while, I pray thee, light And rest upon the breezy height. A prince of Raghu’s line was he Who gave his glory to the Sea,(792) Who now to Ráma’s envoy shows High honour for the debt he owes. He bade me lift my buried head Uprising from my watery bed, And woo the Vánar chief to rest A moment on my glittering crest. Refresh thy weary limbs, and eat My mountain fruits for they are sweet. I too, O chieftain, know thee well; Three worlds thy famous virtues tell; And none, I ween, with thee may vie Who spring impetuous through the sky. To every guest, though mean and low. The wise respect and honour show; And how shall I neglect thee, how Slight the great guest so near me now? Son of the Wind, ’tis thine to share The might of him who shakes the air; And,—for he loves his offspring,—he Is honoured when I honour thee. Of yore, when Krita’s age(793) was new, The little hills and mountains flew Where’er they listed, borne on wings More rapid than the feathered king’s.(794) But mighty terror came on all The Gods and saints who feared their fall. And Indra in his anger rent Their pinions with the bolts he sent. When in his ruthless fury he Levelled his flashing bolt at me, The great-souled Wind inclined to save, And laid me neath the ocean’s wave. Thus by the favour of the sire I kept my cherished wings entire; And for this deed of kindness done I honour thee his noble son. O come, thy weary limbs relieve, And honour due from me receive.” “I may not rest,” the Vánar cried; “I must not stay or turn aside. Yet pleased am I, thou noblest hill, And as the deed accept thy will.”

  Thus as he spoke he lightly pressed With his broad hand the mountain’s crest, Then bounded upward to the height Of heaven, rejoicing in his might, And through the fields of boundless blue, The pathway of his father, flew. Gods, saints, and heavenly bards beheld That flight that none had paralleled, Then to the Nágas’ mother(795) came And thus addressed the sun-bright dame: “See, Hanumán with venturous leap Would spring across the mighty deep,— A Vánar prince, the Wind-God’s seed: Come, Surasá, his course impede. In Rákshas form thy shape disguise, Terrific, like a hill in size: Let thy red eyes with fury glow, And high as heaven thy body grow. With fearful tusks the chief defy, That we his power and strength may try. He will with guile thy hold elude, Or own thy might, by thee subdued.”

  Pleased with the grateful honours paid, The godlike dame their words obeyed, Clad in a shape of terror she Sprang from the middle of the sea, And, with fierce accents that appalled All creatures, to the Vánar called: “Come, prince of Vánars, doomed to be My food this day by heaven’s decree. Such boon from ages long ago To Brahmá’s favouring will I owe.”

  She ceased, and Hanumán replied, By shape and threat unterrified: “Brave Ráma with his Maithil spouse Lodged in the shade of Daṇḍak’s boughs, Thence Rávan king of giants stole Sítá the joy of Ráma’s soul. By Ráma’s high behest to her I go a willing messenger; And never shouldst them hinder one Who toils for Daśaratha’s son. First captive Sítá will I see, And him who sent and waits for me, Then come and to thy will submit, Yea, by my truth I promise it.” “Nay, hope not thus thy life to save; Not such the boon that Brahmá gave. Enter my mouth,” was her reply, “Then forward on thy journey hie!”(796)

  “Stretch, wider stretch thy jaws,” exclaimed The Vánar chief, to ire inflamed; And, as the Rákshas near him drew, Ten leagues in height his stature grew. Then straight, her threatening jaws between, A gulf of twenty leagues was seen. To fifty leagues he waxed, and still Her mouth grew wider at her will. Then smaller than a thumb became, Shrunk by his power, the Vánar’s frame.(797) He leaped within, and turning round Sprang through the portal at a bound. Then hung in air a moment, while He thus addressed her with a smile: “O Daksha’s child,(798) farewell at last! For I within thy mouth have passed. Thou hast the gift of Brahmá’s grace: I go, the Maithil queen to trace.” Then, to her former shape restored, She thus addressed the Vánar lord: “Then forward to the task, and may Success and joy attend thy way! Go, and the rescued lady bring In triumph to her lord and king.”

  Then hosts of spirits as they gazed The daring of the Vánar praised. Through the broad fields of ether, fast Garuḍ’s royal self, he passed, The region of the cloud and rain, Loved by the gay Gandharva train, Where mid the birds that came and went Shone Indra’s glorious bow unbent, And like a host of wandering stars Flashed the high Gods’ celestial cars. Fierce Sinhiká(799) who joyed in ill And changed her form to work her will, Descried him on his airy way And marked the Vánar for her prey. “This day at length,” the demon cried, “My hunger shall be satisfied,” And at his passing shadow caught Delighted with the cheering thought. The Vánar felt the power that stayed And held him as she grasped his shade, Like some tall ship upon the main That struggles with the wind in vain. Below, above, his eye he bent And scanned the sea and firmament. High from the briny deep upreared The monster’s hideous form appeared, “Sugríva’s tale,” he cried, “is true: This is the demon dire to view Of whom the Vánar monarch told, Whose grasp a passing shade can hold.” Then, as a cloud in rain-time grows His form, dilating, swelled and rose. Wide as the space from heaven to hell Her jaws she opened with a yell, And rushed upon her fancied prey With cloud-like roar to seize and slay. The Vánar swift as thought compressed His borrowed bulk of limb and chest, And stood with one quick bound inside The monstrous mouth she opened wide. Hid like the moon when Ráhu draws The orb within his ravening jaws. Within that ample cavern pent The demon’s form he tore and rent, And, from the mangled carcass freed, Came forth again with thought-like speed.(800) Thus with his skill the fiend he slew, Then to his wonted stature grew. The spirits saw the demon die And hailed the Vánar from the sky: “Well hast thou fought a wondrous fight Nor spared the fiend’s terrific might, On, on! perform the blameless deed, And in thine every wish succeed. Ne’er can they fail in whom combine Such valour, thought, and skill as thine.”

  Pleased with their praises as they sang, Again through fields of air he sprang, And now, his travail wellnigh done, The distant shore was almost won. Before him on the margent stood In long dark line a waving wood, And the fair island, bright and green With flowers and trees, was clearly seen, And every babbling brook that gave Her lord the sea a tribute wave. He lighted down on Lamba’s peak Which tinted metals stain and streak, And looked where Lanká’s splendid town Shone on the mountain like a crown.




Canto II. Lanká.


The glorious sight a while he viewed, Then to the town his way pursued. Around the Vánar as he went Breathed from the wood delicious scent, And the soft grass beneath his feet With gem-like flowers was bright and sweet. Still as the Vánar nearer drew More clearly rose the town to view. The palm her fan-like leaves displayed, Priyálas(801) lent their pleasant shade, And mid the lower greenery far Conspicuous rose the Kovidár.(802) A thousand trees mid flowers that glowed Hung down their fruit’s delicious load,(803) And in their crests that rocked and swayed Sweet birds delightful music made. And there were pleasant pools whereon The glories of the lotus shone; And gleams of sparkling fountains, stirred By many a joyous water-bird. Around, in lovely gardens grew Blooms sweet of scent and bright of hue, And Lanká, seat of Rávaṇ’s sway, Before the wondering Vánar lay: With stately domes and turrets tall, Encircled by a golden wall, And moats whose waters were aglow With lily blossoms bright below: For Sítá’s sake defended well With bolt and bar and sentinel, And Rákshases who roamed in bands With ready bows in eager hands. He saw the stately mansions rise Like pale-hued clouds in autumn skies; Where noble streets were broad and bright, And banners waved on every height. Her gates were glorious to behold Rich with the shine of burnished gold: A lovely city planned and decked By heaven’s creative architect,(804) Fairest of earthly cities meet To be the Gods’ celestial seat. The Vánar by the northern gate Thus in his heart began debate “Our mightiest host would strive in vain To take this city on the main: A city that may well defy The chosen warriors of the sky; A city never to be won E’en by the arm of Raghu’s son. Here is no hope by guile to win The hostile hearts of those within. ’Twere vain to war, or bribe, or sow Dissension mid the Vánar foe. But now my search must I pursue Until the Maithil queen I view: And, when I find the captive dame, Make victory mine only aim. But, if I wear my present shape, How shall I enter and escape The Rákshas troops, their guards and spies, And sleepless watch of cruel eyes? The fiends of giant race who hold This mighty town are strong and bold; And I must labour to elude The fiercely watchful multitude. I in a shape to mock their sight Must steal within the town by night, Blind with my art the demons’ eyes, And thus achieve my enterprise. How may I see, myself unseen Of the fierce king, the captive queen, And meet her in some lonely place, With none beside her, face to face?”

  When the bright sun had left the skies The Vánar dwarfed his mighty size, And, in the straitest bounds restrained, The bigness of a cat retained.(805) Then, when the moon’s soft light was spread, Within the city’s walls he sped.




Canto III. The Guardian Goddess.


There from the circling rampart’s height He gazed upon the wondrous sight; Broad gates with burnished gold displayed, And courts with turkises inlaid; With gleaming silver, gems, and rows Of crystal stairs and porticoes. In semblance of a Rákshas dame The city’s guardian Goddess came,— For she with glances sure and keen The entrance of a foe had seen,— And thus with fury in her eye Addressed him with an angry cry: “Who art thou? what has led thee, say, Within these walls to find thy way? Thou mayst not enter here in spite Of Rávaṇ and his warriors’ might.” “And who art thou?” the Vánar cried, By form and frown unterrified, “Why hast thou met me by the gate, And chid me thus infuriate?”

  He ceased: and Lanká made reply: “The guardian of the town am I, Who watch for ever to fulfil My lord the Rákshas monarch’s will. But thou shalt fall this hour, and deep Shall be thy never-ending sleep.”

  Again he spake: “In spite of thee This golden city will I see. Her gates and towers, and all the pride Of street and square from side to side, And freely wander where I please Amid her groves of flowering trees; On all her beauties sate mine eye. Then, as I came, will homeward hie.”

  Swift with an angry roar she smote With her huge hand the Vánar’s throat. The smitten Vánar, rage-impelled, With fist upraised the monster felled: But quick repented, stirred with shame And pity for a vanquished dame, When with her senses troubled, weak With terror, thus she strove to speak: “O spare me thou whose arm is strong: O spare me, and forgive the wrong. The brave that law will ne’er transgress That spares a woman’s helplessness. Hear, best of Vánars, brave and bold, What Brahmá’s self of yore foretold; “Beware,” he said, “the fatal hour When thou shalt own a Vánar’s power. Then is the giants’ day of fear, For terror and defeat are near.” Now, Vánar chief, o’ercome by thee, I own the truth of heaven’s decree. For Sítá’s sake will ruin fall On Rávaṇ, and his town, and all.”




Canto IV. Within The City.


The guardian goddess thus subdued, The Vánar chief his way pursued, And reached the broad imperial street Where fresh-blown flowers were bright and sweet. The city seemed a fairer sky Where cloud-like houses rose on high, Whence the soft sound of tabors came Through many a latticed window frame, And ever and anon rang out The merry laugh and joyous shout. From house to house the Vánar went And marked each varied ornament, Where leaves and blossoms deftly strung About the crystal columns hung. Then soft and full and sweet and clear The song of women charmed his ear, And, blending with their dulcet tones, Their anklets’ chime and tinkling zones. He heard the Rákshas minstrel sing The praises of their matchless king; And softly through the evening air Came murmurings of text and prayer. Here moved a priest with tonsured head, And there an eager envoy sped, Mid crowds with hair in matted twine Clothed in the skins of deer and kine,— Whose only arms, which none might blame, Were blades of grass and holy flame(806) There savage warriors roamed in bands With clubs and maces in their hands, Some dwarfish forms, some huge of size, With single ears and single eyes. Some shone in glittering mail arrayed With bow and mace and flashing blade; Fiends of all shapes and every hue, Some fierce and foul, some fair to view. He saw the grisly legions wait In strictest watch at Rávaṇ’s gate, Whose palace on the mountain crest Rose proudly towering o’er the rest, Fenced with high ramparts from the foe, And lotus-covered moats below. But Hanumán, unhindered, found Quick passage through the guarded bound, Mid elephants of noblest breed, And gilded car and neighing steed.

[I omit Canto V. which corresponds to chapter XI. in Gorresio’s edition. That scholar justly observes: “The eleventh chapter, Description of Evening, is certainly the work of the Rhapsodists and an interpolation of later date. The chapter might be omitted without any injury to the action of the poem, and besides the metre, style, conceits and images differ from the general tenour of the poem; and that continual repetition of the same sounds at the end of each hemistich which is not exactly rime, but assonance, reveals the artificial labour of a more recent age.” The following sample will probably be enough.

Fair shone the moon, as if to lend His cheering light to guide a friend, And, circled by the starry host, Looked down upon the wild sea-coast. The Vánar cheiftain raised his eyes, And saw him sailing through the skies Like a bright swan who joys to take His pastime on a silver lake; Fair moon that calms the mourner’s pain. Heaves up the waters of the main, And o’er the life beneath him throws A tender light of soft repose, The charm that clings to Mandar’s hill, Gleams in the sea when winds are still, And decks the lilly’s opening flower, Showed in that moon her sweetest power.

I am unable to show the difference of style in a translation.]




Canto VI. The Court.


The palace gates were guarded well By many a Rákshas sentinel, And far within, concealed from view, Were dames and female retinue For charm of form and face renowned; Whose tinkling armlets made a sound, Clashed by the wearers in their glee, Like music of a distant sea. The hall beyond the palace gate, Rich with each badge of royal state, Where lines of noble courtiers stood, Showed like a lion-guarded wood. There the wild music rose and fell Of drum and tabor and of shell, Through chambers at each holy tide By solemn worship sanctified. Through grove and garden, undismayed, From house to house the Vánar strayed, And still his wondering glances bent On terrace, dome, and battlement: Then with a light and rapid tread Prahasta’s(807) home he visited, And Kumbhakarṇa’s(808) courtyard where A cloudy pile rose high in air; And, wandering o’er the hill, explored The garden of each Rákshas lord. Each court and grove he wandered through, Then nigh to Rávaṇ’s palace drew. She-demons watched it foul of face, Each armed with sword and spear and mace, And warrior fiends of every hue, A strange and fearful retinue. There elephants in many a row, The terror of the stricken foe. Huge Airávat,(809) deftly trained In battle-fields, stood ready chained. Fair litters on the ground were set Adorned with gems and golden net. Gay bloomy creepers clothed the walls; Green bowers were there and picture halls, And chambers made for soft delight. Broad banners waved on every height. And from the roof like Mandar’s hill The peacock’s cry came loud and shrill.(810)




Canto VII. Rávan’s Palace.


He passed within the walls and gazed On gems and gold that round him blazed, And many a latticed window bright With turkis and with lazulite. Through porch and ante-rooms he passed Each richer, fairer than the last; And spacious halls where lances lay, And bows and shells, in fair array: A glorious house that matched in show All Paradise displayed below. Upon the polished floor were spread Fresh buds and blossoms white and red, And women shone, a lovely crowd, As lightning flashes through a cloud: A palace splendid as the sky Which moon and planets glorify: Like earth whose towering hills unfold Their zones and streaks of glittering gold; Where waving on the mountain brows The tall trees bend their laden boughs, And every bough and tender spray With a bright load of bloom is gay, And every flower the breeze has bent Fills all the region with its scent. Near the tall palace pale of hue Shone lovely lakes where lilies blew, And lotuses with flower and bud Gleamed on the bosom of the flood. There shone with gems that flashed afar The marvel of the Flower-named(811) car, Mid wondrous dwellings still confessed Supreme and nobler than the rest. Thereon with wondrous art designed Were turkis birds of varied kind. And many a sculptured serpent rolled His twisted coil in burnished gold. And steeds were there of noblest form With flying feet as fleet as storm: And elephants with deftest skill Stood sculptured by a silver rill, Each bearing on his trunk a wreath Of lilies from the flood beneath. There Lakshmí,(812) beauty’s heavenly queen, Wrought by the artist’s skill, was seen Beside a flower-clad pool to stand Holding a lotus in her hand.




Canto VIII. The Enchanted Car.


There gleamed the car with wealth untold Of precious gems and burnished gold; Nor could the Wind-God’s son withdraw His rapt gaze from the sight he saw, By Viśvakarmá’s(813) self proclaimed The noblest work his hand had framed. Uplifted in the air it glowed Bright as the sun’s diurnal road. The eye might scan the wondrous frame And vainly seek one spot to blame, So fine was every part and fair With gems inlaid with lavish care. No precious stones so rich adorn The cars wherein the Gods are borne, Prize of the all-resistless might That sprang from pain and penance rite,(814) Obedient to the master’s will It moved o’er wood and towering hill, A glorious marvel well designed By Viśvakarmá’s artist mind, Adorned with every fair device That decks the cars of Paradise. Swift moving as the master chose It flew through air or sank or rose,(815) And in its fleetness left behind The fury of the rushing wind: Meet mansion for the good and great, The holy, wise, and fortunate. Throughout the chariot’s vast extent Were chambers wide and excellent, All pure and lovely to the eyes As moonlight shed from cloudless skies. Fierce goblins, rovers of the night Who cleft the clouds with swiftest flight In countless hosts that chariot drew, With earrings clashing as they flew.




Canto IX. The Ladies’ Bower.


Where stately mansions rose around, A palace fairer still he found, Whose royal height and splendour showed Where Rávaṇ’s self, the king, abode. A chosen band with bow and sword Guarded the palace of their lord, Where Ráksha’s dames of noble race And many a princess fair of face Whom Rávaṇ’s arm had torn away From vanquished kings in slumber lay. There jewelled arches high o’erhead An ever-changing lustre shed From ruby, pearl, and every gem On golden pillars under them. Delicious came the tempered air That breathed a heavenly summer there, Stealing through bloomy trees that bore Each pleasant fruit in endless store. No check was there from jealous guard, No door was fast, no portal barred; Only a sweet air breathed to meet The stranger, as a host should greet A wanderer of his kith and kin And woo his weary steps within. He stood within a spacious hall With fretted roof and painted wall, The giant Rávaṇ’s boast and pride, Loved even as a lovely bride. ’Twere long to tell each marvel there, The crystal floor, the jewelled stair, The gold, the silver, and the shine Of chrysolite and almandine. There breathed the fairest blooms of spring; There flashed the proud swan’s silver wing, The splendour of whose feathers broke Through fragrant wreaths of aloe smoke. “’Tis Indra’s heaven,” the Vánar cried, Gazing in joy from side to side; “The home of all the Gods is this, The mansion of eternal bliss.” There were the softest carpets spread, Delightful to the sight and tread, Where many a lovely woman lay O’ercome by sleep, fatigued with play. The wine no longer cheered the feast, The sound of revelry had ceased. The tinkling feet no longer stirred, No chiming of a zone was heard. So when each bird has sought her nest, And swans are mute and wild bees rest, Sleep the fair lilies on the lake Till the sun’s kiss shall bid them wake. Like the calm field of winter’s sky Which stars unnumbered glorify, So shone and glowed the sumptuous room With living stars that chased the gloom. “These are the stars,” the chieftain cried, “In autumn nights that earth-ward glide, In brighter forms to reappear And shine in matchless lustre here.” With wondering eyes a while he viewed Each graceful form and attitude. One lady’s head was backward thrown, Bare was her arm and loose her zone. The garland that her brow had graced Hung closely round another’s waist. Here gleamed two little feet all bare Of anklets that had sparkled there, Here lay a queenly dame at rest In all her glorious garments dressed. There slept another whose small hand Had loosened every tie and band, In careless grace another lay With gems and jewels cast away, Like a young creeper when the tread Of the wild elephant has spread Confusion and destruction round, And cast it flowerless to the ground. Here lay a slumberer still as death, Save only that her balmy breath Raised ever and anon the lace That floated o’er her sleeping face. There, sunk in sleep, an amorous maid Her sweet head on a mirror laid, Like a fair lily bending till Her petals rest upon the rill. Another black-eyed damsel pressed Her lute upon her heaving breast, As though her loving arms were twined Round him for whom her bosom pined. Another pretty sleeper round A silver vase her arms had wound, That seemed, so fresh and fair and young A wreath of flowers that o’er it hung. In sweet disorder lay a throng Weary of dance and play and song, Where heedless girls had sunk to rest One pillowed on another’s breast, Her tender cheek half seen beneath Bed roses of the falling wreath, The while her long soft hair concealed The beauties that her friend revealed. With limbs at random interlaced Round arm and leg and throat and waist, That wreath of women lay asleep Like blossoms in a careless heap.




Canto X. Rávan Asleep.


Apart a dais of crystal rose With couches spread for soft repose, Adorned with gold and gems of price Meet for the halls of Paradise. A canopy was o’er them spread Pale as the light the moon beams shed, And female figures,(816) deftly planned, The faces of the sleepers fanned, There on a splendid couch, asleep On softest skins of deer and sheep. Dark as a cloud that dims the day The monarch of the giants lay, Perfumed with sandal’s precious scent And gay with golden ornament. His fiery eyes in slumber closed, In glittering robes the king reposed Like Mandar’s mighty hill asleep With flowery trees that clothe his steep. Near and more near the Vánar The monarch of the fiends to view, And saw the giant stretched supine Fatigued with play and drunk with wine. While, shaking all the monstrous frame, His breath like hissing serpents’ came. With gold and glittering bracelets gay His mighty arms extended lay Huge as the towering shafts that bear The flag of Indra high in air. Scars by Airávat’s tusk impressed Showed red upon his shaggy breast. And on his shoulders were displayed The dints the thunder-bolt had made.(817) The spouses of the giant king Around their lord were slumbering, And, gay with sparkling earrings, shone Fair as the moon to look upon. There by her husband’s side was seen Mandodarí the favourite queen, The beauty of whose youthful face Beamed a soft glory through the place. The Vánar marked the dame more fair Than all the royal ladies there, And thought, “These rarest beauties speak The matchless dame I come to seek. Peerless in grace and splendour, she The Maithil queen must surely be.”




Canto XI. The Banquet Hall.


But soon the baseless thought was spurned And longing hope again returned: “No: Ráma’s wife is none of these, No careless dame that lives at ease. Her widowed heart has ceased to care For dress and sleep and dainty fare. She near a lover ne’er would lie Though Indra wooed her from the sky. Her own, her only lord, whom none Can match in heaven, is Raghu’s son.”

  Then to the banquet hall intent On strictest search his steps he bent. He passed within the door, and found Fair women sleeping on the ground, Where wearied with the song, perchance, The merry game, the wanton dance, Each girl with wine and sleep oppressed Had sunk her drooping head to rest. That spacious hall from side to side With noblest fare was well supplied, There quarters of the boar, and here Roast of the buffalo and deer, There on gold plate, untouched as yet The peacock and the hen were set. There deftly mixed with salt and curd Was meat of many a beast and bird, Of kid and porcupine and hare, And dainties of the sea and air. There wrought of gold, ablaze with shine Of precious stones, were cups of wine. Through court and bower and banquet hall The Vánar passed and viewed them all; From end to end, in every spot, For Sítá searched, but found her not.




Canto XII. The Search Renewed.


Again the Vánar chief began Each chamber, bower, and hall to scan. In vain: he found not her he sought, And pondered thus in bitter thought: “Ah me the Maithil queen is slain: She, ever true and free from stain, The fiend’s entreaty has denied, And by his cruel hand has died. Or has she sunk, by terror killed, When first she saw the palace filled With female monsters evil miened Who wait upon the robber fiend? No battle fought, no might displayed, In vain this anxious search is made; Nor shall my steps, made slow by shame, Because I failed to find the dame, Back to our lord the king be bent, For he is swift to punishment. In every bower my feet have been, The dames of Rávaṇ have I seen; But Ráma’s spouse I seek in vain, And all my toil is fruitless pain. How shall I meet the Vánar band I left upon the ocean strand? How, when they bid me speak, proclaim These tidings of defeat and shame? How shall I look on Angad’s eye? What words will Jámbaván reply? Yet dauntless hearts will never fail To win success though foes assail, And I this sorrow will subdue And search the palace through and through, Exploring with my cautious tread Each spot as yet unvisited.”

  Again he turned him to explore Each chamber, hall, and corridor, And arbour bright with scented bloom, And lodge and cell and picture-room. With eager eye and noiseless feet He passed through many a cool retreat Where women lay in slumber drowned; But Sítá still was nowhere found.




Canto XIII. Despair And Hope.


Then rapid as the lightning’s flame From Rávaṇ’s halls the Vánar came. Each lingering hope was cold and dead, And thus within his heart he said: “Alas, my fruitless search is done: Long have I toiled for Raghu’s son; And yet with all my care have seen No traces of the ravished queen. It may be, while the giant through The lone air with his captive flew, The Maithil lady, tender-souled, Slipped struggling from the robber’s hold, And the wild sea is rolling now O’er Sítá of the beauteous brow. Or did she perish of alarm When circled by the monster’s arm? Or crushed, unable to withstand The pressure of that monstrous hand? Or when she spurned his suit with scorn, Her tender limbs were rent and torn. And she, her virtue unsubdued, Was slaughtered for the giant’s food. Shall I to Raghu’s son relate His well-beloved consort’s fate, My crime the same if I reveal The mournful story or conceal? If with no happier tale to tell I seek our mountain citadel, How shall I face our lord the king, And meet his angry questioning? How shall I greet my friends, and brook The muttered taunt, the scornful look? How to the son of Raghu go And kill him with my tale of woe? For sure the mournful tale I bear Will strike him dead with wild despair. And Lakshmaṇ ever fond and true, Will, undivided, perish too. Bharat will learn his brother’s fate, And die of grief disconsolate, And sad Śatrughna with a cry Of anguish on his corpse will die. Our king Sugríva, ever found True to each bond in honour bound, Will mourn the pledge he vainly gave, And die with him he could not save. Then Rumá his devoted wife For her dead lord will leave her life, And Tárá, widowed and forlorn, Will die in anguish, sorrow-worn. On Angad too the blow will fall Killing the hope and joy of all. The ruin of their prince and king The Vánars’ souls with woe will wring. And each, overwhelmed with dark despair, Will beat his head and rend his hair. Each, graced and honoured long, will miss His careless life of easy bliss, In happy troops will play no more On breezy rock and shady shore, But with his darling wife and child Will seek the mountain top, and wild With hopeless desolation, throw Himself, his wife, and babe, below. Ah no: unless the dame I find I ne’er will meet my Vánar kind. Here rather in some distant dell A lonely hermit will I dwell, Where roots and berries will supply My humble wants until I die; Or on the shore will raise a pyre And perish in the kindled fire. Or I will strictly fast until With slow decay my life I kill, And ravening dogs and birds of air The limbs of Hanumán shall tear. Here will I die, but never bring Destruction on my race and king. But still unsearched one grove I see With many a bright Aśoka tree. There will I enter in, and through The tangled shade my search renew. Be glory to the host on high, The Sun and Moon who light the sky, The Vasus(818) and the Maruts’(819) train, Ádityas(820) and the Aśvins(821) twain. So may I win success, and bring The lady back with triumphing.”




Canto XIV. The Asoka Grove.


He cleared the barrier at a bound; He stood within the pleasant ground, And with delighted eyes surveyed The climbing plants and varied shade, He saw unnumbered trees unfold The treasures of their pendent gold, As, searching for the Maithil queen, He strayed through alleys soft and green; And when a spray he bent or broke Some little bird that slept awoke. Whene’er the breeze of morning blew, Where’er a startled peacock flew, The gaily coloured branches shed Their flowery rain upon his head That clung around the Vánar till He seemed a blossom-covered hill,(822) The earth, on whose fair bosom lay The flowers that fell from every spray, Was glorious as a lovely maid In all her brightest robes arrayed, He saw the breath of morning shake The lilies on the rippling lake Whose waves a pleasant lapping made On crystal steps with gems inlaid. Then roaming through the enchanted ground, A pleasant hill the Vánar found, And grottoes in the living stone With grass and flowery trees o’ergrown. Through rocks and boughs a brawling rill Leapt from the bosom of the hill, Like a proud beauty when she flies From her love’s arms with angry eyes.

  He clomb a tree that near him grew And leafy shade around him threw. “Hence,” thought the Vánar, “shall I see The Maithil dame, if here she be, These lovely trees, this cool retreat Will surely tempt her wandering feet. Here the sad queen will roam apart. And dream of Ráma in her heart.”




Canto XV. Sítá.


Fair as Kailása white with snow He saw a palace flash and glow, A crystal pavement gem-inlaid, And coral steps and colonnade, And glittering towers that kissed the skies, Whose dazzling splendour charmed his eyes. There pallid, with neglected dress, Watched close by fiend and giantess, Her sweet face thin with constant flow Of tears, with fasting and with woe; Pale as the young moon’s crescent when The first faint light returns to men: Dim as the flame when clouds of smoke The latent glory hide and choke; Like Rohiṇí the queen of stars Oppressed by the red planet Mars; From her dear friends and husband torn, Amid the cruel fiends, forlorn, Who fierce-eyed watch around her kept, A tender woman sat and wept. Her sobs, her sighs, her mournful mien, Her glorious eyes, proclaimed the queen. “This, this is she,” the Vánar cried, “Fair as the moon and lotus-eyed, I saw the giant Rávan bear A captive through the fields of air. Such was the beauty of the dame; Her form, her lips, her eyes the same. This peerless queen whom I behold Is Ráma’s wife with limbs of gold. Best of the sons of men is he, And worthy of her lord is she.”




Canto XVI. Hanumán’s Lament.


Then, all his thoughts on Sítá bent, The Vánar chieftain made lament: “The queen to Ráma’s soul endeared, By Lakshmaṇ’s pious heart revered, Lies here,—for none may strive with Fate, A captive, sad and desolate. The brothers’ might full well she knows, And bravely bears the storm of woes, As swelling Gangá in the rains The rush of every flood sustains. Her lord, for her, fierce Báli slew, Virádha’s monstrous might o’erthrew, For her the fourteen thousand slain In Janasthán bedewed the plain. And if for her Ikshváku’s son Destroyed the world ’twere nobly done. This, this is she, so far renowned, Who sprang from out the furrowed ground,(823) Child of the high-souled king whose sway The men of Míthilá obey: The glorious lady wooed and won By Daśaratha’s noblest son; And now these sad eyes look on her Mid hostile fiends a prisoner. From home and every bliss she fled By wifely love and duty led, And heedless of a wanderer’s woes, A life in lonely forests chose. This, this is she so fair of mould. Whose limbs are bright as burnished gold. Whose voice was ever soft and mild, Who sweetly spoke and sweetly smiled. O, what is Ráma’s misery! how He longs to see his darling now! Pining for one of her fond looks As one athirst for water brooks. Absorbed in woe the lady sees No Rákshas guard, no blooming trees. Her eyes are with her thoughts, and they Are fixed on Ráma far away.”




Canto XVII. Sítá’s Guard.


His pitying eyes with tears bedewed, The weeping queen again he viewed, And saw around the prisoner stand Her demon guard, a fearful band. Some earless, some with ears that hung Low as their feet and loosely swung: Some fierce with single ears and eyes, Some dwarfish, some of monstrous size: Some with their dark necks long and thin With hair upon the knotty skin: Some with wild locks, some bald and bare, Some covered o’er with bristly hair: Some tall and straight, some bowed and bent With every foul disfigurement: All black and fierce with eyes of fire, Ruthless and stern and swift to ire: Some with the jackal’s jaw and nose, Some faced like boars and buffaloes: Some with the heads of goats and kine, Of elephants, and dogs, and swine: With lions’ lips and horses’ brows, They walked with feet of mules and cows: Swords, maces, clubs, and spears they bore In hideous hands that reeked with gore, And, never sated, turned afresh To bowls of wine and piles of flesh. Such were the awful guards who stood Round Sítá in that lovely wood, While in her lonely sorrow she Wept sadly neath a spreading tree. He watched the spouse of Ráma there Regardless of her tangled hair, Her jewels stripped from neck and limb, Decked only with her love of him.




Canto XVIII. Rávan.


While from his shelter in the boughs The Vánar looked on Ráma’s spouse He heard the gathered giants raise The solemn hymn of prayer and praise.— Priests skilled in rite and ritual, who The Vedas and their branches(824) knew. Then, as loud strains of music broke His sleep, the giant monarch woke. Swift to his heart the thought returned Of the fair queen for whom he burned; Nor could the amorous fiend control The passion that absorbed his soul. In all his brightest garb arrayed He hastened to that lovely shade, Where glowed each choicest flower and fruit, And the sweet birds were never mute, And tall deer bent their heads to drink On the fair streamlet’s grassy brink. Near that Aśoka grove he drew,— A hundred dames his retinue. Like Indra with the thousand eyes Girt with the beauties of the skies. Some walked beside their lord to hold The chouries, fans, and lamps of gold. And others purest water bore In golden urns, and paced before. Some carried, piled on golden plates, Delicious food of dainty cates; Some wine in massive bowls whereon The fairest gems resplendent shone. Some by the monarch’s side displayed, Wrought like a swan, a silken shade: Another beauty walked behind, The sceptre to her care assigned. Around the monarch gleamed the crowd As lightnings flash about a cloud, And each made music as she went With zone and tinkling ornament. Attended thus in royal state The monarch reached the garden gate, While gold and silver torches, fed With scented oil a soft light shed.(825) He, while the flame of fierce desire Burnt in his eyes like kindled fire, Seemed Love incarnate in his pride, His bow and arrows laid aside.(826) His robe, from spot and blemish free Like Amrit foamy from the sea,(827) Hung down in many a loosened fold Inwrought with flowers and bright with gold. The Vánar from his station viewed, Amazed, the wondrous multitude, Where, in the centre of that ring Of noblest women, stood the king, As stands the full moon fair to view, Girt by his starry retinue.




Canto XIX. Sítá’s Fear.


Then o’er the lady’s soul and frame A sudden fear and trembling came, When, glowing in his youthful pride, She saw the monarch by her side. Silent she sat, her eyes depressed, Her soft arms folded o’er her breast, And,—all she could,—her beauties screened From the bold gazes of the fiend. There where the wild she-demons kept Their watch around, she sighed and wept. Then, like a severed bough, she lay Prone on the bare earth in dismay. The while her thoughts on love’s fleet wings Flew to her lord the best of kings. She fell upon the ground, and there Lay struggling with her wild despair, Sad as a lady born again To misery and woe and pain, Now doomed to grief and low estate, Once noble fair and delicate: Like faded light of holy lore, Like Hope when all her dreams are o’er; Like ruined power and rank debased, Like majesty of kings disgraced: Like worship foiled by erring slips, The moon that labours in eclipse; A pool with all her lilies dead, An army when its king has fled: So sad and helpless wan and worn, She lay among the fiends forlorn.




Canto XX. Rávan’s Wooing.


With amorous look and soft address The fiend began his suit to press: “Why wouldst thou, lady lotus-eyed, From my fond glance those beauties hide? Mine eager suit no more repel: But love me, for I love thee well. Dismiss, sweet dame, dismiss thy fear; No giant and no man is near. Ours is the right by force to seize What dames soe’er our fancy please.(828) But I with rude hands will not touch A lady whom I love so much. Fear not, dear queen: no fear is nigh: Come, on thy lover’s love rely, Some little sign of favor show, Nor lie enamoured of thy woe. Those limbs upon that cold earth laid, Those tresses twined in single braid,(829) The fast and woe that wear thy frame, Beseem not thee, O beauteous dame. For thee the fairest wreaths were meant, The sandal and the aloe’s scent, Rich ornaments and pearls of price, And vesture meet for Paradise. With dainty cates shouldst thou be fed, And rest upon a sumptuous bed. And festive joys to thee belong, The music, and the dance and song. Rise, pearl of women, rise and deck With gems and chains thine arms and neck. Shall not the dame I love be seen In vesture worthy of a queen? Methinks when thy sweet form was made His hand the wise Creator stayed; For never more did he design A beauty meet to rival thine. Come, let us love while yet we may, For youth will fly and charms decay, Come cast thy grief and fear aside, And be my love, my chosen bride. The gems and jewels that my hand Has reft from every plundered land,— To thee I give them all this day, And at thy feet my kingdom lay. The broad rich earth will I o’errun, And leave no town unconquered, none; Then of the whole an offering make To Janak,(830) dear, for thy sweet sake. In all the world no power I see Of God or man can strive with me. Of old the Gods and Asurs set In terrible array I met: Their scattered hosts to earth I beat, And trod their flags beneath my feet. Come, taste of bliss and drink thy fill, And rule the slave who serves thy will. Think not of wretched Ráma: he Is less than nothing now to thee. Stript of his glory, poor, dethroned, A wanderer by his friends disowned, On the cold earth he lays his head, Or is with toil and misery dead. And if perchance he lingers yet, His eyes on thee shall ne’er be set. Could he, that mighty monarch, who Was named Hiraṇyakaśipu, Could he who wore the garb of gold Win Glory back from Indra’s hold?(831) O lady of the lovely smile, Whose eyes the sternest heart beguile, In all thy radiant beauty dressed My heart and soul thou ravishest. What though thy robe is soiled and worn, And no bright gems thy limbs adorn, Thou unadorned art dearer far Than all my loveliest consorts are. My royal home is bright and fair; A thousand beauties meet me there, But come, my glorious love, and be The queen of all those dames and me.”




Canto XXI. Sítá’s Scorn.


She thought upon her lord and sighed, And thus in gentle tones replied: “Beseems thee not, O King, to woo A matron, to her husband true. Thus vainly one might hope by sin And evil deeds success to win. Shall I, so highly born, disgrace My husband’s house, my royal race? Shall I, a true and loyal dame, Defile my soul with deed of shame?”

  Then on the king her back she turned, And answered thus the prayer she spurned: “Turn, Rávaṇ, turn thee from thy sin; Seek virtue’s paths and walk therein. To others dames be honour shown; Protect them as thou wouldst thine own. Taught by thyself, from wrong abstain Which, wrought on thee, thy heart would pain.(832) Beware: this lawless love of thine Will ruin thee and all thy line; And for thy sin, thy sin alone, Will Lanká perish overthrown. Dream not that wealth and power can sway My heart from duty’s path to stray. Linked like the Day-God and his shine, I am my lord’s and he is mine. Repent thee of thine impious deed; To Ráma’s side his consort lead. Be wise; the hero’s friendship gain, Nor perish in his fury slain. Go, ask the God of Death to spare, Or red bolt flashing through the air, But look in vain for spell or charm To stay my Ráma’s vengeful arm. Thou, when the hero bends his bow, Shalt hear the clang that heralds woe, Loud as the clash when clouds are rent And Indra’s bolt to earth is sent. Then shall his furious shafts be sped, Each like a snake with fiery head, And in their flight shall hiss and flame Marked with the mighty archer’s name.(833) Then in the fiery deluge all Thy giants round their king shall fall.”




Canto XXII. Rávan’s Threat.


Then anger swelled in Rávaṇ’s breast, Who fiercely thus the dame addressed: “’Tis ever thus: in vain we sue To woman, and her favour woo. A lover’s humble words impel Her wayward spirit to rebel. The love of thee that fills my soul Still keeps my anger in control, As charioteers with bit and rein The swerving of the steed restrain. The love that rules me bids me spare Thy forfeit life, O thou most fair. For this, O Sítá, have I borne The keen reproach, the bitter scorn, And the fond love thou boastest yet For that poor wandering anchoret; Else had the words which thou hast said Brought death upon thy guilty head. Two months, fair dame, I grant thee still To bend thee to thy lover’s will. If when that respite time is fled Thou still refuse to share my bed, My cooks shall mince thy limbs with steel And serve thee for my morning meal.”(834)

  The minstrel daughters of the skies Looked on her woe with pitying eyes, And sun-bright children of the Gods(835) Consoled the queen with smiles and nods. She saw, and with her heart at ease, Addressed the fiend in words like these; “Hast thou no friend to love thee, none In all this isle to bid thee shun The ruin which thy crime will bring On thee and thine, O impious King? Who in all worlds save thee could woo Me, Ráma’s consort pure and true, As though he tempted with his love Queen Śachí(836) on her throne above? How canst thou hope, vile wretch, to fly The vengeance that e’en now is nigh, When thou hast dared, untouched by shame, To press thy suit on Ráma’s dame? Where woods are thick and grass is high A lion and a hare may lie; My Ráma is the lion, thou Art the poor hare beneath the bough. Thou railest at the lord of men, But wilt not stand within his ken. What! is that eye unstricken yet Whose impious glance on me was set? Still moves that tongue that would not spare The wife of Daśaratha’s heir?”

  Then, hissing like a furious snake, The fiend again to Sítá spake: “Deaf to all prayers and threats art thou, Devoted to thy senseless vow. No longer respite will I give, And thou this day shalt cease to live; For I, as sunlight kills the morn, Will slay thee for thy scathe and scorn.”

  The Rákshas guard was summoned: all The monstrous crew obeyed the call, And hastened to the king to take The orders which he fiercely spake: “See that ye guard her well, and tame, Like some wild thing, the stubborn dame, Until her haughty soul be bent By mingled threat and blandishment.”(837)

  The monsters heard: away he strode, And passed within his queens’ abode.




Canto XXIII. The Demons’ Threats.


Then round the helpless Sítá drew With fiery eyes the hideous crew, And thus assailed her, all and each, With insult, taunt, and threatening speech: “What! can it be thou prizest not This happy chance, this glorious lot, To be the chosen wife of one So strong and great, Pulastya’s son? Pulastya—thus have sages told— Is mid the Lords of Life(838) enrolled. Lord Brahmá’s mind-born son was he, Fourth of that glorious company. Viśravas from Pulastya sprang,— Through all the worlds his glory rang. And of Viśravas, large-eyed dame! Our king the mighty Rávaṇ came. His happy consort thou mayst be: Scorn not the words we say to thee.”

  One awful demon, fiery-eyed, Stood by the Maithil queen and cried: ’Come and be his, if thou art wise, Who smote the sovereign of the skies, And made the thirty Gods and three,(839) O’ercome in furious battle, flee. Thy lover turns away with scorn From wives whom grace and youth adorn. Thou art his chosen consort, thou Shall be his pride and darling now.”

  Another, Vikatá by name, In words like these addressed the dame: “The king whose blows, in fury dealt, The Nágas(840) and Gandharvas(841) felt, In battle’s fiercest brunt subdued, Has stood by thee and humbly wooed. And wilt thou in thy folly miss The glory of a love like this? Scared by his eye the sun grows chill, The wanderer wind is hushed and still. The rains at his command descend, And trees with new-blown blossoms bend. His word the hosts of demons fear, And wilt thou, dame, refuse to hear? Be counselled; with his will comply, Or, lady, thou shalt surely die.”




Canto XXIV. Sítá’s Reply.


Still with reproaches rough and rude Those fiends the gentle queen pursued: “What! can so fair a life displease, To dwell with him in joyous ease? Dwell in his bowers a happy queen In silk and gold and jewels’ sheen? Still must thy woman fancy cling To Ráma and reject our king? Die in thy folly, or forget That wretched wandering anchoret. Come, Sítá, in luxurious bowers Spend with our lord thy happy hours; The mighty lord who makes his own The treasures of the worlds o’erthrown.”

  Then, as a tear bedewed her eye, The hapless lady made reply: “I loathe, with heart and soul detest The shameful life your words suggest. Eat, if you will, this mortal frame: My soul rejects the sin and shame. A homeless wanderer though he be, In him my lord, my life I see, And, till my earthly days be done, Will cling to great Ikshváku’s son.”

  Then with fierce eyes on Sítá set They cried again with taunt and threat: Each licking with her fiery tongue The lip that to her bosom hung, And menacing the lady’s life With axe, or spear or murderous knife: “Hear, Sítá, and our words obey, Or perish by our hands to-day. Thy love for Raghu’s son forsake, And Rávaṇ for thy husband take, Or we will rend thy limbs apart And banquet on thy quivering heart. Now from her body strike the head, And tell the king the dame is dead. Then by our lord’s commandment she A banquet for our band shall be. Come, let the wine be quickly brought That frees each heart from saddening thought. Then to the western gate repair, And we will dance and revel there.”




Canto XXV. Sítá’s Lament.


On the bare earth the lady sank, And trembling from their presence shrank Like a strayed fawn, when night is dark, And hungry wolves around her bark. Then to a shady tree she crept, And thought upon her lord and wept. By fear and bitter woe oppressed She bathed the beauties of her breast With her hot tears’ incessant flow, And found no respite from her woe. As shakes a plantain in the breeze She shook, and fell on trembling knees; While at each demon’s furious look Her cheek its native hue forsook. She lay and wept and made her moan In sorrow’s saddest undertone, And, wild with grief, with fear appalled, On Ráma and his brother called: “O dear Kauśalyá,(842) hear me cry! Sweet Queen Sumitrá,(843) list my sigh! True is the saw the wise declare: Death comes not to relieve despair. ’Tis vain for dame or man to pray; Death will not hear before his day; Since I, from Ráma’s sight debarred, And tortured by my cruel guard, Still live in hopeless woe to grieve And loathe the life I may not leave, Here, like a poor deserted thing, My limbs upon the ground I fling, And, like a bark beneath the blast, Shall sink oppressed with woes at last. Ah, blest are they, supremely blest, Whose eyes upon my lord may rest; Who mark his lion port, and hear His gentle speech that charms the ear. Alas, what antenatal crime, What trespass of forgotten time Weighs on my soul, and bids me bow Beneath this load of misery now?”




Canto XXVI. Sítá’s Lament.


“I Ráma’s wife, on that sad day, By Rávaṇ’s arm was borne away, Seized, while I sat and feared no ill, By him who wears each form at will. A helpless captive, left forlorn To demons’ threats and taunts and scorn, Here for my lord I weep and sigh, And worn with woe would gladly die. For what is life to me afar From Ráma of the mighty car? The robber in his fruitless sin Would hope his captive’s love to win. My meaner foot shall never touch The demon whom I loathe so much. The senseless fool! he knows me not, Nor the proud soul his love would blot. Yea, limb from limb will I be rent, But never to his prayer consent; Be burnt and perish in the fire, But never meet his base desire. My lord was grateful, true and wise, And looked on woe with pitying eyes; But now, recoiling from the strife He pities not his captive wife. Alone in Janasthán he slew The thousands of the Rákshas crew. His arm was strong, his heart was brave, Why comes he not to free and save? Why blame my lord in vain surmise? He knows not where his lady lies. O, if he knew, o’er land and sea His feet were swift to set me free; This Lanká, girdled by the deep, Would fall consumed, a shapeless heap, And from each ruined home would rise A Rákshas widow’s groans and cries.”




Canto XXVII. Trijatá’s Dream.


Their threats unfeared, their counsel spurned, The demons’ breasts with fury burned. Some sought the giant king to bear The tale of Sítá’s fixt despair. With threats and taunts renewed the rest Around the weeping lady pressed. But Trijaṭá, of softer mould, A Rákshas matron wise and old, With pity for the captive moved, In words like these the fiends reproved: “Me, me,” she cried, “eat me, but spare The spouse of Daśaratha’s heir. Last night I dreamt a dream; and still The fear and awe my bosom chill; For in that dream I saw foreshown Our race by Ráma’s hand o’erthrown. I saw a chariot high in air, Of ivory exceeding fair. A hundred steeds that chariot drew As swiftly through the clouds it flew, And, clothed in white, with wreaths that shone, The sons of Raghu rode thereon. I looked and saw this lady here, Clad in the purest white, appear High on the snow white hill whose feet The angry waves of ocean beat. And she and Ráma met at last Like light and sun when night is past. Again I saw them side by side. On Rávaṇ’s car they seemed to ride, And with the princely Lakshmaṇ flee To northern realms beyond the sea. Then Rávaṇ, shaved and shorn, besmeared With oil from head to foot, appeared. He quaffed, he raved: his robes were red: Fierce was his eye, and bare his head. I saw him from his chariot thrust; I saw him rolling in the dust. A woman came and dragged away The stricken giant where he lay, And on a car which asses drew The monarch of our race she threw. He rose erect, he danced and laughed, With thirsty lips the oil he quaffed, Then with wild eyes and streaming mouth Sped on the chariot to the south.(844) Then, dropping oil from every limb, His sons the princes followed him, And Kumbhakarṇa,(845) shaved and shorn, Was southward on a camel borne. Then royal Lanká reeled and fell With gate and tower and citadel. This ancient city, far-renowned: All life within her walls was drowned; And the wild waves of ocean rolled O’er Lanká and her streets of gold. Warned by these signs I bid you fly; Or by the hand of Ráma die, Whose vengeance will not spare the life Of one who vexed his faithful wife. Your bitter taunts and threats forgo: Comfort the lady in her woe, And humbly pray her to forgive; For so you may be spared and live.”

[I omit the 28th and 29th Cantos as an unmistakeable interpolation. Instead of advancing the story it goes back to Canto XVII, containing a lamentation of Sítá after Rávaṇ has left her, and describes the the auspicious signs sent to cheer her, the throbbing of her left eye, arm, and side. The Canto is found in the Bengal recension. Gorresio translates it. and observes: “I think that Chapter XXVIII.—The Auspicious Signs—is an addition, a later interpolation by the Rhapsodists. It has no bond of connexion either with what precedes or follows it, and may be struck out not only without injury to, but positively to the advantage of the poem. The metre in which this chapter is written differs from that which is generally adopted in the course of the poem.”]




Canto XXX. Hanumán’s Deliberation.


The Vánar watched concealed: each word Of Sítá and the fiends he heard, And in a maze of anxious thought His quick-conceiving bosom wrought. “At length my watchful eyes have seen, Pursued so long, the Maithil queen, Sought by our Vánar hosts in vain From east to west, from main to main. A cautious spy have I explored The palace of the Rákhshas lord, And thoroughly learned, concealed from sight, The giant monarch’s power and might. And now my task must be to cheer The royal dame who sorrows here. For if I go, and soothe her not, A captive in this distant spot, She, when she finds no comfort nigh, Will sink beneath her woes and die. How shall my tale, if unconsoled I leave her, be to Ráma told? How shall I answer Raghu’s son, “No message from my darling, none?” The husband’s wrath, to fury fanned, Will scorch me lifeless where I stand, Or if I urge my lord the king To Lanká’s isle his hosts to bring, In vain will be his zeal, in vain The toil, the danger, and the pain. Yea, this occasion must I seize That from her guard the lady frees,(846) To win her ear with soft address And whisper hope in dire distress. Shall I, a puny Vánar, choose The Sanskrit men delight to use? If, as a man of Bráhman kind, I speak the tongue by rules refined, The lady, yielding to her fears, Will think ’tis Rávaṇ’s voice she hears. I must assume my only plan— The language of a common(847) man. Yet, if the lady sees me nigh, In terror she will start and cry; And all the demon band, alarmed, Will come with various weapons armed, With their wild shouts the grove will fill, And strive to take me, or to kill. And, at my death or capture, dies The hope of Ráma‘s enterprise. For none can leap, save only me, A hundred leagues across the sea. It is a sin in me, I own, To talk with Janak’s child alone. Yet greater is the sin if I Be silent, and the lady die. First I will utter Ráma’s name, And laud the hero’s gifts and fame. Perchance the name she holds so dear Will soothe the faithful lady’s fear.”




Canto XXXI. Hanumán’s Speech.


Then in sweet accents low and mild The Vánar spoke to Janak’s child: “A noble king, by sin unstained, The mighty Daśaratha reigned. Lord of the warrior’s car and steed, The pride of old Ikshváku’s seed. A faithful friend, a blameless king, Protector of each living thing. A glorious monarch, strong to save, Blest with the bliss he freely gave. His son, the best of all who know The science of the bended bow, Was moon-bright Ráma, brave and strong, Who loved the right and loathed the wrong, Who ne’er from kingly duty swerved, Loved by the lands his might preserved. His feet the path of law pursued; His arm rebellious foes subdued. His sire’s command the prince obeyed And, banished, sought the forest shade, Where with his wife and brother he Wandered a saintly devotee. There as he roamed the wilds he slew The bravest of the Rákshas crew. The giant king the prince beguiled, And stole his consort, Janak’s child. Then Ráma roamed the country round, And a firm friend, Sugríva, found, Lord of the Vánar race, expelled From his own realm which Báli held, He conquered Báli and restored The kingdom to the rightful lord. Then by Sugríva’s high decree The Vánar legions searched for thee, Sampáti’s counsel bade me leap A hundred leagues across the deep. And now my happy eyes have seen At last the long-sought Maithil queen. Such was the form, the eye, the grace Of her whom Ráma bade me trace.”

  He ceased: her flowing locks she drew To shield her from a stranger’s view; Then, trembling in her wild surprise, Raised to the tree her anxious eyes.




Canto XXXII. Sítá’s Doubt.


Her eyes the Maithil lady raised And on the monkey speaker gazed. She looked, and trembling at the sight Wept bitter tears in wild affright. She shrank a while with fear distraught, Then, nerved again, the lady thought: “Is this a dream mine eyes have seen, This creature, by our laws unclean? O, may the Gods keep Ráma, still, And Lakshmaṇ, and my sire, from ill! It is no dream: I have not slept, But, trouble-worn, have watched and wept Afar from that dear lord of mine For whom in ceaseless woe I pine, No art may soothe my wild distress Or lull me to forgetfulness. I see but him: my lips can frame No syllable but Ráma’s name. Each sight I see, each sound I hear, Brings Ráma to mine eye or ear, The wish was in my heart, and hence The sweet illusion mocked my sense. ’Twas but a phantom of the mind, And yet the voice was soft and kind. Be glory to the Eternal Sire,(848) Be glory to the Lord of Fire, The mighty Teacher in the skies,(849) And Indra with his thousand eyes, And may they grant the truth to be E’en as the words that startled me.”




Canto XXXIII. The Colloquy.


Down from the tree Hanumán came And humbly stood before the dame. Then joining reverent palm to palm Addressed her thus with words of balm: “Why should the tears of sorrow rise, Sweet lady, to those lovely eyes, As when the wind-swept river floods Two half expanded lotus buds? Who art thou, O most fair of face? Of Asur,(850) or celestial race? Did Nága mother give thee birth? For sure thou art no child of earth. Do Rudras(851) claim that heavenly form? Or the swift Gods(852) who ride the storm? Or art thou Rohiṇí(853) the blest, That star more lovely than the rest,— Reft from the Moon thou lovest well And doomed a while on earth to dwell? Or canst thou, fairest wonder, be The starry queen Arundhatí,(854) Fled in thy wrath or jealous pride From her dear lord Vaśishṭha’s side? Who is the husband, father, son Or brother, O thou loveliest one, Gone from this world in heaven to dwell, For whom those eyes with weeping swell? Yet, by the tears those sweet eyes shed, Yet, by the earth that bears thy tread,(855) By calling on a monarch’s name, No Goddess but a royal dame. Art thou the queen, fair lady, say, Whom Rávaṇ stole and bore away? Yea, by that agony of woe, That form unrivalled here below, That votive garb, thou art, I ween, King Janak’s child and Ráma’s queen.”

  Hope at the name of Ráma woke, And thus the gentle lady spoke: “I am that Sítá wooed and won By Daśaratha’s royal son, The noblest of Ikshváku’s line; And every earthly joy was mine. But Ráma left his royal home In Daṇḍak’s tangled wilds to roam. Where with Sumitrá’s son and me, He lived a saintly devotee. The giant Rávaṇ came with guile And bore me thence to Lanká’s isle. Some respite yet the fiend allows, Two months of life, to Ráma’s spouse. Two moons of hopeless woe remain, And then the captive will be slain.”




Canto XXXIV. Hanumán’s Speech.


Thus spoke the dame in mournful mood, And Hanumán his speech renewed: “O lady, by thy lord’s decree I come a messenger to thee. Thy lord is safe with steadfast friends, And greeting to his queen he sends, And Lakshmaṇ, ever faithful bows His reverent head to Ráma’s spouse.”

  Through all her frame the rapture ran, As thus again the dame began: “Now verily the truth I know Of the wise saw of long ago: “Once only in a hundred years True joy to living man appears.”

  He marked her rapture-beaming hue, And nearer to the lady drew, But at each onward step he took Suspicious fear her spirit shook. “Alas, Alas,” she cried in fear. “False is the tale I joyed to hear. ’Tis Rávaṇ, ’tis the fiend, who tries To mock me with a new disguise. If thou, to wring my woman’s heart, Hast changed thy shape by magic art, And wouldst a helpless dame beguile, The wicked deed is doubly vile. But no: that fiend thou canst not be: Such joy I had from seeing thee. But if my fancy does not err, And thou art Ráma’s messenger, The glories of my lord repeat: For to these ears such words are sweet.”

  The Vánar knew the lady’s thought,(856) And gave the answer fondly sought: “Bright as the sun that lights the sky Dear as the Moon to every eye. He scatters blessings o’er the land Like bounties from Vaiśravaṇ’s(857) hand. Like Vishṇu strong and unsubdued, Unmatched in might and fortitude. Wise, truthful as the Lord of Speech, With gentle words he welcomes each. Of noblest mould and form is he, Like love’s incarnate deity. He quells the fury of the foe, And strikes when justice prompts the blow. Safe in the shadow of his arm The world is kept from scathe and harm. Now soon shall Rávaṇ rue his theft, And fall, of realm and life bereft. For Ráma’s wrathful hand shall wing His shafts against the giant king. The day, O Maithil Queen, is near When he and Lakshmaṇ will be here, And by their side Sugríva lead His countless hosts of Vánar breed. Sugríva’s servant, I, by name Hanumán, by his order came. With desperate leap I crossed the sea To Lanká’s isle in search of thee, No traitor, gentle dame, am I: Upon my word and faith rely.”




Canto XXXV. Hanumán’s Speech.


With joyous heart she heard him tell Of the great lord she loved so well, And in sweet accents, soft and low, Spoke, half forgetful of her woe: “How didst thou stand by Ráma’s side? How came my lord and thou allied? How met the people of the wood With men on terms of brotherhood? Declare each grace and regal sign That decks the lords of Raghu’s line. Each circumstance and look relate: Tell Ráma’s form and speech, and gait.”

  “Thy fear and doubt,” he cried, “dispelled, Hear, lady, what mine eyes beheld. Hear the imperial signs that grace The glory of Ikshváku’s race. With moon-bright face and lotus eyes, Most beautiful and good and wise, With sun-like glory round his head, Long-suffering as the earth we tread, He from all foes his realm defends. Yea, o’er the world his care extends. He follows right in all his ways, And ne’er from royal duty strays. He knows the lore that strengthens kings; His heart to truth and honour clings. Each grace and gift of form and mind Adorns that prince of human kind; And virtues like his own endue His brother ever firm and true. O’er all the land they roamed distraught, And thee with vain endeavour sought, Until at length their wandering feet Trod wearily our wild retreat. Our banished king Sugríva spied The princes from the mountain side. By his command I sought the pair And led them to our monarch there. Thus Ráma and Sugríva met, And joined the bonds that knit them yet, When each besought the other’s aid, And friendship and alliance made. An arrow launched from Ráma’s bow Laid Báli dead, Sugríva’s foe. Then by commandment of our lord The Vánar hosts each land explored. We reached the coast: I crossed the sea And found my way at length to thee.”(858)




Canto XXXVI. Ráma’s Ring.


“Receive,” he cried, “this precious ring,(859) Sure token from thy lord the king: The golden ring he wont to wear: See, Ráma’s name engraven there.” Then, as she took the ring he showed, The tears that spring of rapture flowed. She seemed to touch the hand that sent The dearly valued ornament, And with her heart again at ease, Replied in gentle words like these: “O thou, whose soul no fears deter, Wise, brave, and faithful messenger! And hast thou dared, o’er wave and foam, To seek me in the giants’ home? In thee, true messenger, I find The noblest of thy woodland kind. Who couldst, unmoved by terror, brook On Rávaṇ, king of fiends, to look. Now may we commune here as friends, For he whom royal Ráma sends Must needs be one in danger tried, A valiant, wise, and faithful guide. Say, is it well with Ráma still? Lives Lakshmaṇ yet untouched by ill? Then why should Ráma’s hand be slow To free his consort from her woe? Why spare to burn, in search of me, The land encircled by the sea? Can Bharat send no army out With banners, cars and battle shout? Cannot thy king Sugríva lend His legions to assist his friend?”

  His hands upon his head he laid And thus again his answer made: “Not yet has Ráma learnt where lies His lady of the lotus eyes, Or he like Indra from the sky To Śachí’s(860) aid, to thee would fly. Soon will he hear the tale, and then, Roused to revenge, the lord of men Will to the giants’ island lead Fierce myriads of the woodland breed, Bridging his conquering way, and make The town a ruin for thy sake. Believe my words, sweet dame; I swear By roots and fruit, my woodland fare, By Meru’s peak and Vindhva’s chain, And Mandar of the Milky Main, Soon shalt thou see thy lord, though now He waits upon Praśravaṇ’s(861) brow, Come glorious as the breaking morn, Like Indra on Airávat(862) borne. For thee he looks with longing eyes; The wood his scanty food supplies. For thee his brow is pale and worn, For thee are meat and wine forsworn. Thine image in his heart he keeps, For thee by night he wakes and weeps. Or if perchance his eyes he close And win brief respite from his woes, E’en then the name of Sítá slips In anguish from his murmuring lips. If lovely flowers or fruit he sees, Which women love, upon the trees, To thee, to thee his fancy flies. And ‘Sítá! O my love!’ he cries.”




Canto XXXVII. Sítá’s Speech.


“Thou bringest me,” she cried again, “A mingled draught of bliss and pain: Bliss, that he wears me in his heart, Pain, that he wakes and weeps apart, O, see how Fate is king of all, Now lifts us high, now bids us fall, And leads a captive bound with cord The meanest slave, the proudest lord, Thus even now Fate’s stern decree Has struck with grief my lord and me. Say, how shall Ráma reach the shore Of sorrow’s waves that rise and roar, A shipwrecked sailor, well nigh drowned In the wild sea that foams around? When will he smite the demon down, Lay low in dust the giants’ town, And, glorious from his foes’ defeat, His wife, his long-lost Sítá, meet? Go, bid him speed to smite his foes Before the year shall reach its close. Ten months are fled but two remain, Then Rávaṇ’s captive must be slain. Oft has Vibhishaṇ,(863) just and wise, Besought him to restore his prize. But deaf is Rávaṇ’s senseless ear: His brother’s rede he will not hear. Vibhishaṇ’s daughter(864) loves me well: From her I learnt the tale I tell. Avindhva(865) prudent, just, and old, The giant’s fall has oft foretold; But Fate impels him to despise His word on whom he most relies. In Ráma’s love I rest secure, For my fond heart is true and pure, And him, my noblest lord, I deem In valour, power, and might supreme.”

  As from her eyes the waters ran, The Vánar chief again began: “Yea, Ráma, when he hears my tale, Will with our hosts these walls assail. Or I myself, O Queen, this day Will bear thee from the fiend away, Will lift thee up, and take thee hence To him thy refuge and defence; Will take thee in my arms, and flee To Ráma far beyond the sea; Will place thee on Praśravaṇ hill Where Raghu’s son is waiting still.” “How canst thou bear me hence?” she cried, “The way is long, the sea is wide. To bear my very weight would be A task too hard for one like thee.”(866)

  Swift rose before her startled eyes The Vánar in his native size, Like Mandar’s hill or Meru’s height, Encircled with a blaze of light. “O come,” he cried, “thy fears dispel, Nor doubt that I will bear thee well. Come, in my strength and care confide, And sit in joy by Ráma’s side.”

  Again she spake: “I know thee now, Brave, resolute, and strong art thou; In glory like the Lord of Fire With storm-swift feet which naught may tire But yet with thee I may not fly: For, borne so swiftly through the sky, Mine eyes would soon grow faint and dim, My dizzy brain would reel and swim, My yielding arms relax their hold, And I in terror uncontrolled Should fall into the raging sea Where hungry sharks would feed on me. Nor can I touch, of free accord, The limbs of any save my lord. If, by the giant forced away, In his enfolding arms I lay, Not mine, O Vánar, was the blame; What could I do, a helpless dame? Go, to my lord my message bear, And bid him end my long despair.”




Canto XXXVIII. Sítá’s Gem.


Again the Vánar chief replied, With her wise answer satisfied: “Well hast thou said: thou canst not brave The rushing wind, the roaring wave. Thy woman’s heart would sink with fear Before the ocean shore were near. And for thy dread lest limb of thine Should for a while be touched by mine, The modest fear is worthy one Whose cherished lord is Raghu’s son. Yet when I sought to bear thee hence I spoke the words of innocence, Impelled to set the captive free By friendship for thy lord and thee. But if with me thou wilt not try The passage of the windy sky, Give me a gem that I may show, Some token which thy lord may know.”

  Again the Maithil lady spoke, While tears and sobs her utterance broke: “The surest of all signs is this, To tell the tale of vanished bliss. Thus in my name to Ráma speak: “Remember Chitrakúṭa’s peak And the green margin of the rill(867) That flows beside that pleasant hill, Where thou and I together strayed Delighting in the tangled shade. There on the grass I sat with thee And laid my head upon thy knee. There came a greedy crow and pecked The meat I waited to protect And, heedless of the clods I threw, About my head in circles flew, Until by darling hunger pressed He boldly pecked me on the breast. I ran to thee in rage and grief And prayed for vengeance on the thief. Then Ráma(868) from his slumber rose And smiled with pity at my woes. Upon my bleeding breast he saw The scratches made by beak and claw. He laid an arrow on his bow, And launched it at the shameless crow. That shaft, with magic power endued, The bird, where’er he flew, pursued, Till back to Raghu’s son he fled And bent at Ráma’s feet his head.(869) Couldst thou for me with anger stirred Launch that dire shaft upon a bird, And yet canst pardon him who stole The darling of thy heart and soul? Rise up, O bravest of the brave, And come in all thy might to save. Come with the thunders of thy bow, And smite to earth the Rákshas foe.”

  She ceased; and from her glorious hair She took a gem that sparkled there A token which her husband’s eyes With eager love would recognize. His head the Vánar envoy bent In low obeisance reverent. And on his finger bound the gem She loosened from her diadem.

[I omit two Cantos of dialogue. Sítá tells Hanumán again to convey her message to Ráma and bid him hasten to rescue her. Hanumán replies as before that there is no one on earth equal to Ráma, who will soon come and destroy Rávaṇ. There is not a new idea in the two Cantos: all is reiteration.]




Canto XLI. The Ruin Of The Grove.


Dismissed with every honour due The Vánar from the spot withdrew. Then joyous thought the Wind-God’s son: “The mighty task is wellnigh done. The three expedients I must leave; The fourth alone can I achieve.(870) These dwellers in the giants’ isle No arts of mine can reconcile. I cannot bribe: I cannot sow Dissension mid the Rákshas foe. Arts, gifts, address, these fiends despise; But force shall yet their king chastise. Perchance he may relent when all The bravest of his chieftains fall. This lovely grove will I destroy, The cruel Rávaṇ’s pride and joy. The garden where he takes his ease Mid climbing plants and flowery trees That lift their proud tops to the skies, Dear to the tyrant as his eyes. Then will he rouse in wrath, and lead His legions with the car and steed And elephants in long array, And seek me thirsty for the fray. The Rákshas legions will I meet, And all his bravest host defeat; Then, glorious from the bloody plain, Turn to my lord the king again.”

  Then every lovely tree that bore Fair blossoms, from the soil he tore, Till each green bough that lent its shade To singing birds on earth was laid. The wilderness he left a waste, The fountains shattered and defaced: O’erthrew and levelled with the ground Each shady seat and pleasure-mound. Each arbour clad with climbing bloom, Each grotto, cell, and picture room, Each lawn by beast and bird enjoyed, Each walk and terrace was destroyed. And all the place that was so fair Was left a ruin wild and bare, As if the fury of the blast Or raging fire had o’er it passed.




Canto XLII. The Giants Roused.


The cries of startled birds, the sound Of tall trees crashing to the ground, Struck with amaze each giant’s ear, And filled the isle with sudden fear. Then, wakened by the crash and cries, The fierce shefiends unclosed their eyes, And saw the Vánar where he stood Amid the devastated wood. The more to scare them with the view To size immense the Vánar grew; And straight the Rákshas warders cried Janak’s daughter terrified “Whose envoy, whence, and who is he, Why has he come to talk with thee? Speak, lady of the lovely eyes, And let not fear thy joy disguise.”

  Then thus replied the Maithil dame Of noble soul and perfect frame. “Can I discern, with scanty skill, These fiends who change their forms at will? ’Tis yours to say: your kin you meet; A serpent knows a serpent’s feet.

  I weet not who he is: the sight Has filled my spirit with affright.” Some pressed round Sítá in a ring; Some bore the story to their king: “A mighty creature of our race, In monkey form, has reached the place. He came within the grove,” they cried, “He stood and talked by Sítá’s side, He comes from Indra’s court to her, Or is Kuvera’s messenger; Or Ráma sent the spy to seek His consort, and her wrongs to wreak. His crushing arm, his trampling feet Have marred and spoiled that dear retreat, And all the pleasant place which thou So lovest is a ruin now. The tree where Sítá sat alone Is spared where all are overthrown. Perchance he saved the dame from harm: Perchance the toil had numbed his arm.”

  Then flashed the giant’s eye with fire Like that which lights the funeral pyre. He bade his bravest Kinkars(871) speed And to his feet the spoiler lead. Forth from the palace, at his hest, Twice forty thousand warriors pressed. Burning for battle, strong and fierce, With clubs to crush and swords to pierce, They saw Hanúmán near a porch, And, thick as moths around a torch, Rushed on the foe with wild attacks Of mace and club and battle-axe. As round him pressed the Rákshas crowd, The wondrous monkey roared aloud, That birds fell headlong from the sky: Then spake he with a mighty cry: “Long life to Daśaratha’s heir, And Lakshmaṇ, ever-glorious pair! Long life to him who rules our race, Preserved by noblest Ráma’s grace! I am the slave of Kośal’s king,(872) Whose wondrous deeds the minstrels sing. Hanúmán I, the Wind-God’s seed: Beneath this arm the foemen bleed. I fear not, unapproached in might, A thousand Rávaṇ’s ranged for fight, Although in furious hands they rear The hill and tree for sword and spear, I will, before the giants’ eyes, Their city and their king chastise; And, having communed with the dame, Depart in triumph as I came.”

  At that terrific roar and yell The heart of every giant fell. But still their king’s command they feared And pressed around with arms upreared. Beside the porch a club was laid: The Vánar caught it up, and swayed The weapon round his head, and slew The foremost of the Rákshas crew. Thus Indra vanquished, thousand-eyed, The Daityas who the Gods defied. Then on the porch Hanúmán sprang, And loud his shout of triumph rang. The giants looked upon the dead, And turning to their monarch fled. And Rávaṇ with his spirit wrought To frenzy by the tale they brought, Urged to the fight Prahasta’s son, Of all his chiefs the mightiest one.




Canto XLIII. The Ruin Of The Temple.


The Wind-God’s son a temple(873) scaled Which, by his fury unassailed, High as the hill of Meru, stood Amid the ruins of the wood; And in his fury thundered out Again his haughty battle-shout: “I am the slave of Kośal’s King Whose wondrous deeds the minstrels sing.” Forth hurried, by that shout alarmed, The warders of the temple armed With every weapon haste supplied, And closed him in on every side, With bands that strove to pierce and strike With shaft and axe and club and pike. Then from its base the Vánar tore A pillar with the weight it bore. Against the wall the mass he dashed, And forth the flames in answer flashed, That wildly ran o’er roofs and wall In hungry rage consuming all. He whirled the pillar round his head And struck a hundred giants dead. Then high upheld on air he rose And called in thunder to his foes: “A thousand Vánar chiefs like me Roam at their will o’er land and sea, Terrific might we all possess: Our stormy speed is limitless. And all, unconquered in the fray, Our king Sugríva’s word obey. Backed by his bravest myriads, he Our warrior lord will cross the sea. Then Lanká’s lofty towers, and all Your hosts and Rávaṇ’s self shall fall. None shall be left unslaughtered; none Who braves the wrath of Raghu’s son.”




Canto XLIV. Jambumáli’s Death.


Then Jambumáli, pride and boast For valour of the Rákshas host, Prahasta’s son supremely brave, Obeyed the hest that Rávaṇ gave: Fierce warrior with terrific teeth, With saguine robes and brilliant wreath. A bow like Indra’s own(874), and store Of glittering shafts the chieftain bore. And ever as the string he tried The weapon with a roar replied, Loud as the crashing thunder sent By him who rules the firmament. Soon as the foeman came in view Borne on a car which asses drew, The Vánar chieftain mighty-voiced Shouted in triumph and rejoiced. Prahasta’s son his bow-string drew, And swift the winged arrows flew, One in the face the Vánar smote, Another quivered in his throat. Ten from the deadly weapon sent His brawny arms and shoulders rent. Then as he felt each galling shot The Vánar’s rage waxed fiercely hot. He looked, and saw a mass of stone That lay before his feet o’erthrown. The mighty block he raised and threw, And crashing through the air it flew. But Jambumáli shunned the blow, And rained fresh arrows from his bow. The Vánar’s limbs were red with gore: A Sál tree from the earth he tore, And, ere he hurled it undismayed, Above his head the missile swayed. But shafts from Jambumáli’s bow Cut through it ere his hand could throw. And thigh and arm and chest and side With streams of rushing blood were dyed. Still unsubdued though wounded oft The shattered trunk he raised aloft, And down with well-directed aim On Jambumáli’s chest it came. There crushed upon the trampled grass He lay an undistinguished mass, The foeman’s eye no more could see His head or chest or arm or knee. And bow and car and steeds(875) and store Of glittering shafts were seen no more.

  When Jambumáli’s death he heard, King Rávaṇ’s heart with rage was stirred And forth his general’s sons he sent, For power and might preeminent.




Canto XLV. The Seven Defeated.


Forth went the seven in brave attire, In glory brilliant as the fire, Impetuous chiefs with massive bows, The quellers of a host of foes: Trained from their youth in martial lore, And masters of the arms they bore: Each emulous and fiercely bold, And banners wrought with glittering gold Waved o’er their chariots, drawn at speed By coursers of the noblest breed. On through the ruins of the grove At Hanumán they fiercely drove, And from the ponderous bows they strained A shower of deadly arrows rained. Then scarce was seen the Vánar’s form Enveloped in the arrowy storm. So stands half veiled the Mountains’ King When rainy clouds about him cling. By nimble turn, by rapid bound He shunned the shafts that rained around, Eluding, as in air he rose, The rushing chariots of his foes. The mighty Vánar undismayed Amid