[ADA-ramayana  —  part 9 of 12, continuation of part 8]
============================================================

his archer foemen played, As plays the frolic wind on high Mid bow-armed(876) clouds that fill the sky. He raised a mighty roar and yell That fear on all the army fell, And then, his warrior soul aglow With fury, rushed upon the foe, Some with his open hand he beat To death and trampled with his feet; Some with fierce nails he rent and slew, And others with his fists o’erthrew; Some with his legs, as on he rushed, Some with his bulky chest he crushed; While some struck senseless by his roar Dropped on the ground and breathed no more, The remnant, seized with sudden dread, Turned from the grove and wildly fled. The trampled earth was thickly strown With steed and car and flag o’erthrown, And the red blood in rivers flowed From slaughtered fiends o’er path and road.




Canto XLVI. The Captains.


Mad with the rage of injured pride King Rávaṇ summoned to his side The valiant five who led his host, Supreme in war and honoured most. “Go forth,” he cried, “with car and steed, And to my feet this monkey lead, But watch each chance of time and place To seize this thing of silvan race. For from his wondrous exploits he No monkey of the woods can be, But some new kind of creature meant To work us woe, by Indra sent. Gandharvas, Nágas, and the best Of Yakshas have our might confessed. Have we not challenged and subdued The whole celestial multitude? Yet will you not, if you are wise, A chief of monkey race despise. For I myself have Báli known, And King Sugríva’s power I own. But none of all their woodland throng Was half so terrible and strong.”

  Obedient to the words he spake They hastened forth the foe to take. Swift were the cars whereon they rode, And bright their weapons flashed and glowed. They saw: they charged in wild career With sword and mace and axe and spear. From Durdhar’s bow five arrows sped And quivered in the Vánar’s head. He rose and roared: the fearful sound Made all the region echo round. Then from above his weight he threw On Durdhar’s car that near him drew. The weight that came with lightning speed Crushed pole and axle, car and steed. It shattered Durdhar’s head and neck, And left him lifeless mid the wreck. Yúpáksha saw the warrior die, And Virúpáksha heard his cry, And, mad for vengeance for the slain, They charged their Vánar foe again. He rose in air: they onward pressed And fiercely smote him on the breast. In vain they struck his iron frame: With eagle swoop to earth he came, Tore from the ground a tree that grew Beside him, and the demons slew. Then Bhásakama raised his spear, And Praghas with a laugh drew near, And, maddened at the sight, the two Against the undaunted Vánar flew. As from his wounds the torrents flowed, Like a red sun the Vánar showed. He turned, a mountain peak to seize With all its beasts and snakes and trees. He hurled it on the pair: and they Crushed, overwhelmed, beneath it lay.




Canto XLVII. The Death Of Aksha.


But Rávaṇ, as his fury burned, His eyes on youthful Aksha(877) turned, Who rose impetuous at his glance And shouted for his bow and lance. He rode upon a glorious car That shot the light of gems afar. His pennon waved mid glittering gold And bright the wheels with jewels rolled, By long and fierce devotion won That car was splendid as the sun. With rows of various weapons stored; And thought-swift horses whirled their lord Racing along the earth, or rose High through the clouds whene’er he chose. Then fierce and fearful war between The Vánar and the fiend was seen. The Gods and Asurs stood amazed, And on the wondrous combat gazed. A cry from earth rose long and shrill, The wind was hushed, the sun grew chill. The thunder bellowed from the sky, And troubled ocean roared reply. Thrice Aksha strained his dreadful bow, Thrice smote his arrow on the foe, And with full streams of crimson bled Three gashes in the Vánar’s head. Then rose Hanúmán in the air To shun the shafts no life could bear. But Aksha in his car pursued, And from on high the fight renewed With storm of arrows, thick as hail When angry clouds some hill assail. Impatient of that arrowy shower The Vánar chief put forth his power, Again above his chariot rose And smote him with repeated blows. Terrific came each deadly stroke: Breast neck and arm and back he broke; And Aksha fell to earth, and lay With all his life-blood drained away.




Canto XLVIII. Hanumán Captured.


To Indrajít(878) the bold and brave The giant king his mandate gave: “O trained in warlike science, best In arms of all our mightiest, Whose valour in the conflict shown To Asurs and to Gods is known, The Kinkars whom I sent are slain, And Jambumálí and his train; The lords who led our giant bands Have fallen by the monkey’s hands; With shattered cars the ground is spread, And Aksha lies amid the dead. Thou art my best and bravest: go, Unmatched in power, and slay the foe.” He heard the hest: he bent his head; Athirst for battle forth he sped. Four tigers fierce, of tawny hue, With fearful teeth, his chariot drew.

  Hanúmán heard his strong bow clang, And swiftly from the earth he sprang, While weak and ineffective fell The archer’s shafts though pointed well. The Rákshas saw that naught might kill The wondrous foe who mocked his skill, And launched a magic shaft to throw A binding spell about his foe. Forth flew the shaft: the mystic charm Stayed his swift feet and numbed his arm, Through all his frame he felt the spell, And motionless to earth he fell. Nor would the reverent Vánar loose The bonds that bound him as a noose. He knew that Brahmá’s self had charmed The weapon that his might disarmed.

  They saw him helpless on the ground, And all the giants pressed around, And bonds of hemp and bark were cast About his limbs to hold him fast. They drew the ropes round feet and wrists; They beat him with their hands and fists, And dragged him as they strained the cord With shouts of triumph to their lord.(879)




Canto XLIX. Rávan.


On the fierce king Hanúmán turned His angry eyes that glowed and burned. He saw him decked with wealth untold Of diamond and pearl and gold, And priceless was each wondrous gem That sparkled in his diadem. About his neck rich chains were twined, The best that fancy e’er designed, And a fair robe with pearls bestrung Down from his mighty shoulders hung. Ten heads he reared,(880) as Mandar’s hill Lifts woody peaks which tigers fill, Bright were his eyes, and bright, beneath, The flashes of his awful teeth. His brawny arms of wondrous size Were decked with rings and scented dyes. His hands like snakes with five long heads Descending from their mountain beds. He sat upon a crystal throne Inlaid with wealth of precious stone, Whereon, of noblest work, was set A gold-embroidered coverlet. Behind the monarch stood the best Of beauteous women gaily dressed, And each her giant master fanned, Or waved a chourie in her hand. Four noble courtiers(881) wise and good In counsel, near the monarch stood, As the four oceans ever stand About the sea-encompassed land. Still, though his heart with rage was fired, The Vánar marvelled and admired: “O what a rare and wondrous sight! What beauty, majesty, and might! All regal pomp combines to grace This ruler of the Rákshas race. He, if he scorned not right and law, Might guide the world with tempered awe: Yea, Indra and the Gods on high Might on his saving power rely.”




Canto L. Prahasta’s Questions.


Then fierce the giant’s fury blazed As on Hanúmán’s form he gazed, And shaken by each wild surmise He spake aloud with flashing eyes: “Can this be Nandi(882) standing here, The mighty one whom all revere? Who once on high Kailása’s hill Pronounced the curse that haunts me still? Or is the woodland creature one Of Asur race, or Bali’s(883) son? The wretch with searching question try: Learn who he is, and whence; and why He marred the glory of the grove, And with my captains fiercely strove.” Prahasta heard his lord’s behest, And thus the Vánar chief addressed: “O monkey stranger be consoled: Fear not, and let thy heart be bold. If thou by Indra’s mandate sent Thy steps to Lanká’s isle hast bent, With fearless words the cause explain, And freedom thou shalt soon regain. Or if thou comest as a spy Despatched by Vishṇu in the sky, Or sent by Yáma, or the Lord Of Riches, hast our town explored; Proved by the prowess thou hast shown No monkey save in form alone; Speak boldly all the truth, and be Released from bonds, unharmed and free. But falsehood spoken to our king Swift punishment of death will bring.”

  He ceased: the Vánar made reply; “Not Indra’s messenger am I, Nor came I hither to fulfil Kuvera’s hest or Vishṇu’s will. I stand before the giants here A Vánar e’en as I appear. I longed to see the king: ’twas hard To win my way through gate and guard. And so to gain my wish I laid In ruin that delightful shade. No fiend, no God of heavenly kind With bond or chain these limbs may bind. The Eternal Sire himself of old Vouchsafed the boon that makes me bold, From Brahmá’s magic shaft released(884) I knew the captor’s power had ceased, The fancied bonds I freely brooked, And thus upon the king have looked. My way to Lanká have I won, A messenger from Raghu’s son.”




Canto LI. Hanumán’s Reply.


“My king Sugríva greets thee fair, And bids me thus his rede declare. Son of the God of Wind, by name Hanumán, to this isle I came. To set the Maithil lady free I crossed the barrier of the sea. I roamed in search of her and found Her weeping in that lovely ground. Thou in the lore of duty trained, Who hast by stern devotion gained This wondrous wealth and power and fame Shouldst fear to wrong another’s dame. Hear thou my counsel, and be wise: No fiend, no dweller in the skies Can bear the shafts by Lakshmaṇ shot, Or Ráma when his wrath is hot. O Giant King, repent the crime And soothe him while there yet is time. Now be the Maithil queen restored Uninjured to her sorrowing lord. Soon wilt thou rue thy dire mistake: She is no woman but a snake, Whose very deadly bite will be The ruin of thy house and thee. Thy pride has led thy thoughts astray, That fancy not a hand may slay The monarch of the giants, screened From mortal blow of God and fiend. Sugríva still thy death may be: No Yaksha, fiend, or God is he, And Ráma from a woman springs, The mortal seed of mortal kings. O think how Báli fell subdued; Think on thy slaughtered multitude. Respect those brave and strong allies; Consult thy safety, and be wise. I, even I, no helper need To overthrow, with car and steed, Thy city Lanká half divine: The power but not the will is mine. For Raghu’s son, before his friend The Vánar monarch, swore to end With his own conquering arm the life Of him who stole his darling wife. Turn, and be wise, O Rávaṇ turn; Or thou wilt see thy Lanká burn, And with thy wives, friends, kith and kin Be ruined for thy senseless sin.”




Canto LII. Vibhishan’s Speech.


Then Rávaṇ spake with flashing eye: “Hence with the Vánar: let him die.” Vibhishaṇ heard the stern behest, And pondered in his troubled breast; Then, trained in arts that soothe and please Addressed the king in words like these:

  “Revoke, my lord, thy fierce decree, And hear the words I speak to thee. Kings wise and noble ne’er condemn To death the envoys sent to them. Such deed the world’s contempt would draw On him who breaks the ancient law.(885) Observe the mean where justice lies, And spare his life but still chastise.” Then forth the tyrant’s fury broke, And thus in angry words he spoke: “O hero, when the wicked bleed No sin or shame attends the deed. The Vánar’s blood must needs be spilt, The penalty of heinous guilt.”

  Again Vibhishaṇ made reply: “Nay, hear me, for he must not die. Hear the great law the wise declare: “Thy foeman’s envoy thou shalt spare.” ’Tis true he comes an open foe: ’Tis true his hands have wrought us woe, But law allows thee, if thou wilt, A punishment to suit the guilt. The mark of shame, the scourge, the brand, The shaven head, the wounded hand. Yea, were the Vánar envoy slain, Where, King of giants, were the gain? On them alone, on them who sent The message, be the punishment. For spake he well or spake he ill, He spake obedient to their will, And, if he perish, who can bear Thy challenge to the royal pair? Who, cross the ocean and incite Thy death-doomed enemies to fight?”




Canto LIII. The Punishment.


King Rávaṇ, by his pleading moved, The counsel of the chief approved: “Thy words are wise and true: to kill An envoy would beseem us ill. Yet must we for his crime invent Some fitting mode of punishment. The tail, I fancy, is the part Most cherished by a monkey’s heart. Make ready: set his tail aflame, And let him leave us as he came, And thus disfigured and disgraced Back to his king and people haste.”

  The giants heard their monarch’s speech; And, filled with burning fury, each Brought strips of cotton cloth, and round The monkey’s tail the bandage wound. As round his tail the bands they drew His mighty form dilating grew Vast as the flame that bursts on high Where trees are old and grass is dry. Each band and strip they soaked in oil, And set on fire the twisted coil. Delighted as they viewed the blaze, The cruel demons stood at gaze: And mid loud drums and shells rang out The triumph of their joyful shout. They pressed about him thick and fast As through the crowded streets he passed, Observing with attentive care Each rich and wondrous structure there, Still heedless of the eager cry That rent the air, The spy! the spy!

  Some to the captive lady ran, And thus in joyous words began: “That copper-visaged monkey, he Who in the garden talked with thee, Through Lanká’s town is led a show, And round his tail the red flames glow.” The mournful news the lady heard That with fresh grief her bosom stirred. Swift to the kindled fire she went And prayed before it reverent: “If I my husband have obeyed, And kept the ascetic vows I made, Free, ever free, from stain and blot, O spare the Vánar; harm him not.”

  Then leapt on high the flickering flame And shone in answer to the dame. The pitying fire its rage forbore: The Vánar felt the heat no more. Then, to minutest size reduced, The bonds that bound his limbs he loosed, And, freed from every band and chain, Rose to his native size again. He seized a club of ponderous weight That lay before him by the gate, Rushed at the fiends that hemmed him round, And laid them lifeless on the ground. Through Lanká’s town again he strode, And viewed each street and square and road,— Still wreathed about with harmless blaze, A sun engarlanded with rays.




Canto LIV. The Burning Of Lanká.


“What further deed remains to do To vex the Rákshas king anew? The beauty of his grove is marred, Killed are the bravest of his guard. The captains of his host are slain; But forts and palaces remain, Swift is the work and light the toil Each fortress of the foe to spoil.”

  Reflecting thus, his tail ablaze As through the cloud red lightning plays, He scaled the palaces and spread The conflagration where he sped. From house to house he hurried on, And the wild flames behind him shone. Each mansion of the foe he scaled, And furious fire its roof assailed Till all the common ruin shared: Vibhishaṇ’s house alone was spared. From blazing pile to pile he sprang, And loud his shout of triumph rang, As roars the doomsday cloud when all The worlds in dissolution fall. The friendly wind conspired to fan The hungry flames that leapt and ran, And spreading in their fury caught The gilded walls with pearls inwrought, Till each proud palace reeled and fell As falls a heavenly citadel.

  Loud was the roar the demons raised Mid walls that split and beams that blazed, As each with vain endeavour strove To stay the flames in house or grove. The women, with dishevelled hair, Flocked to the roofs in wild despair, Shrieked out for succour, wept aloud, And fell, like lightning from a cloud. He saw the flames ascend and curl Round turkis, diamond, and pearl, While silver floods and molten gold From ruined wall and latice rolled. As fire grows fiercer as he feeds On wood and grass and crackling reeds, So Hanúmán the ruin eyed With fury still unsatisfied.




Canto LV. Fear For Sítá.


But other thoughts resumed their sway When Lanká’s town in ruin lay; And, as his bosom felt their weight He stood a while to meditate. “What have I done?”, he thought with shame, “Destroyed the town with hostile flame. O happy they whose firm control Checks the wild passion of the soul; Who on the fires of anger throw The cooling drops that check their glow. But woe is me, whom wrath could lead To do this senseless shameless deed. The town to fire and death I gave, Nor thought of her I came to save,— Doomed by my own rash folly, doomed To perish in the flames consumed. If I, when anger drove me wild, Have caused the death of Janak’s child, The kindled flame shall end my woe, Or the deep fires that burn below,(886) Or my forsaken corse shall be Food for the monsters of the sea. How can I meet Sugríva? how Before the royal brothers bow,— I whose rash deed has madly foiled, The noble work in which we toiled? Or has her own bright virtue shed Its guardian influence round her head? She lives untouched,—the peerless dame; Flame has no fury for the flame.(887) The very fire would ne’er consent To harm a queen so excellent,— The high-souled Ráma’s faithful wife, Protected by her holy life. She lives, she lives. Why should I fear For one whom Raghu’s sons hold dear? Has not the pitying fire that spared The Vánar for the lady cared?”

  Such were his thoughts: he pondered long, And fear grew faint and hope grew strong. Then round him heavenly voices rang, And, sweetly tuned, his praises sang: “O glorious is the exploit done By Hanumán the Wind-God’s son. The flames o’er Lanká’s city rise: The giants’ home in ruin lies. O’er roof and wall the fires have spread, Nor harmed a hair of Sítá’s head.”




Canto LVI. Mount Arishta.


He looked upon the burning waste, Then sought the queen in joyous haste, With words of hope consoled her heart, And made him ready to depart. He scaled Arishṭa’s glorious steep Whose summits beetled o’er the deep. The woods in varied beauty dressed Hung like a garland round his crest, And clouds of ever changing hue A robe about his shoulders threw. On him the rays of morning fell To wake the hill they loved so well, And bid unclose those splendid eyes That glittered in his mineral dyes. He woke to hear the music made By thunders of the white cascade, While every laughing rill that sprang From crag to crag its carol sang. For arms, he lifted to the stars His towering stems of Deodárs, And morning heard his pealing call In tumbling brook and waterfall. He trembled when his woods were pale And bowed beneath the autumn gale, And when his vocal reeds were stirred His melancholy moan was heard.

  Far down against the mountain’s feet The Vánar heard the wild waves beat; Then turned his glances to the north. Sprang from the peak and bounded forth, The mountain felt the fearful shock And trembled through his mass of rock. The tallest trees were crushed and rent And headlong to the valley sent, And as the rocking shook each cave Loud was the roar the lions gave. Forth from the shaken cavern came Fierce serpents with their tongues aflame; And every Yaksha, wild with dread, And Kinnar and Gandharva, fled.




Canto LVII. Hanumán’s Return.


Still, like a winged mountain, he Sprang forward through the airy sea,(888) And rushing through the ether drew The clouds to follow as he flew, Through the great host around him spread, Grey, golden, dark, and white, and red. Now in a sable cloud immersed, Now from its gloomy pall he burst, Like the bright Lord of Stars concealed A moment, and again revealed. Sunábha(889) passed, he neared the coast Where waited still the Vánar host. They heard a rushing in the skies, And lifted up their wondering eyes. His wild triumphant shout they knew That louder still and louder grew, And Jámbaván with eager voice Called on the Vánars to rejoice: “Look he returns, the Wind-God’s son, And full success his toils have won; Triumphant is the shout that comes Like music of a thousand drums.”

  Up sprang the Vánars from the ground And listened to the wondrous sound Of hurtling arm and thigh as through The region of the air he flew, Loud as the wind, when tempests rave, Roars in the prison of the cave. From crag to crag, from height to height; They bounded in their mad delight, And when he touched the mountain’s crest, With reverent welcome round him pressed. They brought him of their woodland fruits, They brought him of the choicest roots, And laughed and shouted in their glee The noblest of their chiefs to see. Nor Hanumán delayed to greet Sage Jámbaván with reverence meet; To Angad and the chiefs he bent For age and rank preëminent, And briefly spoke: “These eyes have seen, These lips addressed, the Maithil queen.” They sat beneath the waving trees, And Angad spoke in words like these: “O noblest of the Vánar kind For valour power and might combined, To thee triumphant o’er the foe Our hopes, our lives and all we owe. O faithful heart in perils tried, Which toil nor fear could turn aside, Thy deed the lady will restore, And Ráma’s heart will ache no more.”(890)




Canto LVIII. The Feast Of Honey.


They rose in air: the region grew Dark with their shadow as they flew. Swift to a lovely grove(891) they came That rivalled heavenly Nandan’s(892) fame; Where countless bees their honey stored,— The pleasance of the Vánars’ lord, To every creature fenced and barred, Which Dadhimukh was set to guard, A noble Vánar, brave and bold, Sugríva’s uncle lofty-souled. To Angad came with one accord The Vánars, and besought their lord That they those honeyed stores might eat That made the grove so passing sweet.

  He gave consent: they sought the trees Thronged with innumerable bees. They rifled all the treasured store, And ate the fruit the branches bore, And still as they prolonged the feast Their merriment and joy increased. Drunk with the sweets, they danced and bowed, They wildly sang, they laughed aloud, Some climbed and sprang from tree to tree, Some sat and chattered in their glee. Some scaled the trees which creepers crowned, And rained the branches to the ground. There with loud laugh a Vánar sprang Close to his friend who madly sang, In doleful mood another crept To mix his tears with one who wept.

  Then Dadhimukh with fury viewed The intoxicated multitude. He looked upon the rifled shade, And all the ruin they had made; Then called with angry voice, and strove To save the remnant of the grove. But warning cries and words were spurned, And angry taunt and threat returned. Then fierce and wild contention rose: With furious words he mingled blows. They by no shame or fear withheld, By drunken mood and ire impelled, Used claws, and teeth, and hands, and beat The keeper under trampling feet.

[Three Cantos consisting of little but repetitions are omitted. Dadhimukh escapes from the infuriated monkeys and hastens to Sugríva to report their misconduct. Sugríva infers that Hanumán and his band have been successful in their search, and that the exuberance of spirits and the mischief complained of, are but the natural expression of their joy. Dadhimukh obtains little sympathy from Sugríva, and is told to return and send the monkeys on with all possible speed.]




Canto LXV. The Tidings.


On to Praśravaṇ’s hill they sped Where blooming trees their branches spread. To Raghu’s sons their heads they bent And did obeisance reverent. Then to their king, by Angad led, Each Vánar chieftain bowed his head; And Hanumán the brave and bold His tidings to the monarch told; But first in Ráma’s hand he placed The gem that Sítá’s brow had graced: “I crossed the sea: I searched a while For Sítá in the giants’ isle. I found her vext with taunt and threat By demon guards about her set. Her tresses twined in single braid, On the bare earth her limbs were laid. Sad were her eyes: her cheeks were pale As shuddering flowers in winter’s gale. I stood beside the weeping dame, And gently whispered Ráma’s name: With cheering words her grief consoled, And then the whole adventure told. She weeps afar beyond the sea, And her true heart is still with thee. She gave a sign that thou wouldst know, She bids thee think upon the crow, And bright mark pressed upon her brow When none was nigh but she and thou. She bids thee take this precious stone, The sea-born gem thou long hast known. “And I,” she said, “will dull the sting Of woe by gazing on the ring. One little month shall I sustain This life oppressed with woe and pain: And when the month is ended, I The giants’ prey must surely die.’ ”




Canto LXVI. Ráma’s Speech.


There ceased the Vánar: Ráma pressed The treasured jewel to his breast, And from his eyes the waters broke As to the Vánar king he spoke: “As o’er her babe the mother weeps, This flood of tears the jewel steeps. This gem that shone on Sítá’s head Was Janak’s gift when we were wed, And the pure brow that wore it lent New splendour to the ornament. This gem, bright offspring of the wave, The King of Heaven to Janak gave, Whose noble sacrificial rite Had filled the God with new delight. Now, as I gaze upon the prize, Methinks I see my father’s eyes. Methinks I see before me stand The ruler of Videha’s land.(893) Methinks mine arms are folded now Round her who wore it on her brow. Speak, Hanumán, O say, dear friend, What message did my darling send? O speak, and let thy words impart Their gentle dew to cool my heart. Ah, ’tis the crown of woe to see This gem and ask “Where, where is she?” If for one month her heart be strong, Her days of life will yet be long. But I, with naught to lend relief, This very day must die of grief. Come, Hanumán, and quickly guide The mourner to his darling’s side. O lead me—thou hast learnt the way— I cannot and I will not stay. How can my gentle love endure, So timid, delicate, and pure, The dreadful demons fierce and vile Who watch her in the guarded isle? No more the light of beauty shines From Sítá as she weeps and pines. But pain and sorrow, cloud on cloud Her moonlight glory dim and shroud. O speak, dear Hanumán, and tell Each word that from her sweet lips fell, Her words, her words alone can give The healing balm to make me live.”(894)





BOOK VI.(895)




Canto I. Ráma’s Speech.


The son of Raghu heard, consoled, The wondrous tale Hanumán told; And, as his joyous hope grew high, In friendly words he made reply:

  “Behold a mighty task achieved, Which never heart but his conceived. Who else across the sea can spring, Save Váyu(896) and the Feathered King?(897) Who, pass the portals strong and high Which Nágas,(898) Gods, and fiends defy, Where Rávaṇ’s hosts their station keep,— And come uninjured o’er the deep? By such a deed the Wind-God’s son Good service to the king has done, And saved from ruin and disgrace Lakshmaṇ and me and Raghu’s race. Well has he planned and bravely fought, And with due care my lady sought. But of the sea I sadly think, And the sweet hopes that cheered me sink. How can we cross the leagues of foam That keep us from the giant’s home? What can the Vánar legions more Than muster on the ocean shore?”




Canto II. Sugríva’s Speech.


He ceased: and King Sugríva tried To calm his grief, and thus replied: “’Be to thy nobler nature true, Nor let despair thy soul subdue. This cloud of causeless woe dispel, For all as yet has prospered well, And we have traced thy queen, and know The dwelling of our Rákshas foe. Arise, consult: thy task must be To cast a bridge athwart the sea, The city of our foe to reach That crowns the mountain by the beach; And when our feet that isle shall tread, Rejoice and deem thy foeman dead. The sea unbridged, his walls defy Both fiends and children of the sky, Though at the fierce battalions’ head Lord Indra’s self the onset led. Yea, victory is thine before The long bridge touch the farther shore, So fleet and fierce and strong are these Who limb them as their fancies please. Away with grief and sad surmise That mar the noblest enterprise, And with their weak suspicion blight The sage’s plan, the hero’s might. Come, this degenerate weakness spurn, And bid thy dauntless heart return, For each fair hope by grief is crossed When those we love are dead or lost. Arise, O best of those who know, Arm for the giant’s overthrow. None in the triple world I see Who in the fight may equal thee; None who before thy face may stand And brave the bow that arms thy hand, Trust to these mighty Vánars: they With full success thy trust will pay, When thou shalt reach the robber’s hold, And loving arms round Sítá fold.”




Canto III. Lanká.


He ceased: and Raghu’s son gave heed, Attentive to his prudent rede: Then turned again, with hope inspired, To Hanumán, and thus inquired:

  “Light were the task for thee, I ween, To bridge the sea that gleams between The mainland and the island shore. Or dry the deep and guide as o’er. Fain would I learn from thee whose feet Have trod the stones of every street, Of fenced Lanká’s towers and forts, And walls and moats and guarded ports, And castles where the giants dwell, And battlemented citadel. O Váyu’s son, describe it all, With palace, fort, and gate, and wall.”

  He ceased: and, skilled in arts that guide The eloquent, the chief replied:

  “Vast is the city, gay and strong, Where elephants unnumbered throng, And countless hosts of Rákshas breed Stand ready by the car and steed. Four massive gates, securely barred, All entrance to the city guard, With murderous engines fixt to throw Bolt, arrow, rock to check the foe, And many a mace with iron head That strikes at once a hundred dead. Her golden ramparts wide and high With massy strength the foe defy, Where inner walls their rich inlay Of coral, turkis, pearl display. Her circling moats are broad and deep, Where ravening monsters dart and leap. By four great piers each moat is spanned Where lines of deadly engines stand. In sleepless watch at every gate Unnumbered hosts of giants wait, And, masters of each weapon, rear The threatening pike and sword and spear. My fury hurled those ramparts down, Filled up the moats that gird the town, The piers and portals overturned, And stately Lanká spoiled and burned. Howe’er we Vánars force our way O’er the wide seat of Varuṇ’s(899) sway, Be sure that city of the foe Is doomed to sudden overthrow, Nay, why so vast an army lead? Brave Angad, Dwivid good at need, Fierce Mainda, Panas famed in fight, And Níla’s skill and Nala’s might, And Jámbaván the strong and wise, Will dare the easy enterprise. Assailed by these shall Lanká fall With gate and rampart, tower and wall. Command the gathering, chief: and they In happy hour will haste away.”




Canto IV. The March.


He ceased; and spurred by warlike pride The impetuous son of Raghu cried: “Soon shall mine arm with wrathful joy That city of the foe destroy. Now, chieftain, now collect the host, And onward to the southern coast! The sun in his meridian tower Gives glory to the Vánar power. The demon lord who stole my queen By timely flight his life may screen. She, when she knows her lord is near, Will cling to hope and banish fear, Saved like a dying wretch who sips The drink of Gods with fevered lips. Arise, thy troops to battle lead: All happy omens counsel speed. The Lord of Stars in favouring skies Bodes glory to our enterprise. This arm shall slay the fiend; and she, My consort, shall again be free. Mine upward-throbbing eye foreshows The longed-for triumph o’er my foes. Far in the van be Níla’s post, To scan the pathway for the host, And let thy bravest and thy best, A hundred thousand, wait his hest. Go forth, O warrior Níla, lead The legions on through wood and mead Where pleasant waters cool the ground, And honey, flowers, and fruit abound. Go, and with timely care prevent The Rákshas foeman’s dark intent. With watchful troops each valley guard Ere brooks and fruits and roots be marred And search each glen and leafy shade For hostile troops in ambuscade. But let the weaklings stay behind: For heroes is our task designed. Let thousands of the Vánar breed The vanguard of the armies lead: Fierce and terrific must it be As billows of the stormy sea. There be the hill-huge Gaja’s place, And Gavaya’s, strongest of his race, And, like the bull that leads the herd, Gaváksha’s, by no fears deterred Let Rishabh, matchless in the might Of warlike arms, protect our right, And Gandhamádan next in rank Defend and guide the other flank. I, like the God who rules the sky Borne on Airávat(900) mounted high On stout Hanúmán’s back will ride, The central host to cheer and guide. Fierce as the God who rules below, On Angad’s back let Lakshmaṇ show Like him who wealth to mortals shares,(901) The lord whom Sárvabhauma(902) bears. The bold Susheṇ’s impetuous might, And Vegadarśí’s piercing sight, And Jámbaván whom bears revere, Illustrious three, shall guard the rear.”

  He ceased, the royal Vánar heard, And swift, obedient to his word, Sprang forth in numbers none might tell From mountain, cave, and bosky dell, From rocky ledge and breezy height, Fierce Vánars burning for the fight. And Ráma’s course was southward bent Amid the mighty armament. On, joyous, pressed in close array The hosts who owned Sugríva’s sway, With nimble feet, with rapid bound Exploring, ere they passed, the ground, While from ten myriad throats rang out The challenge and the battle shout. On roots and honeycomb they fed, And clusters from the boughs o’erhead, Or from the ground the tall trees tore Rich with the flowery load they bore. Some carried comrades, wild with mirth, Then cast their riders to the earth, Who swiftly to their feet arose And overthrew their laughing foes. While still rang out the general cry, “King Rávaṇ and his fiends shall die,” Still on, exulting in the pride Of conscious strength, the Vánars hied, And gazed where noble Sahya, best Of mountains, raised each towering crest. They looked on lake and streamlet, where The lotus bloom was bright and fair, Nor marched—for Ráma’s hest they feared Where town or haunt of men appeared. Still onward, fearful as the waves Of Ocean when he roars and raves, Led by their eager chieftains, went The Vánars’ countless armament. Each captain, like a noble steed Urged by the lash to double speed. Pressed onward, filled with zeal and pride, By Ráma’s and his brother’s side, Who high above the Vánar throng On mighty backs were borne along, Like the great Lords of Day and Night Seized by eclipsing planets might. Then Lakshmaṇ radiant as the morn, On Angad’s shoulders high upborne. With sweet consoling words that woke New ardour, to his brother spoke: “Soon shalt thou turn, thy queen regained And impious Rávaṇ’s life-blood drained, In happiness and high renown To dear Ayodhyá’s happy town. I see around exceeding fair All omens of the earth and air. Auspicious breezes sweet and low To greet the Vánar army blow, And softly to my listening ear Come the glad cries of bird and deer. Bright is the sky around us, bright Without a cloud the Lord of Light, And Śukra(903) with propitious love Looks on thee from his throne above. The pole-star and the Sainted Seven(904) Shine brightly in the northern heaven, And great Triśanku,(905) glorious king, Ikshváku’s son from whom we spring, Beams in unclouded glory near His holy priest(906) whom all revere. Undimmed the two Viśákhás(907) shine, The strength and glory of our line, And Nairrit’s(908) influence that aids Our Rákshas foemen faints and fades. The running brooks are fresh and fair, The boughs their ripening clusters bear, And scented breezes gently sway The leaflet of the tender spray. See, with a glory half divine The Vánars’ ordered legions shine, Bright as the Gods’ exultant train Who saw the demon Tárak slain. O let thine eyes these signs behold, And bid thy heart be glad and bold.”

  The Vánar squadrons densely spread O’er all the country onward sped, While rising from the rapid beat Of bears’ and monkeys’ hastening feet. Dust hid the earth with thickest veil, And made the struggling sunbeams pale. Now where Mahendra’s peaks arise Came Ráma of the lotus eyes And the long arm’s resistless might, And clomb the mountain’s wood-crowned height. Thence Daśaratha’s son beheld Where billowy Ocean rose and swelled, Past Malaya’s peaks and Sahya’s chain The Vánar legions reached the main, And stood in many a marshalled band On loud-resounding Ocean’s strand. To the fair wood that fringed the tide Came Daśaratha’s son, and cried: “At length, my lord Sugríva, we Have reached King Varuṇ’s realm the sea, And one great thought, still-vexing, how To cross the flood, awaits us now. The broad deep ocean, that denies A passage, stretched before us lies. Then let us halt and plan the while How best to storm the giant’s isle.”

  He ceased: Sugríva on the coast By trees o’ershadowed stayed the host, That seemed in glittering lines to be The bright waves of a second sea. Then from the shore the captains gazed On billows which the breezes raised To fury, as they dashed in foam O’er Varuṇ’s realm, the Asurs’ home:(909) The sea that laughed with foam, and danced With waves whereon the sunbeams glanced: Where, when the light began to fade, Huge crocodiles and monsters played; And, when the moon went up the sky, The troubled billows rose on high From the wild watery world whereon A thousand moons reflected shone: Where awful serpents swam and showed Their fiery crests which flashed and glowed, Illumining the depths of hell, The prison where the demons dwell. The eye, bewildered, sought in vain The bounding line of sky and main: Alike in shade, alike in glow Were sky above and sea below. There wave-like clouds by clouds were chased, Here cloud-like billows roared and raced: Then shone the stars, and many a gem That lit the waters answered them. They saw the great-souled Ocean stirred To frenzy by the winds, and heard, Loud as ten thousand drums, the roar Of wild waves dashing on the shore. They saw him mounting to defy With deafening voice the troubled sky. And the deep bed beneath him swell In fury as the billows fell.




Canto V. Ráma’s Lament.


There on the coast in long array The Vánars’ marshalled legions lay, Where Níla’s care had ordered well The watch of guard and sentinel, And Mainda moved from post to post With Dwivid to protect the host.

  Then Ráma stood by Lakshmaṇ’s side, And mastered by his sorrow cried: “My brother dear, the heart’s distress, As days wear on, grows less and less. But my deep-seated grief, alas, Grows fiercer as the seasons pass. Though for my queen my spirit longs, And broods indignant o’er my wrongs, Still wilder is my grief to know That her young life is passed in woe. Breathe, gentle gale, O breathe where she Lies prisoned, and then breathe on me, And, though my love I may not meet, Thy kiss shall be divinely sweet. Ah, by the giant’s shape appalled, On her dear lord for help she called, Still in mine ears the sad cry rings And tears my heart with poison stings. Through the long daylight and the gloom Of night wild thoughts of her consume My spirit, and my love supplies The torturing flame which never dies. Leave me, my brother; I will sleep Couched on the bosom of the deep, For the cold wave may bring me peace And bid the fire of passion cease. One only thought my stay must be, That earth, one earth, holds her and me, To hear, to know my darling lives Some life-supporting comfort gives, As streams from distant fountains run O’er meadows parching in the sun. Ah when, my foeman at my feet, Shall I my queen, my glory, meet, The blossom of her dear face raise And on her eyes enraptured gaze, Press her soft lips to mine again, And drink a balm to banish pain! Alas, alas! where lies she now, My darling of the lovely brow? On the cold earth, no help at hand, Forlorn amid the Rákshas band, King Janak’s child still calls on me, Her lord and love, to set her free. But soon in glory will she rise A crescent moon in autumn skies, And those dark rovers of the night, Like scattered clouds shall turn in flight.”




Canto VI. Rávan’s Speech.


But when the giant king surveyed His glorious town in ruin laid, And each dire sign of victory won By Hanumán the Wind-God’s son, He vailed his angry eyes oppressed By shame, and thus his lords addressed: “The Vánar spy has passed the gate Of Lanká long inviolate, Eluded watch and ward, and seen With his bold eyes the captive queen. My royal roof with flames is red, The bravest of my lords are dead, And the fierce Vánar in his hate Has left our city desolate. Now ponder well the work that lies Before us, ponder and advise. With deep-observing judgment scan The peril, and mature a plan. From counsel, sages say, the root, Springs victory, most glorious fruit. First ranks the king, when woe impends Who seeks the counsel of his friends, Of kinsmen ever faithful found, Or those whose hopes with his are bound, Then with their aid his strength applies, And triumphs in his enterprise. Next ranks the prince who plans alone, No counsel seeks to aid his own, Weighs loss and gain and wrong and right, And seeks success with earnest might. Unwisest he who spurns delays, Who counts no cost, no peril weighs, Speeds to his aim, defying fate, And risks his all, precipitate. Thus too in counsel sages find A best, a worst, a middle kind. When gathered counsellors explore The way by light of holy lore, And all from first to last agree, Is the best counsel of the three. Next, if debate first waxes high, And each his chosen plan would try Till all agree at last, we deem This counsel second in esteem. Worst of the three is this, when each Assails with taunt his fellow’s speech; When all debate, and no consent Concludes the angry argument. Consult then, lords; my task shall be To crown with act your wise decree. With thousands of his wild allies The vengeful Ráma hither hies; With unresisted might and speed Across the flood his troops will lead, Or for the Vánar host will drain The channels of the conquered main.”




Canto VII. Rávan Encouraged.


He ceased: they scorned, with blinded eyes, The foeman and his bold allies, Raised reverent hands with one accord, And thus made answer to their lord: “Why yield thee, King, to causeless fear? A mighty host with sword and spear And mace and axe and pike and lance Waits but thy signal to advance. Art thou not he who slew of old The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold; Scaled Mount Kailása and o’erthrew Kuvera(910) and his Yaksha crew, Compelling Śiva’s haughty friend Beneath a mightier arm to bend? Didst thou not bring from realms afar The marvel of the magic car, When they who served Kuvera fell Crushed in their mountain citadel? Attracted by thy matchless fame To thee, a suppliant, Maya came, The lord of every Dánav band, And won thee with his daughter’s hand. Thy arm in hell itself was felt, Where Vásuki(911) and Śankha dwelt, And they and Takshak, overthrown, Were forced thy conquering might to own. The Gods in vain their blessing gave To heroes bravest of the brave, Who strove a year and, sorely pressed, Their victor’s peerless might confessed. In vain their magic arts they tried, In vain thy matchless arm defied King Varuṇ’s sons with fourfold force, Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse, But for a while thy power withstood, And, conquered, mourned their hardihood. Thou hast encountered, face to face, King Yáma(912) with his murdering mace. Fierce as the wild tempestuous sea, What terror had his wrath for thee, Though death in every threatening form, And woe and torment, urged the storm? Thine arm a glorious victory won O’er the dread king who pities none; And the three worlds, from terror freed, In joyful wonder praised thy deed. The tribe of Warriors, strong and dread As Indra’s self, o’er earth had spread; As giant trees that towering stand In mountain glens, they filled the land. Can Raghu’s son encounter foes Fierce, numerous, and strong as those? Yet, trained in war and practised well, O’ermatched by thee, they fought and fell, Stay in thy royal home, nor care The battle and the toil to share; But let the easy fight be won By Indrajít(913) thy matchless son. All, all shall die, if thou permit, Slain by the hand of Indrajít.”




Canto VIII. Prahasta’s Speech.


Dark as a cloud of autumn, dread Prahasta joined his palms and said:

  “Gandharvas, Gods, the hosts who dwell In heaven, in air, in earth, in hell, Have yielded to thy might, and how Shall two weak men oppose thee now? Hanúmán came, a foe disguised, And mocked us heedless and surprised, Or never had he lived to flee And boast that he has fought with me. Command, O King, and this right hand Shall sweep the Vánars from the land, And hill and dale, to Ocean’s shore, Shall know the death-doomed race no more. But let my care the means devise To guard thy city from surprise.”

  Then Durmukh cried, of Rákshas race: “Too long we brook the dire disgrace. He gave our city to the flames, He trod the chambers of thy dames. Ne’er shall so weak and vile a thing Unpunished brave the giants’ king. Now shall this single arm attack And drive the daring Vánars back, Till to the winds of heaven they flee, Or seek the depths of earth and sea.”

  Then, brandishing the mace he bore, Whose horrid spikes were stained with gore, While fury made his eyeballs red, Impetuous Vajradanshṭra said:

  “Why waste a thought on one so vile As Hanúmán the Vánar, while Sugríva, Lakshmaṇ, yet remain, And Ráma mightier still, unslain? This mace to-day shall crush the three, And all the host will turn and flee. Listen, and I will speak: incline, O King, to hear these words of mine, For the deep plan that I propose Will swiftly rid thee of thy foes. Let thousands of thy host assume The forms of men in youthful bloom, In war’s magnificent array Draw near to Raghu’s son, and say: “Thy younger brother Bharat sends This army, and thy cause befriends.” Then let our legions hasten near With bow and mace and sword and spear, And on the Vánar army rain Our steel and stone till all be slain. If Raghu’s sons will fain believe, Entangled in the net we weave, The penalty they both must pay, And lose their forfeit lives to-day.” Then with his warrior soul on fire, Nikumbha spoke in burning ire:

  “I, only I, will take the field, And Raghu’s son his life shall yield. Within these walls, O Chiefs, abide, Nor part ye from our monarch’s side.”




Canto IX. Vibhishan’s Counsel.


A score of warriors(914) forward sprang, And loud the clashing iron rang Of mace and axe and spear and sword, As thus they spake unto their lord: “Their king Sugríva will we slay, And Raghu’s sons, ere close of day, And strike the wretch Hanúmán down, The spoiler of our golden town.”

  But sage Vibhishaṇ strove to calm The chieftains’ fury; palm to palm He joined in lowly reverence, pressed(915) Before them, and the throng addressed:

  “Dismiss the hope of conquering one So stern and strong as Raghu’s son. In due control each sense he keeps With constant care that never sleeps. Whose daring heart has e’er conceived The exploit Hanumán achieved, Across the fearful sea to spring, The tributary rivers’ king? O Rákshas lords, in time be wise, Nor Ráma’s matchless power despise. And say, what evil had the son Of Raghu to our monarch done, Who stole the dame he loved so well And keeps her in his citadel; If Khara in his foolish pride Encountered Ráma, fought, and died, May not the meanest love his life And guard it in the deadly strife? The Maithil dame, O Rákshas King, Sore peril to thy realm will bring. Restore her while there yet is time, Nor let us perish for thy crime. O, let the Maithil lady go Ere the avenger bend his bow To ruin with his arrowy showers Our Lanká with her gates and towers. Let Janak’s child again be free Ere the wild Vánars cross the sea, In their resistless might assail Our city and her ramparts scale. Ah, I conjure thee by the ties Of brotherhood, be just and wise. In all my thoughts thy good I seek, And thus my prudent counsel speak. Let captive Sítá be restored Ere, fierce as autumn’s sun, her lord Send his keen arrows from the string To drink the life-blood of our king. This fury from thy soul dismiss, The bane of duty, peace, and bliss. Seek duty’s path and walk therein, And joy and endless glory win. Restore the captive, ere we feel The piercing point of Ráma’s steel. O spare thy city, spare the lives Of us, our friends, our sons and wives.”

  Thus spake Vibhishaṇ wise and brave: The Rákshas king no answer gave, But bade his lords the council close, And sought his chamber for repose.




Canto X. Vibhishan’s Counsel.


Soon as the light of morning broke, Vibhishaṇ from his slumber woke, And, duty guiding every thought, The palace of his brother sought. Vast as a towering hill that shows His peaks afar, that palace rose. Here stood within the monarch’s gate Sage nobles skilful in debate. There strayed in glittering raiment through The courts his royal retinue, Where in wild measure rose and fell The music of the drum and shell, And talk grew loud, and many a dame Of fairest feature went and came Through doors a marvel to behold, With pearl inlaid on burning gold: Therein Gandharvas or the fleet Lords of the storm might joy to meet. He passed within the wondrous pile, Chief glory of the giants’ isle: Thus, ere his fiery course be done, An autumn cloud admits the sun. He heard auspicious voices raise With loud accord the note of praise, And sages, deep in Scripture, sing Each glorious triumph of the king. He saw the priests in order stand, Curd, oil, in every sacred hand; And by them flowers were laid and grain, Due offerings to the holy train. Vibhishaṇ to the monarch bowed, Raised on a throne above the crowd: Then, skilled in arts of soft address, He raised his voice the king to bless, And sate him on a seat where he Full in his brother’s sight should be. The chieftain there, while none could hear, Spoke his true speech for Rávaṇ’s ear, And to his words of wisdom lent The force of weightiest argument:

  “O brother, hear! since Ráma’s queen A captive in thy house has been, Disastrous omens day by day Have struck our souls with wild dismay. No longer still and strong and clear The flames of sacrifice appear, But, restless with the frequent spark, Neath clouds of smoke grow faint and dark. Our ministering priests turn pale To see their wonted offerings fail, And ants and serpents creep and crawl Within the consecrated hall.(916) Dried are the udders of our cows, Our elephants have juiceless brows,(917) Nor can the sweetest pasture stay The charger’s long unquiet neigh. Big tears from mules and camels flow Whose staring coats their trouble show, Nor can the leech’s art restore Their health and vigour as before. Rapacious birds are fierce and bold: Not single hunters as of old, In banded troops they chase the prey, Or gathering on our temples stay. Through twilight hours with shriek and howl Around the city jackals prowl, And wolves and foul hyænas wait Athirst for blood at every gate. One sole atonement still may cure These evils, and our weal assure. Restore the Maithil dame, and win An easy pardon for thy sin.”

  The Rákshas monarch heard, and moved To sudden wrath his speech reproved:

  “No danger, brother, can I see: The Maithil dame I will not free. Though all the Gods for Ráma fight, He yields to my superior might.” Thus the tremendous king who broke The ranks of heavenly warriors spoke, And, sternly purposed to resist, His brother from the hall dismissed.




Canto XI. The Summons.


Still Rávaṇ’s haughty heart rebelled, The counsel of the wise repelled, And, as his breast with passion burned, His thoughts again to Sítá turned. Thus, to each sign of danger blind, To love and war he still inclined. Then mounted he his car that glowed With gems and golden net, and rode Where, gathered at the monarch’s call, The nobles filled the council hall. A host of warriors bright and gay With coloured robes and rich array, With shield and mace and spear and sword, Followed the chariot of their lord. Mid the loud voice of shells and beat Of drums he raced along the street, And, ere he came, was heard afar The rolling thunder of his car. He reached the doors: the nobles bent Their heads before him reverent: And, welcomed with their loud acclaim, Within the glorious hall he came. He sat upon a royal seat With golden steps beneath his feet, And bade the heralds summon all His captains to the council hall. The heralds heard the words he spake, And sped from house to house to wake The giants where they slept or spent The careless hours in merriment. These heard the summons and obeyed: From chamber, grove, and colonnade, On elephants or cars they rode, Or through the streets impatient strode. As birds on rustling pinions fly Through regions of the darkened sky, Thus cars and mettled coursers through The crowded streets of Lanká flew. The council hall was reached, and then, As lions seek their mountain den, Through massy doors that opened wide, With martial stalk the captains hied. Welcomed with honour as was meet They stooped to press their monarch’s feet, And each a place in order found On stool, on cushion, or the ground. Nor did the sage Vibhishaṇ long Delay to join the noble throng. High on a car that shone like flame With gold and flashing gems he came, Drew near and spoke his name aloud, And reverent to his brother bowed.




Canto XII. Rávan’s Speech.


The king in counsel unsurpassed His eye around the synod cast, And fierce Prahasta, first and best Of all his captains, thus addressed:

  “Brave master of each warlike art, Arouse thee and perform thy part. Array thy fourfold forces(918) well To guard our isle and citadel.”

  The captain of the hosts obeyed, The troops with prudent skill arrayed; Then to the hall again he hied, And stood before the king and cried: “Each inlet to the town is closed Without, within, are troops disposed. With fearless heart thine aim pursue And do the deed thou hast in view.”

  Thus spoke Prahasta in the zeal That moved him for the kingdom’s weal. And thus the monarch, who pursued His own delight, his speech renewed: “In ease and bliss, in toil and pain, In doubts of duty, pleasure, gain, Your proper path I need not tell, For of yourselves ye know it well. The Storm-Gods, Moon, and planets bring New glory to their heavenly king,(919) And, ranged about your monarch, ye Give joy and endless fame to me. My secret counsel have I kept, While senseless Kumbhakarṇa slept. Six months the warrior’s slumbers last And bind his torpid senses fast; But now his deep repose he breaks, The best of all our champions wakes. I captured, Ráma’s heart to wring, This daughter of Videha’s king. And brought her from that distant land(920) Where wandered many a Rákshas band. Disdainful still my love she spurns, Still from each prayer and offering turns, Yet in all lands beneath the sun No dame may rival Sítá, none, Her dainty waist is round and slight, Her cheek like autumn’s moon is bright, And she like fruit in graven gold Mocks her(921) whom Maya framed of old. Faultless in form, how firmly tread Her feet whose soles are rosy red! Ah, as I gaze her beauty takes My spirit, and my passion wakes. Looking for Ráma far away She sought with tears a year’s delay Nor gazing on her love-lit eye Could I that earnest prayer deny. But baffled hopes and vain desire At length my patient spirit tire. How shall the sons of Raghu sweep To vengeance o’er the pathless deep? How shall they lead the Vánar train Across the monster-teeming main? One Vánar yet could find a way To Lanká’s town, and burn and slay. Take counsel then, remembering still That we from men need fear no ill; And give your sentence in debate, For matchless is the power of fate. Assailed by you the Gods who dwell In heaven beneath our fury fell. And shall we fear these creatures bred In forests, by Sugríva led? E’en now on ocean’s farther strand, The sons of Daśaratha stand, And follow, burning to attack Their giant foes, on Sítá’s track. Consult then, lords for ye are wise: A seasonable plan devise. The captive lady to retain, And triumph when the foes are slain. No power can bring across the foam Those Vánars to our island home; Or if they madly will defy Our conquering might, they needs must die.”

  Then Kumbhakarṇa’s anger woke, And wroth at Rávaṇ’s words he spoke: “O Monarch, when thy ravished eyes First looked upon thy lovely prize, Then was the time to bid us scan Each peril and mature a plan. Blest is the king who acts with heed, And ne’er repents one hasty deed; And hapless he whose troubled soul Mourns over days beyond control. Thou hast, in beauty’s toils ensnared, A desperate deed of boldness dared; By fortune saved ere Ráma’s steel One wound, thy mortal bane, could deal. But, Rávaṇ, as the deed is done, The toil of war I will not shun. This arm, O rover of the night, Thy foemen to the earth shall smite, Though Indra with the Lord of Flame, The Sun and Storms, against me came. E’en Indra, monarch of the skies, Would dread my club and mountain size, Shrink from these teeth and quake to hear The thunders of my voice of fear. No second dart shall Ráma cast: The first he aims shall be the last. He falls, and these dry lips shall drain The blood of him my hand has slain; And Sítá, when her champion dies, Shall be thine undisputed prize.”




Canto XIII. Rávan’s Speech.


But Mahápárśva saw the sting Of keen reproach had galled the king; And humbly, eager to appease His anger, spoke in words like these:

  “And breathes there one so cold and weak The forest and the gloom to seek Where savage beasts abound, and spare To taste the luscious honey there? Art thou not lord? and who is he Shall venture to give laws to thee? Love thy Videhan still, and tread Upon thy prostrate foeman’s head. O’er Sítá’s will let thine prevail, And strength achieve if flattery fail. What though the lady yet be coy And turn her from the proffered joy? Soon shall her conquered heart relent And yield to love and blandishment. With us let Kumbhakarṇa fight, And Indrajít of matchless might: We need not other champions, they Shall lead us forth to rout and slay. Not ours to bribe or soothe or part The foeman’s force with gentle art, Doomed, conquered by our might, to feel The vengeance of the warrior’s steel.”

  The Rákshas monarch heard, and moved By flattering hopes the speech approved:

  “Hear me,” he cried, “great chieftain, tell What in the olden time befell,— A secret tale which, long suppressed, Lies prisoned only in my breast. One day—a day I never forget— Fair Punjikasthalá(922) I met, When, radiant as a flame of fire, She sought the palace of the Sire. In passion’s eager grasp I tore From her sweet limbs the robes she wore, And heedless of her prayers and cries Strained to my breast the vanquised prize. Like Naliní(923) with soil distained, The mansion of the Sire she gained, And weeping made the outrage known To Brahmá on his heavenly throne. He in his wrath pronounced a curse,— That lord who made the universe: “If, Rávaṇ, thou a second time Be guilty of so foul a crime, Thy head in shivers shall be rent: Be warned, and dread the punishment.” Awed by the threat of vengeance still I force not Sítá’s stubborn will. Terrific as the sea in might: My steps are like the Storm-Gods’ flight; But Ráma knows not this, or he Had never sought to war with me. Where is the man would idly brave The lion in his mountain cave, And wake him when with slumbering eyes Grim, terrible as Death, he lies? No, blinded Ráma knows me not: Ne’er has he seen mine arrows shot; Ne’er marked them speeding to their aim Like snakes with cloven tongues of flame. On him those arrows will I turn, Whose fiery points shall rend and burn. Quenched by my power when I assail The glory of his might shall fail, As stars before the sun grow dim And yield their feeble light to him.”




Canto XIV. Vibhishan’s Speech.


  He ceased: Vibhishaṇ ill at ease Addressed the king in words like these:

  “O Rávaṇ, O my lord, beware Of Sítá dangerous as fair, Nor on thy heedless bosom hang This serpent with a deadly fang. O King, the Maithil dame restore To Raghu’s matchless son before Those warriors of the woodlands, vast As mountain peaks, approaching fast, Armed with fierce teeth and claws, enclose Thy city with unsparing foes. O, be the Maithil dame restored Ere loosened from the clanging cord The vengeful shafts of Ráma fly, And low in death thy princes lie. In all thy legions hast thou one A match in war for Raghu’s son? Can Kumbhakarṇa’s self withstand, Or Indrajít, that mighty hand? In vain with Ráma wilt thou strive: Thou wilt not save thy soul alive Though guarded by the Lord of Day And Storm-Gods’ terrible array, In vain to Indra wilt thou fly, Or seek protection in the sky, In Yáma’s gloomy mansion dwell, Or hide thee in the depths of hell.”

  He ceased; and when his lips were closed Prahasta thus his rede opposed:

  “O timid heart, to counsel thus! What terrors have the Gods for us? Can snake, Gandharva, fiend appal The giants’ sons who scorn them all? And shall we now our birth disgrace, And dread a king of human race?” Thus fierce Prahasta counselled ill: But sage Vibhishaṇ’s constant will The safety of the realm ensued; Who thus in turn his speech renewed:

  “Yes, when a soul defiled with sin Shall mount to heaven and enter in, Then, chieftain, will experience teach The truth of thy disdainful speech. Can I, or thou, or these or all Our bravest compass Ráma’s fall, The chief in whom all virtues shine, The pride of old Ikshváku’a line, With whom the Gods may scarce compare In skill to act, in heart to dare? Yea, idly mayst thou vaunt thee, till Sharp arrows winged with matchless skill From Ráma’s bowstring, fleet and fierce As lightning’s flame, thy body pierce. Nikumbha shall not save thee then, Nor Rávaṇ, from the lord of men. O Monarch, hear my last appeal, My counsel for thy kingdom’s weal. This sentence I again declare: O giant King, beware, beware! Save from the ruin that impends Thy town, thy people, and thy friends; O hear the warning urged once more: To Raghu’s son the dame restore.”




Canto XV. Indrajít’s Speech.


He ceased: and Indrajít the pride Of Rákshas warriors thus replied:

  “Is this a speech our king should hear, This counsel of ignoble fear? A scion of our glorious race Should ne’er conceive a thought so base, But one mid all our kin we find, Vibhishaṇ, whose degenerate mind No spark of gallant pride retains, Whose coward soul his lineage stains. Against one giant what can two Unhappy sons of Raghu do? Away with idle fears, away! Matched with our meanest, what are they? Beneath my conquering prowess fell The Lord of earth and heaven and hell.(924) Through every startled region dread Of my resistless fury spread; And Gods in each remotest sphere Confessed the universal fear. Rending the air with roar and groan, Airávat(925) to the earth was thrown. From his huge head the tusks I drew, And smote the Gods with fear anew. Shall I who tame celestials’ pride, By whom the fiends are terrified, Now prove a weakling little worth, And fail to slay those sons of earth?”

  He ceased: Vibhishaṇ trained and tried In war and counsel thus replied

  “Thy speech is marked with scorn of truth, With rashness and the pride of youth. Yea, to thy ruin like a child Thou pratest, and thy words are wild. Most dear, O Indrajít, to thee Should Rávaṇ’s weal and safety be, For thou art called his son, but thou Art proved his direst foeman now, When warned by me thou hast not tried To turn the coming woe aside. Both thee and him ’twere meet to slay, Who brought thee to this hall to-day, And dared so rash a youth admit To council where the wisest sit. Presumptuous, wild, devoid of sense, Filled full of pride and insolence, Thy reckless tongue thou wilt not rule That speaks the counsel of a fool. Who in the fight may brook or shun The arrows shot by Raghu’s son With flame and fiery vengeance sped, Dire as his staff who rules the dead? O Rávaṇ, let thy people live, And to the son of Raghu give Fair robes and gems and precious ore, And Sítá to his arms restore.”




Canto XVI. Rávan’s Speech.


Then, while his breast with fury swelled, Thus Rávaṇ spoke, as fate impelled:

  “Better with foes thy dwelling make, Or house thee with the venomed snake, Than live with false familiar friends Who further still thy foeman’s ends. I know their treacherous mood, I know Their secret triumph at thy woe. They in their inward hearts despise The brave, the noble, and the wise, Grieve at their bliss with rancorous hate, And for their sorrows watch and wait: Scan every fault with curious eye, And each slight error magnify. Ask elephants who roam the wild How were their captive friends beguiled. “For fire,” they cry, “we little care, For javelin and shaft and snare: Our foes are traitors, taught to bind The trusting creatures of their kind.” Still, still, shall blessings flow from cows,(926) And Bráhmans love their rigorous vows; Still woman change her restless will, And friends perfidious work us ill. What though with conquering feet I tread On every prostrate foeman’s head; What though the worlds in abject fear Their mighty lord in me revere? This thought my peace of mind destroys And robs me of expected joys. The lotus of the lake receives The glittering rain that gems its leaves, But each bright drop remains apart: So is it still with heart and heart. Deceitful as an autumn cloud Which, though its thunderous voice be loud, On the dry earth no torrent sends, Such is the race of faithless friends. No riches of the bloomy spray Will tempt the wandering bee to stay That loves from flower to flower to range; And friends like thee are swift to change. Thou blot upon thy glorious line, If any giant’s tongue but thine Had dared to give this base advice, He should not live to shame me twice.”

  Then just Vibhishaṇ in the heat Of anger started from his seat, And with four captains of the band Sprang forward with his mace in hand; Then, fury flashing from his eye, Looked on the king and made reply:

  “Thy rights, O Rávaṇ, I allow: My brother and mine elder thou. Such, though from duty’s path they stray, We love like fathers and obey, But still too bitter to be borne Is thy harsh speech of cruel scorn. The rash like thee, who spurn control, Nor check one longing of the soul, Urged by malignant fate repel The faithful friend who counsels well. A thousand courtiers wilt thou meet, With flattering lips of smooth deceit: But rare are they whose tongue or ear Will speak the bitter truth, or hear. Unclose thy blinded eyes and see That snares of death encompass thee. I dread, my brother, to behold The shafts of Ráma, bright with gold, Flash fury through the air, and red With fires of vengeance strike thee dead. Lord, brother, King, again reflect, Nor this mine earnest prayer reject, O, save thyself, thy royal town, Thy people and thine old renown.”




Canto XVII. Vibhishan’s Flight.


Soon as his bitter words were said, To Raghu’s sons Vibhishaṇ fled.(927) Their eyes the Vánar leaders raised And on the air-borne Rákhshas gazed, Bright as a thunderbolt, in size Like Meru’s peak that cleaves the skies. In gorgeous panoply arrayed Like Indra’s self he stood displayed, And four attendants brave and bold Shone by their chief in mail and gold. Sugríva then with dark surmise Bent on their forms his wondering eyes, And thus in hasty words confessed The anxious doubt that moved his breast:

  “Look, look ye Vánars, and beware: That giant chief sublime in air With other four in bright array Comes armed to conquer and to slay.” Soon as his warning speech they heard, The Vánar chieftains undeterred Seized fragments of the rock and trees, And made reply in words like these: “We wait thy word: the order give, And these thy foes shall cease to live. Command us, mighty King, and all Lifeless upon the earth shall fall.”

  Meanwhile Vibhishaṇ with the four Stood high above the ocean shore. Sugríva and the chiefs he spied, And raised his mighty voice and cried: “From Rávaṇ, lord of giants, I His brother, named Vibhishaṇ, fly. From Janasthán he stole the child Of Janak by his art beguiled, And in his palace locked and barred Surrounds her with a Rákshas guard. I bade him, plied with varied lore, His hapless prisoner restore. But he, by Fate to ruin sent, No credence to my counsel lent, Mad as the fevered wretch who sees And scorns the balm to bring him ease. He scorned the sage advice I gave, He spurned me like a base-born slave. I left my children and my wife, And fly to Raghu’s son for life. I pray thee, Vánar chieftain, speed To him who saves in hour of need, And tell him famed in distant lands That suppliant here Vibhishaṇ stands.”

  The Rákshas ceased: Sugríva hied To Raghu’s noble son and cried:

  “A stranger from the giant host, Borne o’er the sea, has reached the coast; A secret foe, he comes to slay, As owls attack their heedless prey. ’Tis thine, O King, in time of need To watch, to counsel, and to lead, Our Vánar legions to dispose, And guard us from our crafty foes. Vibhishaṇ from the giants’ isle, King Rávaṇ’s brother, comes with guile And, feigning from his king to flee, Seeks refuge, Raghu’s son, with thee. Arise, O Ráma, and prevent By bold attack his dark intent. Who comes in friendly guise prepared To slay thee by his arts ensnared.”

  Thus urged Sugríva famed for lore Of moving words, and spoke no more. Then Ráma thus in turn addressed The bold Hanúmán and the rest: “Chiefs of the Vánar legions each Of you heard Sugríva’s speech. What think ye now in time of fear, When peril and distress are near, In every doubt the wise depend For counsel on a faithful friend.”

  They heard his gracious words, and then Spake reverent to the lord of men: “O Raghu’s son, thou knowest well All things of heaven and earth and hell. ’Tis but thy friendship bids us speak The counsel Ráma need not seek. So duteous, brave, and true art thou, Heroic, faithful to thy vow. Deep in the scriptures, trained and tried, Still in thy friends wilt thou confide. Let each of us in turn impart The secret counsel of his heart, And strive to win his chief’s assent, By force of wisest argument.”

  They ceased and Angad thus began: “With jealous eye the stranger scan: Not yet with trusting heart receive Vibhishaṇ, nor his tale believe. These giants wandering far and wide Their evil nature falsely hide, And watching with malignant skill Assail us when we fear no ill. Well ponder every hope and fear Until thy doubtful course be clear; Then own his merit or detect His guile, and welcome or reject.”

  Then Śarabha the bold and brave In turn his prudent sentence gave: “Yea, Ráma, send a skilful spy With keenest tact to test and try. Then let the stranger, as is just, Obtain or be refused thy trust.”

  Then he whose heart was rich in store Of scripture’s life-directing lore, King Jámbaván, stood forth and cried: “Suspect, suspect a foe allied With Rávaṇ lord of Lanká’s isle, And Rákshas sin and Rákshas guile.”

  Then Mainda, wisest chief, who knew The wrong, the right, the false, the true, Pondered a while, then silence broke, And thus his sober counsel spoke:

  “Let one with gracious speech draw near And gently charm Vibhishaṇ’s ear, Till he the soothing witchery feel And all his secret heart reveal. So thou his aims and hopes shalt know, And hail the friend or shun the foe.”

  “Not he,” Hanúmán cried, “not he Who taught the Gods(928) may rival thee, Supreme in power of quickest sense, First in the art of eloquence. But hear me soothly speak, O King, And learn the hope to which I cling. Vibhishaṇ comes no crafty spy: Urged by his brother’s fault to fly. With righteous soul that loathes the sin, He fled from Lanká and his kin. If strangers question, doubt will rise And chill the heart of one so wise. Marred by distrust the parle will end, And thou wilt lose a faithful friend. Nor let it seem so light a thing To sound a stranger’s heart, O King. And he, I ween, whate’er he say, Will ne’er an evil thought betray. He comes a friend in happy time, Loathing his brother for his crime. His ear has heard thine old renown, The might that struck King Báli down, And set Sugríva on the throne. And looking now to thee alone He comes thy matchless aid to win And punish Rávaṇ for his sin. Thus have I tried thy heart to move, And thus Vibhishaṇ’s truth to prove. Still in his friendship I confide; But ponder, wisest, and decide.”




Canto XVIII. Ráma’s Speech.


Then Ráma’s rising doubt was stilled, And friendly thoughts his bosom filled. Thus, deep in Scripture’s lore, he spake: “The suppliant will I ne’er forsake, Nor my protecting aid refuse When one in name of friendship sues. Though faults and folly blot his fame, Pity and help he still may claim.”

  He ceased: Sugríva bowed his head And pondered for a while, and said:

  “Past number be his faults or few, What think ye of the Rákshas who, When threatening clouds of danger rise, Deserts his brother’s side and flies? Say, Vánars, who may hope to find True friendship in his faithless kind?”

  The son of Raghu heard his speech: He cast a hasty look on each Of those brave Vánar chiefs, and while Upon his lips there played a smile, To Lakshmaṇ turned and thus expressed The thoughts that moved his gallant breast: “Well versed in Scripture’s lore, and sage And duly reverent to age, Is he, with long experience stored, Who counsels like this Vánar lord. Yet here, methinks, for searching eyes Some deeper, subtler matter lies. To you and all the world are known The perils of a monarch’s throne, While foe and stranger, kith and kin By his misfortune trust to win. By hope of such advantage led, Vibhishaṇ o’er the sea has fled. He in his brother’s stead would reign, And our alliance seeks to gain; And we his offer may embrace, A stranger and of alien race. But if he comes a spy and foe, What power has he to strike a blow In furtherance of his close design? What is his strength compared with mine? And can I, Vánar King, forget The great, the universal debt, Ever to aid and welcome those Who pray for shelter, friends or foes? Hast thou not heard the deathless praise Won by the dove in olden days, Who conquering his fear and hate Welcomed the slayer of his mate, And gave a banquet, to refresh The weary fowler, of his flesh? Now hear me, Vánar King, rehearse What Kaṇdu(929) spoke in ancient verse, Saint Kaṇva’s son who loved the truth And clave to virtue from his youth: “Strike not the suppliant when he stands And asks thee with beseeching hands For shelter: strike him not although He were thy father’s mortal foe. No, yield him, be he proud or meek, The shelter which he comes to seek, And save thy foeman, if the deed Should cost thy life, in desperate need.” And shall I hear the wretched cry, And my protecting aid deny? Shall I a suppliant’s prayer refuse, And heaven and glory basely lose? No, I will do for honour sake E’en as the holy Kaṇdu spake, Preserve a hero’s name from stain, And bliss in heaven and glory gain. Bound by a solemn vow I sware That all my saving help should share Who sought me in distress and cried, “Thou art my hope, and none beside.” Then go, I pray thee, Vánar King, Vibhishaṇ to my presence bring, Yea, were he Rávaṇ’s self, my vow Forbids me to reject him now.”

  He ceased: the Vánar king approved; And Ráma toward Vibhishaṇ moved. So moves, a brother God to greet, Lord Indra from his heavenly seat.




Canto XIX. Vibhishan’s Counsel.


When Raghu’s son had owned his claim Down from the air Vibhishaṇ came, And with his four attendants bent At Ráma’s feet most reverent.

  “O Ráma,” thus he cried, “in me Vibhishaṇ, Rávaṇ’s brother see. By him disgraced thine aid I seek, Sure refuge of the poor and weak. From Lanká, friends, and wealth I fly, And reft of all on thee rely. On thee, the wretch’s firmest friend, My kingdom, joys, and life depend.”

  With glance of favour Ráma eyed The Rákshas chief and thus replied:

  “First from thy lips I fain would hear Each brighter hope, each darker fear. Speak, stranger, that I well may know The strength and weakness of the foe.”

  He ceased: the Rákshas chief obeyed, And thus in turn his answer made:

  “O Prince, the Self-existent gave This boon to Rávaṇ; he may brave All foes in fight; no fiend or snake, Gandharva, God, his life may take. His brother Kumbhakarṇa vies In might with him who rules the skies. The captain of his armies—fame Perhaps has taught the warrior’s name— Is terrible Prahasta, who King Maṇibhadra’s(930) self o’erthrew. Where is the warrior found to face Young Indrajít, when armed with brace And guard(931) and bow he stands in mail And laughs at spear and arrowy hail? Within his city Lanká dwell Ten million giants fierce and fell, Who wear each varied shape at will And eat the flesh of those they kill. These hosts against the Gods he led, And heavenly might discomfited.”

  Then Ráma cried: “I little heed Gigantic strength or doughty deed. In spite of all their might has done The king, the captain, and the son Shall fall beneath my fury dead, And thou shalt reign in Rávaṇ’s stead. He, though in depths of earth he dwell, Or seek protection down in hell, Or kneel before the Sire supreme, His forfeit life shall ne’er redeem. Yea, by my brothers’ lives I swear, I will not to my home repair Till Rávaṇ and his kith and kin Have paid in death the price of sin.”

  Vibhishaṇ bowed his head and cried: “Thy conquering army will I guide To storm the city of the foe, And aid the tyrant’s overthrow.” Thus spake Vibhishaṇ: Ráma pressed The Rákshas chieftain to his breast, And cried to Lakshmaṇ: “Haste and bring Sea-water for the new-made king.” He spoke, and o’er Vibhishaṇ’s head The consecrating drops were shed Mid shouts that hailed with one accord The giants’ king and Lanká’s lord.

  “Is there no way,” Hanúmán cried, “No passage o’er the boisterous tide? How may we lead the Vánar host In triumph to the farther coast?” “Thus,” said Vibhishaṇ, “I advise: Let Raghu’s son in suppliant guise Entreat the mighty Sea to lend His succour and this cause befriend. His channels, as the wise have told, By Sagar’s sons were dug of old,(932) Nor will high-thoughted Ocean scorn A prince of Sagar’s lineage born.”

  He ceased; the prudent counsel won The glad assent of Raghu’s son. Then on the ocean shore a bed Of tender sacred grass was spread, Where Ráma at the close of day Like fire upon an altar lay.




Canto XX. The Spies.


Śárdúla, Rávaṇ’s spy, surveyed The legions on the strand arrayed. And bore, his bosom racked with fear, These tidings to the monarch’s ear:

  “They come, they come. A rushing tide, Ten leagues they spread from side to side, And on to storm thy city press, Fierce rovers of the wilderness. Rich in each princely power and grace, The pride of Daśaratha’s race, Ráma and Lakshmaṇ lead their bands, And halt them on the ocean sands. O Monarch, rise, this peril meet; Risk not the danger of defeat. First let each wiser art be tried; Bribe them, or win them, or divide.” Such was the counsel of the spy: And Rávaṇ called to Śuka: “Fly, Sugríva lord of Vánars seek, And thus my kingly message speak: “Great power and might and fame are thine, Brave scion of a royal line, King Riksharajas’ son, in thee A brother and a friend I see. How wronged by me canst thou complain? What profit here pretend to gain? If from the wood the wife I stole Of Ráma of the prudent soul, What cause hast thou to mourn the theft? Thou art not injured or bereft. Return, O King, thy steps retrace And seek thy mountain dwelling-place. No, never may thy hosts within My Lanká’s walls a footing win. A mighty town whose strength defies The gathered armies of the skies.”

  He ceased: obedient Śuka heard; With wings and plumage of a bird He rose in eager speed and through The air upon his errand flew. Borne o’er the sea with rapid wing He stood above the Vánar king, And spoke aloud, sublime in air, The message he was charged to bear. The Vánar heard the words he spoke, And quick redoubling stroke on stroke On head and pinions hemmed him round And bore him struggling to the ground. The Rákshas wounded and distressed These words to Raghu’s son addressed:

  “Quick, quick! This Vánar host restrain, For heralds never must be slain. To him alone, a wretch untrue, The punishment of death is due Who leaves his master’s speech unsaid And speaks another in its stead.” Moved by the suppliant speech and prayer Up sprang the prince and cried, forbear. Saved from his wild assailant’s blows Again the Rákshas herald rose And borne on light wings to the sky Addressed Sugríva from on high: “O Vánar Monarch, chief endued With power and wonderous fortitude, What answer is my king, the fear And scourge of weeping worlds, to hear?” “Go tell thy lord,” Sugríva cried, “Thou, Ráma’s foe, art thus defied. His arm the guilty Báli slew; Thus, tyrant, shalt thou perish too. Thy sons, thy friends, proud King, and all Thy kith and kin with thee shall fall; And, emptied of the giant’s brood, Burnt Lanká be a solitude. Fly to the Sun-God’s pathway, go And hide thee deep in hell below: In vain from Ráma shalt thou flee Though heavenly warriors fight for thee. Thine arm subdued, securely bold, The Vulture-king infirm and old: But will thy puny strength avail When Raghu’s wrathful sons assail? A captive in thy palace lies The lady of the lotus eyes: Thou knowest not how fierce and strong Is he whom thou hast dared to wrong. The best of Raghu’s lineage, he Whose conquering hand shall punish thee.”

  He ceased: and Angad raised a cry; “This is no herald but a spy. Above thee from his airy post His rapid eye surveyed our host, Where with advantage he might scan Our gathered strength from rear to van. Bind him, Vánars, bind the spy, Nor let him back to Lanká fly.”

  They hurled the Rákshas to the ground, They grasped his neck, his pinions bound, And firmly held him while in vain His voice was lifted to complain. But Ráma’s heart inclined to spare, He listened to his plaint and prayer, And cried aloud: “O Vánars, cease; The captive from his bonds release.”




Canto XXI. Ocean Threatened.


His hands in reverence Ráma raised And southward o’er the ocean gazed; Then on the sacred grass that made His lowly couch his limbs he laid. His head on that strong arm reclined Which Sítá, best of womankind, Had loved in happier days to hold With soft arms decked with pearls and gold. Then rising from his bed of grass, “This day,” he cried, “the host shall pass Triumphant to the southern shore, Or Ocean’s self shall be no more.” Thus vowing in his constant breast Again he turned him to his rest, And there, his eyes in slumber closed, Silent beside the sea reposed. Thrice rose the Day-God thrice he set, The lord of Ocean came not yet, Thrice came the night, but Raghu’s son No answer by his service won. To Lakshmaṇ thus the hero cried, His eyes aflame with wrath and pride:

  “In vain the softer gifts that grace The good are offered to the base. Long-suffering, patience, gentle speech Their thankless hearts can never reach. The world to him its honour pays Whose ready tongue himself can praise, Who scorns the true, and hates the right, Whose hand is ever raised to smite. Each milder art is tried in vain: It wins no glory, but disdain. And victory owns no softer charm Than might which nerves a warrior’s arm. My humble suit is still denied By Ocean’s overweening pride. This day the monsters of the deep In throes of death shall wildly leap. My shafts shall rend the serpents curled In caverns of the watery world, Disclose each sunless depth and bare The tangled pearl and coral there. Away with mercy! at a time Like this compassion is a crime. Welcome, the battle and the foe! My bow! my arrows and my bow! This day the Vánars’ feet shall tread The conquered Sea’s exhausted bed, And he who never feared before Shall tremble to his farthest shore.”

  Red flashed his eyes with angry glow: He stood and grasped his mighty bow, Terrific as the fire of doom Whose quenchless flames the world consume. His clanging cord the archer drew, And swift the fiery arrows flew Fierce as the flashing levin sent By him who rules the firmament. Down through the startled waters sped Each missile with its flaming head. The foamy billows rose and sank, And dashed upon the trembling bank. Sea monsters of tremendous form With crash and roar of thunder storm. Still the wild waters rose and fell Crowned with white foam and pearl and shell. Each serpent, startled from his rest, Raised his fierce eyes and glowing crest. And prisoned Dánavs(933) where they dwelt In depths below the terror felt. Again upon his string he laid A flaming shaft, but Lakshmaṇ stayed His arm, with gentle reasoning tried To soothe his angry mood, and cried: “Brother, reflect: the wise control The rising passions of the soul. Let Ocean grant, without thy threat, The boon on which thy heart is set. That gracious lord will ne’er refuse When Ráma son of Raghu sues.” He ceased: and voices from the air Fell clear and loud, Spare, Ráma, spare.




Canto XXII. Ocean Threatened.


With angry menace Ráma, best Of Raghu’s sons, the Sea addressed: “With fiery flood of arrowy rain Thy channels will I dry and drain. And I and all the Vánar host Will reach on foot the farther coast. Thou shalt not from destruction save The creatures of the teeming wave, And lapse of time shall ne’er efface The memory of the dire disgrace.”

  Thus spoke the warrior, and prepared The mortal shaft which never spared, Known mystic weapon, by the name Of Brahmá, red with quenchless flame. Great terror, as he strained the bow, Struck heaven above and earth below. Through echoing skies the thunder pealed, And startled mountains rocked and reeled, The earth was black with sudden night And heaven was blotted from the sight. Then ever and anon the glare Of meteors shot through murky air, And with a wild terrific sound Red lightnings struck the trembling ground. In furious gusts the fierce wind blew: Tall trees it shattered and o’erthrew, And, smiting with a giant’s stroke, Huge masses from the mountain broke. A cry of terror long and shrill Came from each valley, plain, and hill. Each ruined dale, each riven peak Re-echoed with a wail or shriek.

  While Raghu’s son undaunted gazed, The waters of the deep were raised, And, still uplifted more and more, Leapt in wild flood upon the shore. Still Ráma looked upon the tide And kept his post unterrified. Then from the seething flood upreared Majestic Ocean’s form appeared, As rising from his eastern height Springs through the sky the Lord of Light. Attendant on their monarch came Sea serpents with their eyes aflame. Like lazulite mid burning gold His form was wondrous to behold. Bright with each fairest precious stone A chain about his neck was thrown. Calm shone his lotus eyes beneath The blossoms of his heavenly wreath, And many a pearl and sea-born gem Flashed in the monarch’s diadem. There Gangá, tributary queen, And Sindhu(934) by his lord, were seen, And every stream and brook renowned In ancient story girt him round. Then, as the waters rose and swelled, The king with suppliant hands upheld, His glorious head to Ráma bent And thus addressed him reverent: “Air, ether, fire, earth, water, true To nature’s will, their course pursue; And I, as ancient laws ordain, Unfordable must still remain. Yet, Raghu’s son, my counsel hear: I ne’er for love or hope or fear Will pile my waters in a heap And leave a pathway through the deep. Still shall my care for thee provide An easy passage o’er the tide, And like a city’s paven street Shall be the road beneath thy feet.” He ceased: and Ráma spoke again: “This spell is ne’er invoked in vain. Where shall the magic shaft, to spend The fury of its might, descend?” “Shoot,” Ocean cried, “thine arrow forth With all its fury to the north, Where sacred Drumakulya lies, Whose glory with thy glory vies. There dwells a wild Abhíra(935) race, As vile in act as foul of face, Fierce Dasyus(936) who delight in ill, And drink my tributary rill. My soul no longer may endure Their neighbourhood and touch impure. At these, O son of Raghu, aim Thine arrow with the quenchless flame.”

  Swift from the bow, as Ráma drew His cord, the fiery arrow flew. Earth groaned to feel the wound, and sent A rush of water through the rent; And famed for ever is the well Of Vraṇa(937) where the arrow fell. Then every brook and lake beside Throughout the region Ráma dried. But yet he gave a boon to bless And fertilize the wilderness: No fell disease should taint the air, And sheep and kine should prosper there: Earth should produce each pleasant root, The stately trees should bend with fruit; Oil, milk, and honey should abound, And fragrant herbs should clothe the ground. Then spake the king of brooks and seas To Raghu’s son in words like these: “Now let a wondrous task be done By Nala, Viśvakarmá’s son, Who, born of one of Vánar race, Inherits by his father’s grace A share of his celestial art. Call Nala to perform his part, And he, divinely taught and skilled, A bridge athwart the sea shall build.”

  He spoke and vanished. Nala, best Of Vánar chiefs, the king addressed: “O’er the deep sea where monsters play A bridge, O Ráma, will I lay; For, sharer of my father’s skill, Mine is the power and mine the will. ’Tis vain to try each gentler art To bribe and soothe the thankless heart; In vain on such is mercy spent; It yields to naught but punishment. Through fear alone will Ocean now A passage o’er his waves allow. My mother, ere she bore her son, This boon from Viśvakarmá won: “O Mandarí, thy child shall be In skill and glory next to me.” But why unbidden should I fill Thine ear with praises of my skill? Command the Vánar hosts to lay Foundations for the bridge to-day.”

  He spoke: and swift at Ráma’s hest Up sprang the Vánars from their rest, The mandate of the king obeyed And sought the forest’s mighty shade. Unrooted trees to earth they threw, And to the sea the timber drew. The stately palm was bowed and bent, Aśokas from the ground were rent, And towering Sáls and light bamboos, And trees with flowers of varied hues, With loveliest creepers wreathed and crowned, Shook, reeled, and fell upon the ground. With mighty engines piles of stone And seated hills were overthrown: Unprisoned waters sprang on high, In rain descending from the sky: And ocean with a roar and swell Heaved wildly when the mountains fell. Then the great bridge of wondrous strength Was built, a hundred leagues in length. Rocks huge as autumn clouds bound fast With cordage from the shore were cast, And fragments of each riven hill, And trees whose flowers adorned them still. Wild was the tumult, loud the din As ponderous rocks went thundering in. Ere set of sun, so toiled each crew, Ten leagues and four the structure grew; The labours of the second day Gave twenty more of ready way, And on the fifth, when sank the sun, The whole stupendous work was done. O’er the broad way the Vánars sped, Nor swayed it with their countless tread. Exultant on the ocean strand Vibhishaṇ stood, and, mace in hand, Longed eager for the onward way, And chafed impatient at delay. Then thus to Ráma trained and tried In battle King Sugríva cried: “Come, Hanumán’s broad back ascend; Let Angad help to Lakshmaṇ lend. These high above the sea shall bear Their burthen through the ways of air.”

  So, with Sugríva, borne o’erhead Ikshváku’s sons the legions led. Behind, the Vánar hosts pursued Their march in endless multitude. Some skimmed the surface of the wave, To some the air a passage gave. Amid their ceaseless roar the sound Of Ocean’s fearful voice was drowned, As o’er the bridge by Nala planned They hastened on to Lanká’s strand, Where, by the pleasant brooks, mid trees Loaded with fruit, they took their ease.




Canto XXIII. The Omens.


Then Ráma, peerless in the skill That marks each sign of good and ill, Strained his dear brother to his breast, And thus with prudent words addressed: “Now, Lakshmaṇ, by the water’s side In fruitful groves the host divide, That warriors of each woodland race May keep their own appointed place. Dire is the danger: loss of friends, Of Vánars and of bears, impends. Distained with dust the breezes blow, And earth is shaken from below. The tall hills rock from foot to crown, And stately trees come toppling down. In threatening shape, with voice of fear, The clouds like cannibals appear, And rain in fitful torrents, red With sanguinary drops, is shed. Long streaks of lurid light invest The evening skies from east to west. And from the sun at times a ball Of angry fire is seen to fall. From every glen and brake is heard The boding voice of beast and bird: From den and lair night-prowlers run And shriek against the falling sun. Up springs the moon, but hot and red Kills the sad night with woe and dread; No gentle lustre, but the gloom That heralds universal doom. A cloud of dust and vapour mars The beauty of the evening stars, And wild and fearful is the sky As though the wreck of worlds were nigh. Around our heads in boding flight Wheel hawk and vulture, crow and kite; And every bird of happy note Shrieks terror from his altered throat. Sword, spear and shaft shall strew the plain Dyed red with torrents of the slain. To-day the Vánar troops shall close Around the city of our foes.”




Canto XXIV. The Spy’s Return.


As shine the heavens with autumn’s moon Refulgent in the height of noon, So shone with light which Ráma gave That army of the bold and brave, As from the sea it marched away In war’s magnificent array, And earth was shaken by the beat And trampling of unnumbered feet. Then to the giants’ ears were borne, The mingled notes of drum and horn, And clash of tambours smote the sky, And shouting and the battle cry. The sound of martial strains inspired Each chieftain, and his bosom fired: While giants from their walls replied, And answering shouts the foe defied, Then Ráma looked on Lanká where Bright banners floated in the air, And, pierced with anguish at the view, His loving thoughts to Sítá flew. “There, prisoned by the giant, lies My lady of the tender eyes, Like Rohiṇí the queen of stars O’erpowered by the fiery Mars.” Then turned he to his brother chief And cried in agony of grief: “See on the hill, divinely planned And built by Viśvakarmá’s hand, The towers and domes of Lanká rise In peerless beauty to the skies. Bright from afar the city shines With gleam of palaces and shrines, Like pale clouds through the region spread By Vishṇu’s self inhabited. Fair gardens grow, and woods between The stately domes are fresh and green, Where trees their bloom and fruit display, And sweet birds sing on every spray. Each bird is mad with joy, and bees Sing labouring in the bloomy trees On branches by the breezes bowed, Where the gay Koïl’s voice is loud.”

  This said, he ranged with warlike art Each body of the host apart. “There in the centre,” Ráma cried, “Be Angad’s place by Níla’s side. Let Rishabh of impetuous might Be lord and leader on the right, And Gandhamádan, next in rank, Be captain of the farther flank. Lakshmaṇ and I the hosts will lead, And Jámbaván of ursine breed, With bold Susheṇ unused to fear, And Vegadarśí, guide the rear.”

  Thus Ráma spoke: the chiefs obeyed; And all the Vánar hosts arrayed Showed awful as the autumn sky When clouds embattled form on high. Their arms were mighty trees o’erthrown, And massy blocks of mountain stone. One hope in every warlike breast, One firm resolve, they onward pressed, To die in fight or batter down The walls and towers of Lanká’s town.

  Those marshalled legions Ráma eyed, And thus to King Sugríva cried: “Now, Monarch, ere the hosts proceed, Let Śuka, Rávaṇ’s spy, be freed.” He spoke: the Vánar gave consent And loosed him from imprisonment: And Śuka, trembling and afraid, His homeward way to Rávaṇ made. Loud laughed the lord of Lanká’s isle: “Where hast thou stayed this weary while? Why is thy plumage marred, and why Do twisted cords thy pinions tie? Say, comest thou in evil plight The victim of the Vánars’ spite?”

  He ceased: the spy his fear controlled, And to the king his story told: “I reached the ocean’s distant shore, Thy message to the king I bore. In sudden wrath the Vánars rose, They struck me down with furious blows; They seized me helpless on the ground, My plumage rent, my pinions bound. They would not, headlong in their ire, Consider, listen, or inquire; So fickle, wrathful, rough and rude Is the wild forest multitude. There, marshalling the Vánar bands, King Ráma with Sugríva stands, Ráma the matchless warrior, who Virádha and Kabandha slew, Khara, and countless giants more, And tracks his queen to Lanká’s shore. A bridge athwart the sea was cast, And o’er it have his legions passed. Hark! heralded by horns and drums The terrible avenger comes. E’en now the giants’ isle he fills With warriors huge as clouds and hills, And burning with vindictive hate Will thunder soon at Lanká’s gate. Yield or oppose him: choose between Thy safety and the Maithil queen.”

  He ceased: the tyrant’s eyeballs blazed With fury as his voice he raised: “No, if the dwellers of the sky, Gandharvas, fiends assail me, I Will keep the Maithil lady still, Nor yield her back for fear of ill. When shall my shafts with iron hail My foeman, Raghu’s son, assail, Thick as the bees with eager wing Beat on the flowery trees of spring? O, let me meet my foe at length, And strip him of his vaunted strength, Fierce as the sun who shines afar Stealing the light of every star. Strong as the sea’s impetuous might My ways are like the tempest’s flight; But Ráma knows not this, or he In terror from my face would flee.”




Canto XXV. Rávan’s Spies.(938)


When Ráma and the host he led Across the sea had safely sped, Thus Rávaṇ, moved by wrath and pride, To Śuka and to Sáraṇ cried: “O counsellors, the Vánar host Has passed the sea from coast to coast, And Daśaratha’s son has wrought A wondrous deed surpassing thought. And now in truth I needs must know The strength and number of the foe. Go ye, to Ráma’s host repair And count me all the legions there. Learn well what power each captain leads His name and fame for warlike deeds. Learn by what artist’s wondrous aid That bridge athwart the sea was made; Learn how the Vánar host came o’er And halted on the island shore. Mark Ráma son of Raghu well; His valour, strength, and weapons tell. Watch his advisers one by one, And Lakshmaṇ, Raghu’s younger son. Learn with observant eyes, and bring “Unerring tidings to your king.

  He ceased: then swift in Vánar guise Forth on their errand sped the spies. They reached the Vánars, and, dismayed, Their never-ending lines surveyd: Nor would they try, in mere despair, To count the countless legions there, That crowded valley, plain and hill, That pressed about each cave and rill. Though sea-like o’er the land were spread The endless hosts which Ráma led, The bridge by thousands yet was lined, And eager myriads pressed behind. But sage Vibhishaṇ’s watchful eyes Had marked the giants in disguise. He gave command the pair to seize, And told the tale in words like these:

  “O Ráma these, well known erewhile, Are giant sons of Lanká’s isle, Two counsellors of Rávaṇ sent To watch the invading armament.”

  Vibhishaṇ ceased: at Ráma’s look The Rákshas envoys quailed and shook; Then suppliant hand to hand they pressed And thus Ikshváku’s son addressed: “O Ráma, bear the truth we speak: Our monarch Rávaṇ bade us seek The Vánar legions and survey Their numbers, strength, and vast array.”

  Then Ráma, friend and hope and guide Of suffering creatures, thus replied:

  “Now giants, if your eyes have scanned Our armies, numbering every band, Marked lord and chief, and gazed their fill, Return to Rávaṇ when ye will. If aught remain, if aught anew Ye fain would scan with closer view, Vibhishaṇ, ready at your call, Will lead you forth and show you all. Think not of bonds and capture; fear No loss of life, no peril here: For, captive, helpless and unarmed, An envoy never should be harmed. Again to Lanká’s town repair, Speed to the giant monarch there, And be these words to Rávaṇ told, Fierce brother of the Lord of Gold: “Now, tyrant, tremble for thy sin: Call up thy friends, thy kith and kin, And let the power and might be seen Which made thee bold to steal my queen. To-morrow shall thy mournful eye Behold thy bravest warriors die, And Lanká’s city, tower and wall, Struck by my fiery shafts, will fall. Then shall my vengeful blow descend Its rage on thee and thine to spend, Fierce as the fiery bolt that flew From heaven against the Dánav crew, Mid those rebellious demons sent By him who rules the firmament.”

  Thus spake Ikshváku’s son, and ceased: The giants from their bonds released Lauded the King with glad accord, And hasted homeward to their lord. Before the tyrant side by side Śuka and Sáraṇ stood and cried: “Vibhishaṇ seized us, King, and fain His helpless captives would have slain. But glorious Ráma saw us; he, Great-hearted hero, made us free. There in one spot our eyes beheld Four chiefs on earth unparalleled, Who with the guardian Gods may vie Who rule the regions of the sky. There Ráma stood, the boast and pride Of Raghu’s race, by Lakshmaṇ’s side. There stood the sage Vibhishaṇ, there Sugríva strong beyond compare. These four alone can batter down Gate, rampart, wall, and Lanká’s town. Nay, Ráma matchless in his form, A single foe, thy town would storm: So wondrous are his weapons, he Needs not the succour of the three. Why speak we of the countless train That fills the valley, hill and plain, The millions of the Vánar breed Whom Ráma and Sugríva lead? O King, be wise, contend no more, And Sítá to her lord restore.”




Canto XXVI. The Vánar Chiefs.


“Not if the Gods in heaven who dwell, Gandharvas, and the fiends of hell In banded opposition rise Against me, will I yield my prize. Still trembling from the ungentle touch Of Vánar hands ye fear too much, And bid me, heedless of the shame, Give to her lord the Maithil dame.”

  Thus spoke the king in stern reproof; Then mounted to his palace roof Aloft o’er many a story raised, And on the lands beneath him gazed. There by his faithful spies he stood And looked on sea and hill and wood. There stretched before him far away The Vánars’ numberless array: Scarce could the meadows’ tender green Beneath their trampling feet be seen. He looked a while with furious eye, Then questioned thus the nearer spy: “Bend, Sáraṇ, bend thy gaze, and show The leaders of the Vánar foe. Tell me their heroes’ names, and teach The valour, power and might of each.”

  Obedient Sáraṇ eyed the van, The leaders marked, and thus began: “That chief conspicuous at the head Of warriors in the forest bred, Who hither bends his ruthless eye And shouts his fearful battle cry: Whose voice with pealing thunder shakes All Lanká, with the groves and lakes And hills that tremble at the sound, Is Níla, for his might renowned: First of the Vánar lords controlled By King Sugríva lofty-souled. He who his mighty arm extends, And his fierce eye on Lanká bends, In stature like a stately tower, In colour like a lotus flower, Who with his wild earth-shaking cries Thee, Rávaṇ, to the field defies, Is Angad, by Sugríva’s care Anointed his imperial heir: In wondrous strength, in martial fire Peer of King Báli’s self, his sire; For Ráma’s sake in arms arrayed Like Varuṇ called to Śakra’s aid. Behind him, girt by warlike bands, Nala the mighty Vánar stands, The son of Viśvakarmá, he Who built the bridge athwart the sea. Look farther yet, O King, and mark That chieftain clothed in Sandal bark. ’Tis Śweta, famed among his peers, A sage whom all his race reveres. See, in Sugríva’s ear he speaks, Then, hasting back, his post reseeks, And turns his practised eye to view The squadrons he has formed anew. Next Kumud stands who roamed of yore On Gomatí’s(939) delightful shore, Feared where the waving woods invest His seat on Mount Sanrochan’s crest. Next him a chieftain strong and dread, Comes Chaṇḍa at his legions’ head; Exulting in his warrior might He hastens, burning for the fight, And boasts that his unaided powers Shall cast to earth thy walls and towers. Mark, mark that chief of lion gait, Who views thee with a glance of hate As though his very eyes would burn The city walls to which they turn: ’Tis Rambha, Vánar king; he dwells In Krishṇagiri’s tangled dells, Where Vindhya’s pleasant slopes are spread And fair Sudarśan lifts his head. There, listening with erected ears, Śarabha, mighty chief, appears. His soul is burning for the strife, Nor dreads the jeopardy of life. He trembles as he moves, for ire, And bends around his glance of fire. Next, like a cloud that veils the skies, A chieftain of terrific size, Conspicuous mid the Vánars, comes With battle shout like rolling drums, ’Tis Panas, trained in war and tried, Who dwells on Páriyátra’s side. He, far away, the chief who throws A glory o’er the marshalled rows That ranged behind their captain stand Exulting on the ocean strand, Is Vinata the fierce in fight, Preëminent like Dardur’s height. That chieftain bending down to drink On lovely Veṇá’s verdant brink, Is Krathan; now he lifts his eyes And thee to mortal fray defies. Next Gavaya comes, whose haughty mind Scorns all the warriors of his kind. He comes to trample—such his boast— On Lanká with his single host.”




Canto XXVII. The Vánar Chiefs.


“Yet more remain, brave chiefs who stake Their noble lives for Ráma’s sake. See, glorious, golden-coated, one Who glisters like the morning sun, Whom thousands of his race surround, ’Tis Hara for his strength renowned. Next comes a mighty chieftain, he Whose legions, armed with rock and tree, Press on, in numbers passing tale, The ramparts of our town to scale. O Rávaṇ, see the king advance Terrific with his fiery glance, Girt by the bravest of his train, Majestic as the God of Rain, Parjanya, when his host of clouds About the king, embattled, crowds: On Rikshaván’s high mountain nursed, In Narmadá(940) he slakes his thirst, Dhúmra, proud ursine chief, who leads Wild warriors whom the forest breeds. His brother, next in strength and age, In Jámbaván the famous sage. Of yore his might and skill he lent To him who rules the firmament, And Indra’s liberal boons repaid The chieftain for the timely aid. There like a gloomy cloud that flies Borne by the tempest through the skies, Pramáthí stands: he roamed of yore The forest wilds on Gangá’s shore, Where elephants were struck with dread And trembling at his coming fled. There on his foes he loved to sate The old hereditary hate.(941) Look, Gaja and Gaváksha show Their lust of battle with the foe. See Nala burning for the fray, And Níla chafing at delay. Behind the eager captains press Wild hosts in numbers numberless, And each for Ráma’s sake would fall Or force his way through Lanká’s wall.”




Canto XXVIII. The Chieftains.


There Sáraṇ ceased: then Śuka broke The silence and to Rávaṇ spoke: “O Monarch, yonder chiefs survey: Like elephants in size are they, And tower like stately trees that grow Where Gangá’s nursing waters flow; Yea, tall as mountain pines that fling Long shadows o’er the snow-crowned king. They all in wild Kishkindhá dwell And serve their lord Sugríva well. The Gods’ and bright Gandharvas’ seed, They take each form that suits their need. Now farther look, O Monarch, where Those chieftains stand, a glorious pair, Conspicuous for their godlike frames; Dwivid and Mainda are their names. Their lips the drink of heaven have known, And Brahmá claims them for his own. That chieftain whom thine eyes behold Refulgent like a hill of gold, Before whose wrathful might the sea Roused from his rest would turn and flee, The peerless Vánar, he who came To Lanká for the Maithil dame, The Wind-God’s son Hanumán; thou Hast seen him once, behold him now. Still nearer let thy glance be bent, And mark that prince preëminent Mid chieftains for his strength and size And splendour of his lotus eyes. Far through the worlds his virtues shine, The glory of Ikshváku’s line. The path of truth he never leaves, And still through all to duty cleaves. Deep in the Vedas, skilled to wield The mystic shafts to him revealed: Whose flaming darts to heaven ascend, And through the earth a passage rend: In might like him who rules the sky; Like Yáma, when his wrath grows high: Whose queen, the darling of his soul, Thy magic art deceived and stole: There royal Ráma stands and longs For battle to avenge his wrongs. Near on his right a prince, in hue Like pure gold freshly burnished, view: Broad is his chest, his eye is red, His black hair curls about his head: ’Tis Lakshmaṇ, faithful friend, who shares His brother’s joys, his brother’s cares. By Ráma’s side he loves to stand And serve him as his better hand, For whose dear sake without a sigh The warrior youth would gladly die. On Ráma’s left Vibhishaṇ view, With giants for his retinue: King-making drops have dewed his head, Appointed monarch in thy stead. Behold that chieftain sternly still, High towering like a rooted hill, Supreme in power and pride of place, The monarch of the Vánar race. Raised high above his woodland kind, In might and glory, frame and mind, His head above his host he shows Conspicuous as the Lord of Snows. His home is far from hostile eyes Where deep in woods Kishkindhá lies. A glistering chain which flowers bedeck With burnished gold adorns his neck. Queen Fortune, loved by Gods and kings, To him her chosen favourite clings. That chain he owes to Ráma’s grace, And Tárá and his kingly place. In him the great Sugríva know, Whom Ráma rescued from his foe.”(942)




Canto XXIX. Sárdúla Captured.


The giant viewed with earnest ken The Vánars and the lords of men; Then thus, with grief and anger moved, In bitter tone the spies reproved: “Can faithful servants hope to please Their master with such fates as these? Or hope ye with wild words to wring The bosom of your lord and king? Such words were better said by those Who come arrayed our mortal foes. In vain your ears have heard the sage, And listened to the lore of age, Untaught, though lectured many a day, The first great lesson, to obey, ’Tis marvel Rávaṇ reigns and rules Whose counsellors are blind and fools. Has death no terrors that ye dare To tempt your monarch to despair, From whose imperial mandate flow Disgrace and honour, weal and woe? Yea, forest trees, when flames are fanned About their scorching trunks, may stand; But naught can set the sinner free When kings the punishment decree. I would not in mine anger spare The traitorous foe-praising pair, But years of faithful service plead For pardon, and they shall not bleed. Henceforth to me be dead: depart, Far from my presence and my heart.”

  Thus spoke the angry king: the two Cried, Long live Rávaṇ, and withdrew, The giant monarch turned and cried To strong Mahodar at his side: “Go thou, and spies more faithful bring. More duteous to their lord the king.”

  Swift at his word Mahodar shed, And came returning at the head Of long tried messengers, who bent Before their monarch reverent. “Go quickly hence,” said Rávaṇ “scan With keenest eyes the foeman’s plan. Learn who, as nearest friends, advise And mould each secret enterprise. Learn when he wakes and goes to rest, Sound every purpose of his breast. Learn what the prince intends to-day: Watch keenly all, and come away.”

  With joy they heard the words he said: Then with Śárdúla at their head About the giant king they went With circling paces reverent. By fair Suvela’s grassy side The chiefs of Raghu’s race they spied, Where, shaded by the waving wood, Vibhishaṇ and Sugríva stood. A while they rested there and viewed The Vánars’ countless multitude. Vibhishaṇ with observant eyes Knew at a glance the giant spies, And bade the warriors of his train Bind the rash foes with cord and chain: “Śárdúla’s is the sin,” he cried. He neath the Vánars’ hands had died, But Ráma from their fury freed The captive in his utmost need, And, merciful at sight of woe, Loosed all the spies and bade them go. Then home to Lanká’s monarch fled The giant chiefs discomfited.




Canto XXX. Sárdúla’s Speech.


They told their lord that Ráma still Lay waiting by Suvela’s hill. The tyrant, flushed with angry glow, Heard of the coming of the foe, And thus with close inquiry pressed Śárdúla spokesman for the rest: “Why art thou sad, night-rover? speak: Has grief or terror changed thy cheek? Have the wild Vánars’ hostile bands Assailed thee with their mighty hands?”

  Śárdúla heard, but scarce might speak; His trembling tones were faint and weak: “O Giant King, in vain we try The purpose of the foe to spy. Their strength and number none may tell, And Ráma guards his legions well. He leaves no hope to prying eyes, And parley with the chiefs denies: Each road and path a Vánar guard, Of mountain size, has closed and barred. Soon as my feet an entrance found By giants was I seized and bound, And wounded sore I fell beneath Their fists and knees and hands and teeth. Then trembling, bleeding, wellnigh dead To Ráma’s presence was I led. He in his mercy stooped to save, And freedom to the captive gave. With rocks and shattered mountains he Has bridged his way athwart the sea, And he and all his legions wait Embattled close to Lanká’s gate. Soon will the host thy wall assail, And, swarming on, the rampart scale. Now, O my King, his consort yield, Or arm thee with the sword and shield. This choice is left thee: choose between Thy safety and the Maithil queen.”(943)




Canto XXXI. The Magic Head.


The tyrant’s troubled eye confessed The secret fear that filled his breast. With dread of coming woe dismayed He called his counsellors to aid; Then sternly silent, deep in thought, His chamber in the palace sought. Then, as the surest hope of all, The monarch bade his servants call Vidyujjihva, whom magic skill Made master of the means of ill. Then spake the lord of Lanká’s isle: “Come, Sítá with thine arts beguile. With magic skill and deftest care A head like Ráma’s own prepare. This head, long shafts and mighty bow, To Janak’s daughter will we show.”

  He ceased: Vidyujjihva obeyed, And wondrous magic skill displayed; And Rávaṇ for the art he showed An ornament of price bestowed. Then to the grove where Sítá lay The lord of Lanká took his way. Pale, wasted, weeping, on the ground The melancholy queen he found, Whose thoughts in utmost stress of ill Were fixed upon her husband still. The giant king approached the dame, Declared in tones of joy his name; Then heeding naught her wild distress Bespake her, stern and pitiless: “The prince to whom thy fancies cling Though loved and wooed by Lanká’s king, Who slew the noble Khara,—he Is slain by warriors sent by me. Thy living root is hewn away, Thy scornful pride is tamed to-day. Thy lord in battle’s front has died, And Sítá shall be Rávaṇ’s bride. Hence, idle thoughts: thy hope is fled; What wilt thou, Sítá, with the dead? Rise, child of Janak, rise and be The queen of all my queens and me. Incline thine ear, and I will tell, Dear lady, how thy husband fell. He bridged his way across the sea With countless troops to fight with me. The setting sun had flushed the west When on the shore they took their rest. Weary with toil no watch they kept, Securely on the sands they slept. Prahasta’s troops assailed our foes, And smote them in their deep repose. Scarce could their bravest prove their might: They perished in the dark of night. Axe, spear, and sword, directed well, Upon the sleeping myriads fell. First in the fight Prahasta’s sword Reft of his head thy slumbering lord. Roused at the din Vibhishaṇ rose, The captive of surrounding foes, And Lakshmaṇ through the woods that spread Around him with his Vánars fled. Hanúmán fell: one deadly stroke The neck of King Sugríva broke, And Mainda sank, and Dwivid lay Gasping in blood his life away. The Vánars died, or fled dispersed Like cloudlets when the storm has burst. Some rose aloft in air, and more Ran to the sea and filled the shore. On shore, in woods, on hill and plain Our conquering giants left the slain. Thus my victorious host o’erthrew The Vánars, and thy husband slew: See, rudely stained with dust, and red With dropping blood, the severed head.”

  Then, turning to a Rákshas slave, The ruthless king his mandate gave, And straight Vidyujjihva who bore The head still wet with dripping gore, The arrows and the mighty bow, Bent down before his master low. “Vidyujjihva,” cried Rávaṇ, “place The head before the lady’s face, And let her see with weeping eyes That low in death her husband lies.”

  Before the queen the giant laid The beauteous head his art had made. And Rávaṇ cried: “Thine eyes will know These arrows and the mighty bow. With fame of this by Ráma strung The earth and heaven and hell have rung. Prahasta brought it hither when His hand had slain thy prince of men. Now, widowed Queen, thy hopes resign: Forget thy husband and be mine.”




Canto XXXII. Sítá’s Lament.


Again her eyes with tears o’erflowed: She gazed upon the head he showed, Gazed on the bow so famed of yore, The glorious bow which Ráma bore. She gazed upon his cheek and brows, The eyes of her beloved spouse; His lips, the lustre of his hair, The priceless gem that glittered there. The features of her lord she knew, And, pierced with anguish at the view, She lifted up her voice and cried: “Kaikeyí, art thou satisfied? Now all thy longings are fulfilled; The joy of Raghu’s race is killed, And ruined is the ancient line, Destroyer, by that fraud of thine. Ah, what offence, O cruel dame, What fault in Ráma couldst thou blame, To drive him clad in hermit dress With Sítá to the wilderness?”

  Great trembling seized her frame, and she Fell like a stricken plantain tree. As lie the dead she lay; at length Slowly regaining sense and strength, On the dear head she fixed her eye And cried with very bitter cry: “Ah, when thy cold dead cheek I view, My hero, I am murdered too. Then first a faithful woman’s eyes See sorrow, when her husband dies. When thou, my lord, wast nigh to save, Some stealthy hand thy death wound gave. Thou art not dead: rise, hero, rise; Long life was thine, as spake the wise Whose words, I ween, are ever true, For faith lies open to their view. Ah lord, and shall thy head recline On earth’s cold breast, forsaking mine, Counting her chill lap dearer far Than I and my caresses are? Ah, is it thus these eyes behold Thy famous bow adorned with gold, Whereon of yore I loved to bind Sweet garlands that my hands had twined? And hast thou sought in heaven a place Amid the founders of thy race, Where in the home deserved so well Thy sires and Daśaratha dwell? Or dost thou shine a brighter star In skies where blest immortals are, Forsaking in thy lofty scorn The race wherein thy sires were born? Turn to my gaze, O turn thine eye: Why are thy cold lips silent, why? When first we met as youth and maid, When in thy hand my hand was laid, Thy promise was thy steps should be Through life in duty’s path with me. Remember, faithful still, thy vow, And take me with thee even now. Is that broad bosom where I hung, That neck to which I fondly clung, Where flowery garlands breathed their scent By hungry dogs and vultures rent? Shall no funereal honours grace The parted lord of Raghu’s race, Whose bounty liberal fees bestowed, For whom the fires of worship glowed? Kauśalyá wild with grief will see One sole survivor of the three Who in their hermit garments went To the dark woods in banishment. Then at her cry shall Lakshmaṇ tell How, slain by night, the Vánars fell; How to thy side the giants crept, And slew the hero as he slept. Thy fate and mine the queen will know, And broken-hearted die of woe. For my unworthy sake, for mine, Ráma, the glory of his line, Who bridged his way across the main, Is basely in a puddle slain; And I, the graceless wife he wed, Have brought this ruin on his head. Me, too, on him, O Rávaṇ, slay: The wife beside her husband lay. By his dear body let me rest, Cheek close to cheek and breast to breast, My happy eyes I then will close, And follow whither Ráma goes.”

  Thus cried the miserable dame; When to the king a warder came, Before the giant monarch bowed And said that, followed by a crowd Of counsellors and lords of state, Prahasta stood before the gate, And, sent by some engrossing care, Craved audience of his master there. The anxious tyrant left his seat And hastened forth the chief to meet: Then summoning his nobles all, Took counsel in his regal hall.

  When Lanká’s lord had left the queen, The head and bow no more were seen. The giant king his nobles eyed, And, terrible as Yáma, cried: “O faithful lords, the time is come: Gather our hosts with beat of drum. Nigh to the town our foeman draws: Be prudent, nor reveal the cause.”

  The nobles listened and obeyed: Swift were the gathered troops arrayed, And countless rovers of the night Stood burning for the hour of fight.




Canto XXXIII. Saramá.


But Saramá, of gentler mood, With pitying eyes the mourner viewed, Stole to her side and softly told Glad tidings that her heart consoled, Revealing with sweet voice and smile The secret of the giant’s guile. She, one of those who night and day Watching in turns by Sítá lay, Though Rákshas born felt pity’s touch, And loved the hapless lady much.

  “I heard,” she said, “thy bitter cry, Heard Rávaṇ’s speech and thy reply, For, hiding in the thicket near, No word or tone escaped mine ear. When Rávaṇ hastened forth I bent My steps to follow as he went, And learnt the secret cause that drove The monarch from the Aśoka grove. Believe me, Queen, thou needst not weep For Ráma slaughtered in his sleep. Thy lion lord of men defies By day attack, by night surprise. Can even giants slay with ease Vast hosts who fight with brandished trees, For whom, with eye that never sleeps, His constant watch thy Ráma keeps? Lord of the mighty arm and chest, Of earthly warriors first and best, Whose fame through all the regions rings, Proud scion of a hundred kings; Who guards his life and loves to lend His saving succour to a friend: Whose bow no hand but his can strain,— Thy lord, thy Ráma is not slain. Obedient to his master’s will, A great magician, trained in ill, With deftest art surpassing thought That marvellous illusion wrought. Let rising hope thy grief dispel: Look up and smile, for all is well, And gentle Lakshmí, Fortune’s Queen, Regards thee with a favouring mien. Thy Ráma with his Vánar train Has thrown a bridge athwart the main, Has led his countless legions o’er, And ranged them on this southern shore. These eyes have seen the hero stand Girt by his hosts on Lanká’s strand, And breathless spies each moment bring Fresh tidings to the giant king; And every peer and lord of state Is called to counsel and debate.”

  She ceased: the sound, long loud and clear, Of gathering armies smote her ear, Where call of drum and shell rang out, The tambour and the battle shout; And, while the din the echoes woke, Again to Janak’s child she spoke: “Hear, lady, hear the loud alarms That call the Rákshas troops to arms, From stable and from stall they lead The elephant and neighing steed, Brace harness on with deftest care, And chariots for the fight prepare. Swift o’er the trembling ground career Mailed horsemen armed with axe and spear, And here and there in road and street The terrible battalions meet. I hear the gathering near and far, The snorting steed, the rattling car. Bold chieftains, leaders of the brave, Press densely on, like wave on wave, And bright the evening sunbeams glance On helm and shield, on sword and lance. Hark, lady, to the ringing steel, Hark to the rolling chariot wheel: Hark to the mettled courser’s neigh And drums’ loud thunder far away. The Queen of Fortune holds thee dear, For Lanká’s troops are struck with fear, And Ráma with the lotus eyes, Like Indra monarch of the skies, With conquering arm will slay his foe And free his lady from her woe. Soon will his breast support thy head, And tears of joy thine eyes will shed. Soon by his mighty arm embraced The long-lost rapture wilt thou taste, And Ráma, meet for highest bliss, Will gain his guerdon in thy kiss.”




Canto XXXIV. Saramá’s Tidings.


Thus Saramá her story told: And Sítá’s spirit was consoled, As when the first fresh rain is shed The parching earth is comforted. Then, filled with zeal for Sítá’s sake, Again in gentle tones she spake, And, skilled in arts that soothe and please, Addressed the queen in words like these: “Thy husband, lady, will I seek, Say the fond words thy lips would speak, And then, unseen of any eye, Back to thy side will swiftly fly. My airy flights are speedier far Than Garuḍa’s and the tempest are.”

  Then Sítá spake: her former woe Still left her accents faint and low: “I know thy steps, which naught can stay, Can urge through heaven and hell their way. Then if thy love and changeless will Would serve the helpless captive still, Go forth and learn each plot and guile Planned by the lord of Lanká’s isle. With magic art like maddening wine He cheats these weeping eyes of mine, Torments me with his suit, nor spares Reproof or flattery, threats or prayers. These guards surround me night and day; My heart is sad, my senses stray; And helpless in my woe I fear The tyrant Rávaṇ even here.”

  Then Saramá replied: “I go To learn the purpose of thy foe, Soon by thy side again to stand And tell thee what the king has planned.” She sped, she heard with eager ears The tyrant speak his hopes and fears, Where, gathered at their master’s call, The nobles filled the council hall; Then swiftly, to her promise true, Back to the Aśoka grove she flew. The lady on the grassy ground, Longing for her return, she found; Who with a gentle smile, to greet The envoy, led her to a seat. Through her worn frame a shiver ran As Saramá her tale began: “There stood the royal mother: she Besought her son to set thee free, And to her counsel, tears and prayers, The elder nobles added theirs: “O be the Maithil queen restored With honour to her angry lord, Let Janasthán’s unhappy fight Be witness of the hero’s might. Hanúmán o’er the waters came And looked upon the guarded dame. Let Lanká’s chiefs who fought and fell The prowess of the leader tell.” In vain they sued, in vain she wept, His purpose still unchanged he kept, As clings the miser to his gold, He would not loose thee from his hold. No, never till in death he lies, Will Lanká’s lord release his prize. Soon slain by Ráma’s arrows all The giants with their king will fall, And Ráma to his home will lead His black-eyed queen from bondage freed.”

  An awful sound that moment rose From Lanká’s fast-approaching foes, Where drum and shell in mingled peal Made earth in terror rock and reel. The hosts within the walls arrayed Stood trembling, in their hearts dismayed; Thought of the tempest soon to burst, And Lanká’s lord, their ruin, cursed.




Canto XXXV. Malyaván’s Speech.


The fearful notes of drum and shell Upon the ear of Rávaṇ fell. One moment quailed his haughty look, One moment in his fear he shook, But soon recalling wonted pride, His counsellors he sternly eyed, And with a voice that thundered through The council hall began anew: “Lords, I have heard—your tongues have told— How Raghu’s son is fierce and bold. To Lanká’s shore has bridged his way And hither leads his wild array. I know your might, in battle tried, Fighting and conquering by my side. Why now, when such a foe is near, Looks eye to eye in silent fear?”

  He ceased, his mother’s sire well known For wisdom in the council shown, Malyaván, sage and faithful guide. Thus to the monarch’s speech replied: “Long reigns the king in safe repose, Unmoved by fear of vanquished foes, Whose feet by saving knowledge led In justice path delight to tread: Who knows to sheath the sword or wield, To order peace, to strike or yield: Prefers, when foes are stronger, peace, And bids a doubtful conflict cease. Now, King, the choice before thee lies, Make peace with Ráma, and be wise. This day the captive queen restore Who brings the foe to Lanká’s shore. The Sire by whom the worlds are swayed Of yore the Gods and demons made. With these Injustice sided; those Fair Justice for her champions chose. Still Justice dwells with Gods above; Injustice, fiends and giants love. Thou, through the worlds that fear thee, long Hast scorned the right and loved the wrong, And Justice, with thy foes allied, Gives might resistless to their side. Thou, guided by thy wicked will, Hast found delight in deeds of ill, And sages in their holy rest Have trembled, by thy power oppressed. But they, who check each vain desire, Are clothed with might which burns like fire. In them the power and glory live Which zeal and saintly fervour give. Their constant task, their sole delight Is worship and each holy rite, To chant aloud the Veda hymn, Nor let the sacred fires grow dim. Now through the air like thunder ring The echoes of the chants they sing. The vapours of their incense rise And veil with cloudy pall the skies, And Rákshas might grows weak and faint Killed by the power of sage and saint. By Brahmá’s boon thy life was screened From God, Gandharva, Yaksha, fiend; But Vánars, men, and bears, arrayed Against thee now, thy shores invade. Red meteors, heralds of despair Flash frequent through the lurid air, Foretelling to my troubled mind The ruin of the Rákshas kind. With awful thundering overhead Clouds black as night are densely spread, And oozing from the gloomy pall Great drops of blood on Lanká fall. Dogs roam through house and shrine to steal The sacred oil and curd and meal, Cats pair with tigers, hounds with swine, And asses’ foals are born of kine. In these and countless signs I trace The ruin of the giant race. ’Tis Vishṇu’s self who comes to storm Thy city, clothed in Ráma’s form; For, well I ween, no mortal hand The ocean with a bridge has spanned. O giant King, the dame release, And sue to Raghu’s son for peace”




Canto XXXVI. Rávan’s Reply.


But Rávaṇ’s breast with fury swelled, And thus he spake by Death impelled, While, under brows in anger bent, Fierce glances from his eyes were sent: “The bitter words which thou, misled By friendly thought, hast fondly said, Which praise the foe and counsel fear, Unheeded fall upon mine ear. How canst thou deem a mighty foe This Ráma who, in stress of woe, Seeks, banished as his sire decreed, Assistance from the Vánar breed? Am I so feeble in thine eyes, Though feared by dwellers of the skies,— Whose might in many a battle shown The glorious race of giants own? Shall I for fear of him restore The lady whom I hither bore, Exceeding fair like Beauty’s Queen(944) Without her well-loved lotus seen? Around the chief let Lakshmaṇ stand, Sugríva, and each Vánar band, Soon, Malyaván, thine eyes will see This boasted Ráma slain by me. I in the brunt of war defy The mightiest warriors of the sky; And if I stoop to combat men, Shall I be weak and tremble then? This mangled trunk the foe may rend, But Rávaṇ ne’er can yield or bend, And be it vice or virtue, I This nature never will belie. What marvel if he bridged the sea? Why should this deed disquiet thee? This, only this, I surely know, Back with his life he shall not go.”

  Thus in loud tones the king exclaimed, And mute stood Malyaván ashamed, His reverend head he humbly bent, And slowly to his mansion went. But Rávaṇ stayed, and deep in care Held counsel with his nobles there, All entrance to secure and close, And guard the city from their foes. He bade the chief Prahasta wait, Commander at the eastern gate, To fierce Mahodar, strong and brave, To keep the southern gate, he gave, Where Mahápárśva’s might should aid The chieftain with his hosts arrayed. To guard the west—no chief more fit— He placed the warrior Indrajít, His son, the giant’s joy and boast, Surrounded by a Rákshas host: And mighty Sáraṇ hastened forth With Śuka to protect the north.(945) “I will myself,” the monarch cried, “Be present on the northern side.” These orders for the walls’ defence The tyrant gave, then parted thence, And, by the hope of victory fired, To chambers far within, retired.




Canto XXXVII. Preparations.


Lords of the legions of the wood, The chieftains with Vibhishaṇ stood, And, strangers in the foeman’s land, Their hopes and fears in council scanned:

  “See, see where Lanká’s towers ascend, Which Rávaṇ’s power and might defend, Which Gods, Gandharvas, fiends would fail To conquer, if they durst assail. How shall our legions pass within, The city of the foe to win, With massive walls and portals barred Which Rávaṇ keeps with surest guard?” With anxious looks the walls they eyed: And sage Vibhishaṇ thus replied: “These lords of mine(946) can answer: they Within the walls have found their way, The foeman’s plan and order learned, And hither to my side returned. Now, Ráma, let my tongue declare How Rávaṇ’s hosts are stationed there. Prahasta heads, in warlike state, His legions at the eastern gate. To guard the southern portal stands Mahodar, girt by Rákshas bands, Where mighty Mahápárśva, sent By Rávaṇ’s hest, his aid has lent. Guard of the gate that fronts the west Is valiant Indrajít, the best Of warriors, Rávaṇ’s joy and pride; And by the youthful chieftain’s side Are giants, armed for fierce attacks With sword and mace and battle-axe. North, where approach is dreaded most, The king, encompassed with a host Of giants trained in war, whose hands Wield maces, swords and lances, stands. All these are chiefs whom Rávaṇ chose As mightiest to resist his foes; And each a countless army(947) leads With elephants and cars and steeds.”

  Then Ráma, while his spirit burned For battle, words like these returned: “The eastern gate be Níla’s care, Opponent of Prahasta there. The southern gate, with troops arrayed Let Angad, Báli’s son, invade. The gate that fronts the falling sun Shall be by brave Hanúmán won; Soon through its portals shall he lead His myriads of Vánar breed. The gate that fronts the north shall be Assailed by Lakshmaṇ and by me, For I myself have sworn to kill The tyrant who delights in ill. Armed with the boon which Brahmá gave, The Gods of heaven he loves to brave, And through the trembling worlds he flies, Oppressor of the just and wise. Thou, Jámbaván, and thou, O King Of Vánars, all your bravest bring, And with your hosts in dense array Straight to the centre force your way. But let no Vánar in the storm Disguise him in a human form, Ye chiefs who change your shapes at will, Retain your Vánar semblance still. Thus, when we battle with the foe, Both men and Vánars will ye know, In human form will seven appear; Myself, my brother Lakshmaṇ here; Vibhishaṇ, and the four he led From Lanká’s city when he fled.”

  Thus Raghu’s son the chiefs addressed: Then, gazing on Suvela’s crest, Transported by the lovely sight, He longed to climb the mountain height.




Canto XXXVIII. The Ascent Of Suvela.


“Come let us scale,” the hero cried, “This hill with various metals dyed. This night upon the breezy crest Sugríva, Lakshmaṇ, I, will rest, With sage Vibhishaṇ, faithful friend, His counsel and his lore to lend. From those tall peaks each eager eye The foeman’s city shall espy, Who from the wood my darling stole And brought long anguish on my soul.”

  Thus spake the lord of men, and bent His footsteps to the steep ascent, And Lakshmaṇ, true in weal and woe, Next followed with his shafts and bow. Vibhishaṇ followed, next in place, The sovereign of the Vánar race, And hundreds of the forest kind Thronged with impetuous feet, behind. The chiefs in woods and mountains bred Fast followed to Suvela’s head, And gazed on Lanká bright and fair As some gay city in the air. On glittering gates, on ramparts raised By giant hands, the chieftains gazed. They saw the mighty hosts that, skilled In arts of war, the city filled, And ramparts with new ramparts lined, The swarthy hosts that stood behind. With spirits burning for the fight They saw the giants from the height, And from a hundred throats rang out Defiance and the battle shout. Then sank the sun with dying flame, And soft the shades of twilight came, And the full moon’s delicious light Was shed upon the tranquil night.




Canto XXXIX. Lanká.


They slept secure: the sun arose And called the chieftains from repose. Before the wondering Vánars, gay With grove and garden, Lanká lay, Where golden buds the Champak showed, And bright with bloom Aśoka glowed, And palm and Sál and many a tree With leaf and flower were fair to see. They looked on wood and lawn and glade, On emerald grass and dusky shade, Where creepers filled the air with scent, And luscious fruit the branches bent, Where bees inebriate loved to throng, And each sweet bird was loud in song. The wondering Vánars passed the bound That circled that enchanting ground, And as they came a sweet breeze through The odorous alleys softly blew. Some Vánars, at their king’s behest, Onward to bannered Lanká pressed, While, startled by the strangers’ tread, The birds and deer before them fled. Earth trembled at each step they took, And Lanká at their shouting shook. Bright rose before their wondering eyes Trikúṭa’s peak that kissed the skies, And, clothed with flowers of every hue, Afar its golden radiance threw. Most fair to see the mountain’s head A hundred leagues in length was spread. There Rávaṇ’s town, securely placed, The summit of Trikúṭa graced. O’er leagues of land she stretched in pride, A hundred long and twenty wide. They saw a lofty wall enfold The city, built of blocks of gold, They saw the beams of morning fall On dome and fane within the wall, Bright with the shine that mansion gives Where Vishṇu in his glory lives. White-crested like the Lord of Snows Before them Rávaṇ’s palace rose. High on a thousand pillars raised With gold and precious stone it blazed, Guarded by giant warders, crown And ornament of Lanká’s town.




Canto XL. Rávan Attacked.


Still stood the son of Raghu where Suvela’s peak rose high in air, And with Sugríva turned his eye To scan each quarter of the sky. There on Trikúṭa, nobly planned And built by Viśvakarmá’s hand, He saw the lovely Lanká, dressed In all her varied beauty, rest. High on a tower above the gate The tyrant stood in kingly state. The royal canopy displayed Above him lent its grateful shade, And servants, from the giant band, His cheek with jewelled chowries fanned. Red sandal o’er his breast was spread, His ornaments and robe were red: Thus shows a cloud of darksome hue With golden sunbeams flashing through. While Ráma and the chiefs intent Upon the king their glances bent, Up sprang Sugríva from the ground And reached the turret at a bound. Unterrified the Vánar stood, And wroth, with wondrous hardihood, The king in bitter words addressed, And thus his scorn and hate expressed:

  “King of the giant race, in me The friend and slave of Ráma see. Lord of the world, he gives me power To smite thee in thy fenced tower.” While through the air his challenge rang, At Rávaṇ’s face the Vánar sprang. Snatched from his head the kingly crown And dashed it in his fury down. Straight at his foe the giant flew, His mighty arms about him threw. With strength resistless swung him round And dashed him panting to the ground. Unharmed amid the storm of blows Swift to his feet Sugríva rose. Again in furious fight they met: With streams of blood their limbs were wet, Each grasping his opponent’s waist. Thus with their branches interlaced, Which, crimson with the flowers of spring, From side to side the breezes swing, In furious wrestle you may see The Kinśuk and the Seemal tree.(948) They fought with fists and hands, alike Prepared to parry and to strike. Long time the doubtful combat, waged With matchless strength and fury, raged. Each fiercely struck, each guarded well, Till, closing, from the tower they fell, And, grasping each the other’s throat, Lay for an instant in the moat. They rose, and each in fiercer mood The sanguinary strife renewed. Well matched in size and strength and skill They fought the dubious battle still. While sweat and blood their limbs bedewed They met, retreated, and pursued: Each stratagem and art they tried, Stood front to front and swerved aside. His hand a while the giant stayed And called his magic to his aid. But brave Sugríva, swift to know The guileful purpose of the foe, Gained with light leap the upper air, And breath and strength and spirit there; Then, joyous as for victory won, Returned to Raghu’s royal son.




Canto XLI. Ráma’s Envoy.


When Ráma saw each bloody trace On King Sugríva’s limbs and face, He cried, while, sorrowing at the view, His arms about his friend he threw: “Too venturous chieftain, kings like us Bring not their lives in peril thus; Nor, save when counsel shows the need, Attempt so bold, so rash a deed. Remember, I, Vibhishaṇ all Have sorrowed fearing for thy fall. O do not—for us all I speak— These desperate adventures seek.” “I could not,” cried Sugríva, “brook Upon the giant king to look, Nor challenge to the deadly strife The fiend who robbed thee of thy wife.” “Now Lakshmaṇ, marshal,” Ráma cried, “Our legions where the woods are wide, And stand we ready to oppose The fury of our giant foes. This day our armies shall ascend The walls which Rávaṇ’s powers defend, And floods of Rákshas blood shall stain The streets encumbered with the slain.” Down from the peak he came, and viewed The Vánars’ ordered multitude. Each captain there for battle burned, Each fiery eye to Lanká turned. On, where the royal brothers led To Lanká’s walls the legions sped. The northern gate, where giant foes Swarmed round their monarch, Ráma chose Where he in person might direct The battle, and his troops protect. What arm but his the post might keep Where, strong as he who sways the deep,(949) Mid thousands armed with bow and mace, Stood Rávaṇ mightiest of his race? The eastern gate was Níla’s post, Where marshalled stood his Vánar host, And Mainda with his troops arrayed, And Dwivid stood to lend him aid. The southern gate was Angad’s care, Who ranged his bold battalions there. Hanúmán by the port that faced The setting sun his legions placed, And King Sugríva held the wood East of the gate where Rávaṇ stood. On every side the myriads met, And Lanká’s walls of close beset That scarce the roving gale could win A passage to the hosts within. Loud as the angry ocean’s roar When wild waves lash the rocky shore, Ten thousand thousand throats upsent A shout that tore the firmament, And Lanká with each grove and brook And tower and wall and rampart shook. The giants heard, and were appalled: Then Raghu’s son to Angad called, And, led by kingly duty,(950) gave This order merciful as brave: “Go, Angad, Rávaṇ’s presence seek, And thus my words of warning speak: “How art thou changed and fallen now, O Monarch of the giants, thou Whose impious fury would not spare Saint, nymph, or spirit of the air; Whose foot in haughty triumph trod On Yaksha, king, and Serpent God: How art thou fallen from thy pride Which Brahmá’s favour fortified! With myriads at thy Lanká’s gate I stand my righteous ire to sate, And punish thee with sword and flame, The tyrant fiend who stole my dame. Now show the might, employ the guile, O Monarch of the giants’ isle, Which stole a helpless dame away: Call up thy power and strength to-day. Once more I warn thee, Rákshas King, This hour the Maithil lady bring, And, yielding while there yet is time, Seek, suppliant, pardon for the crime, Or I will leave beneath the sun No living Rákshas, no, not one. In vain from battle wilt thou fly, Or borne on pinions seek the sky; The hand of Ráma shall not spare; His fiery shaft shall smite thee there.’ ”

  He ceased: and Angad bowed his head; Thence like embodied flame he sped, And lighted from his airy road Within the Rákshas king’s abode. There sate, the centre of a ring Of counsellors, the giant king. Swift through the circle Angad pressed, And spoke with fury in his breast: “Sent by the lord of Kośal’s land, His envoy here, O King, I stand, Angad the son of Báli: fame Has haply taught thine ears my name. Thus in the words of Ráma I Am come to warn thee or defy: Come forth, and fighting in the van Display the spirit of a man. This arm shall slay thee, tyrant: all Thy nobles, kith and kin shall fall: And earth and heaven, from terror freed, Shall joy to see the oppressor bleed. Vibhishaṇ, when his foe is slain, Anointed king in peace shall reign. Once more I counsel thee: repent, Avoid the mortal punishment, With honour due the dame restore, And pardon for thy sin implore.”

  Loud rose the king’s infuriate cry: “Seize, seize the Vánar, let him die.” Four of his band their lord obeyed, And eager hands on Angad laid. He purposing his strength to show Gave no resistance to the foe, But swiftly round his captors cast His mighty arms and held them fast. Fierce shout and cry around him rang: Light to the palace roof he sprang, There his detaining arms unwound, And hurled the giants to the ground. Then, smiting with a fearful stroke, A turret from the roof he broke,— As when the fiery levin sent By Indra from the clouds has rent The proud peak of the Lord of Snow,— And flung the stony mass below. Again with loud terrific cry He sprang exulting to the sky, And, joyous for his errand done, Stood by the side of Raghu’s son.




Canto XLII. The Sally.


Still was the cry, “The Vánar foes Around the leaguered city close.” King Rávaṇ from the terrace gazed And saw, with eyes where fury blazed, The Vánar host in serried ranks Press to the moat and line the banks, And, first in splendour and in place, The lion lord of Raghu’s race. And Ráma looked on Lanká where Gay flags were streaming to the air, And, while keen sorrow pierced him through, His loving thoughts to Sítá flew: “There, there in deep affliction lies My darling with the fawn-like eyes. There on the cold bare ground she keeps Sad vigil and for Ráma weeps.” Mad with the thought, “Charge, charge,” he cried. “Let earth with Rákshas blood be dyed.”

  Responsive to his call rang out A loud, a universal shout, As myriads filled the moat with stone, Trees, rocks, and mountains overthrown, And charging at their leader’s call Pressed forward furious to the wall. Some in their headlong ardour scaled The rampart’s height, the guard assailed, And many a ponderous fragment rent From portal, tower, and battlement. Huge gates adorned with burnished gold Were loosed and lifted from their hold; And post and pillar, with a sound Like thunder, fell upon the ground. At every portal, east and west And north and south, the chieftains pressed Each in his post appointed led His myriads in the forest bred.

  “Charge, let the gates be opened wide: Charge, charge, my giants,” Rávaṇ cried. They heard his voice, and loud and long Rang the wild clamour of the throng, And shell and drum their notes upsent, And every martial instrument. Forth, at the bidding of their lord From every gate the giants poured, As, when the waters rise and swell, Huge waves preceding waves impel. Again from every Vánar throat A scream of fierce defiance smote The welkin: earth and sea and sky Reëchoed with the awful cry. The roar of elephants, the neigh Of horses eager for the fray. The frequent clash of warriors’ steel, The rattling of the chariot wheel. Fierce was the deadly fight: opposed In terrible array they closed, As when the Gods of heaven enraged With rebel fiends wild battle waged. Axe, spear, and mace were wielded well: At every blow a Vánar fell. But shivered rock and brandished tree Brought many a giant on his knee, To perish in his turn beneath The deadly wounds of nails and teeth.




Canto XLIII. The Single Combats.


Brave chiefs of each opposing side Their strength in single combat tried. Fierce Indrajít the fight began With Angad in the battle’s van. Sampáti, strongest of his race, Stood with Prajangha face to face. Hanúmán, Jambumáli met In mortal opposition set. Vibhishaṇ, brother of the lord Of Lanká, raised his threatening sword And singled out, with eyes aglow With wrath, Śatrughna for his foe. The mighty Gaja Tapan sought, And Níla with Nikumbha fought. Sugríva, Vánar king, defied Fierce Praghas long in battle tried, And Lakshmaṇ fearless in the fight Encountered Vírúpáksha’s might. To meet the royal Ráma came Wild Agniketu fierce as flame; Mitraghana, he who loved to strike His foeman and his friend alike: With Raśmiketu, known and feared Where’er his ponderous flag was reared; And Yajnakopa whose delight Was ruin of the sacred rite. These met and fought, with thousands more, And trampled earth was red with gore. Swift as the bolt which Indra sends When fire from heaven the mountain rends Smote Indrajít with furious blows On Angad queller of his foes. But Angad from his foeman tore The murderous mace the warrior bore, And low in dust his coursers rolled, His driver, and his car of gold. Struck by the shafts Prajangha sped, The Vánar chief Sampáti bled, But, heedless of his gashes he Crushed down the giant with a tree. Then car-borne Jambumáli smote Hanumán on the chest and throat; But at the car the Vánar rushed, And chariot, steeds, and rider crushed. Sugríva whirled a huge tree round, And struck fierce Praghas to the ground. One arrow shot from Lakshmaṇ’s bow Laid mighty Vírúpáksha low. His giant foes round Ráma pressed And shot their shafts at head and breast; But, when the iron shower was spent, Four arrows from his bow he sent, And every missile, deftly sped; Cleft from the trunk a giant head.(951)




Canto XLIV. The Night.


The lord of Light had sunk and set: Night came; the foeman struggled yet; And fiercer for the gloom of night Grew the wild fury of the fight. Scarce could each warrior’s eager eye The foeman from the friend descry. “Rákshas or Vánar? say;” cried each, And foe knew foeman by his speech. “Why wilt thou fly? O warrior, stay: Turn on the foe, and rend and slay:” Such were the cries, such words of fear Smote through the gloom each listening ear. Each swarthy rover of the night Whose golden armour flashed with light, Showed like a towering hill embraced By burning woods about his waist. The giants at the Vánars flew, And ravening ate the foes they slew: With mortal bite like serpent’s fang, The Vánars at the giants sprang, And car and steeds and they who bore The pennons fell bedewed with gore. No serried band, no firm array The fury of their charge could stay. Down went the horse and rider, down Went giant lords of high renown. Though midnight’s shade was dense and dark, With skill that swerved not from the mark Their bows the sons of Raghu drew, And each keen shaft a chieftain slew. Uprose the blinding dust from meads Ploughed by the cars and trampling steeds, And where the warriors fell the flood Was dark and terrible with blood. Six giants(952) singled Ráma out, And charged him with a furious shout Loud as the roaring of the sea When every wind is raging free. Six times he shot: six heads were cleft; Six giants dead on earth were left. Nor ceased he yet: his bow he strained, And from the sounding weapon rained A storm of shafts whose fiery glare Filled all the region of the air; And chieftains dropped before his aim Like moths that perish in the flame. Earth glistened where the arrows fell, As shines in autumn nights a dell Which fireflies, flashing through the gloom, With momentary light illume.

  But Indrajít, when Báli’s son(953) The victory o’er the foe had won, Saw with a fury-kindled eye His mangled steeds and driver die; Then, lost in air, he fled the fight, And vanished from the victor’s sight. The Gods and saints glad voices raised, And Angad for his virtue praised; And Raghu’s sons bestowed the meed Of honour due to valorous deed.

  Compelled his shattered car to quit, Rage filled the soul of Indrajít, Who brooked not, strong by Brahmá’s grace Defeat from one of Vánar race. In magic mist concealed from view His bow the treacherous warrior drew, And Raghu’s sons were first to feel The tempest of his winged steel. Then when his arrows failed to kill The princes who defied him still, He bound them with the serpent noose,(954) The magic bond which none might loose.




Canto XLV. Indrajít’s Victory.


Brave Ráma, burning still to know The station of his artful foe, Gave to ten chieftains, mid the best Of all the host, his high behest. Swift rose in air the Vánar band: Each region of the sky they scanned: But Rávaṇ’s son by magic skill Checked them with arrows swifter still, When streams of blood from chest and side The dauntless Vánars’ limbs had dyed, The giant in his misty shroud Showed like the sun obscured by cloud. Like serpents hissing through the air, His arrows smote the princely pair; And from their limbs at every rent A stream of rushing blood was sent. Like Kinśuk trees they stood, that show In spring their blossoms’ crimson glow. Then Indrajít with fury eyed Ikshváku’s royal sons, and cried:

  “Not mighty Indra can assail Or see me when I choose to veil My form in battle: and can ye, Children of earth, contend with me? The arrowy noose this hand has shot Has bound you with a hopeless knot; And, slaughtered by my shafts and bow, To Yáma’s hall this hour ye go.”

  He spoke, and shouted. Then anew The arrows from his bowstring flew, And pierced, well aimed with perfect art, Each limb and joint and vital part. Transfixed with shafts in every limb, Their strength relaxed, their eyes grew dim. As two tall standards side by side, With each sustaining rope untied, Fall levelled by the howling blast, So earth’s majestic lords at last Beneath the arrowy tempest reeled, And prostrate pressed the battle field.




Canto XLVI. Indrajít’s Triumph.


The Vánar chiefs whose piercing eyes Scanned eagerly the earth and skies, Saw the brave brothers wounded sore Transfixed with darts and stained with gore. The monarch of the Vánar race, With wise Vibhishaṇ, reached the place; Angad and Níla came behind, And others of the forest kind, And standing with Hanúmán there Lamented for the fallen pair. Their melancholy eyes they raised; In fruitless search a while they gazed. But magic arts Vibhishaṇ knew; Not hidden from his keener view, Though veiled by magic from the rest, The son of Rávaṇ stood confessed. Fierce Indrajít with savage pride The fallen sons of Raghu eyed, And every giant heart was proud As thus the warrior cried aloud:

  “Slain by mine arrows Ráma lies, And closed in death are Lakshmaṇ’s eyes. Dead are the mighty princes who Dúshaṇ and Khara smote and slew. The Gods and fiends may toil in vain To free them from the binding chain. The haughty chief, my father’s dread, Who drove him sleepless from his bed, While Lanká, troubled like a brook In rain time, heard his name and shook: He whose fierce hate our lives pursued Lies helpless by my shafts subdued. Now fruitless is each wondrous deed Wrought by the race the forests breed, And fruitless every toil at last Like cloudlets when the rains are past.” Then rose the shout of giants loud As thunder from a bursting cloud, When, deeming Ráma, dead, they raised Their voices and the conqueror praised.

  Still motionless, as lie the slain, The brothers pressed the bloody plain, No sigh they drew, no breath they heaved, And lay as though of life bereaved. Proud of the deed his art had done, To Lanká’s town went Rávaṇ’s son, Where, as he passed, all fear was stilled, And every heart with triumph filled. Sugríva trembled as he viewed Each fallen prince with blood bedewed, And in his eyes which overflowed With tears the flame of anger glowed. “Calm,” cried Vibhishaṇ, “calm thy fears, And stay the torrent of thy tears. Still must the chance of battle change, And victory still delight to range. Our cause again will she befriend And bring us triumph in the end. This is not death: each prince will break The spell that holds him, and awake; Nor long shall numbing magic bind The mighty arm, the lofty mind.”

  He ceased: his finger bathed in dew Across Sugríva’s eyes he drew; From dulling mist his vision freed, And spoke these words to suit the need: “No time is this for fear: away With fainting heart and weak delay. Now, e’en the tear which sorrow wrings From loving eyes destruction brings. Up, on to battle at the head Of those brave troops which Ráma led. Or guardian by his side remain Till sense and strength the prince regain. Soon shall the trance-bound pair revive, And from our hearts all sorrow drive. Though prostrate on the earth he lie, Deem not that Ráma’s death is nigh; Deem not that Lakshmí will forget Or leave her darling champion yet. Rest here and be thy heart consoled; Ponder my words, be firm and bold. I, foremost in the battlefield, Will rally all who faint or yield. Their staring eyes betray their fear; They whisper each in other’s ear. They, when they hear my cheering cry And see the friend of Ráma nigh, Will cast their gloom and fears away Like faded wreaths of yesterday.”

  Thus calmed he King Sugríva’s dread; Then gave new heart to those who fled. Fierce Indrajít, his soul on fire With pride of conquest, sought his sire, Raised reverent hands, and told him all, The battle and the princes’ fall. Rejoicing at his foes’ defeat Upsprang the monarch from his seat, Girt by his giant courtiers: round His warrior son his arms he wound, Close kisses on his head applied, And heard again how Ráma died.




Canto XLVII. Sítá.


Still on the ground where Ráma slept Their faithful watch the Vánars kept. There Angad stood o’erwhelmed with grief And many a lord and warrior chief; And, ranged in densest mass around, Their tree-armed legions held the ground. Far ranged each Vánar’s eager eye, Now swept the land, now sought the sky, All fearing, if a leaf was stirred, A Rákshas in the sound they heard. The lord of Lanká in his hall, Rejoicing at his foeman’s fall, Commanded and the warders came Who ever watched the Maithil dame. “Go,” cried the Rákshas king, “relate To Janak’s child her husband’s fate. Low on the earth her Ráma lies, And dark in death are Lakshmaṇ’s eyes. Bring forth my car and let her ride To view the chieftains side by side. The lord to whom her fancy turned For whose dear sake my love she spurned, Lies smitten, as he fiercely led The battle, with his brother dead. Lead forth the royal lady: go Her husband’s lifeless body show. Then from all doubt and terror free Her softening heart will turn to me.”

  They heard his speech: the car was brought; That shady grove the warders sought Where, mourning Ráma night and day, The melancholy lady lay. They placed her in the car and through The yielding air they swiftly flew. The lady looked upon the plain, Looked on the heaps of Vánar slain, Saw where, triumphant in the fight, Thronged the fierce rovers of the night, And Vánar chieftains, mournful-eyed, Watched by the fallen brothers’ side. There stretched upon his gory bed Each brother lay as lie the dead, With shattered mail and splintered bow Pierced by the arrows of the foe. When on the pair her eyes she bent, Burst from her lips a wild lament Her eyes o’erflowed, she groaned and sighed And thus in trembling accents cried:




Canto XLVIII. Sítá’s Lament.


“False are they all, proved false to-day, The prophets of my fortune, they Who in the tranquil time of old A blessed life for me foretold, Predicting I should never know A childless dame’s, a widow’s woe, False are they all, their words are vain, For thou, my lord and life, art slain. False was the priest and vain his lore Who blessed me in those days of yore By Ráma’s side in bliss to reign: For thou, my lord and life, art slain. They hailed me happy from my birth, Proud empress of the lord of earth. They blessed me—but the thought is pain— For thou, my lord and life, art slain. Ah, fruitless hope! each glorious sign That stamps the future queen is mine, With no ill-omened mark to show A widow’s crushing hour of woe. They say my hair is black and fine, They praise my brows’ continuous line; My even teeth divided well, My bosom for its graceful swell. They praise my feet and fingers oft; They say my skin is smooth and soft, And call me happy to possess The twelve fair marks that bring success.(955) But ah, what profit shall I gain? Thou, O my lord and life, art slain. The flattering seer in former days My gentle girlish smile would praise, And swear that holy water shed By Bráhman hands upon my head Should make me queen, a monarch’s bride: How is the promise verified? Matchless in might the brothers slew In Janasthán the giant crew. And forced the indomitable sea To let them pass to rescue me. Theirs was the fiery weapon hurled By him who rules the watery world;(956) Theirs the dire shaft by Indra sped; Theirs was the mystic Brahmá’s Head.(957) In vain they fought, the bold and brave: A coward’s hand their death-wounds gave. By secret shafts and magic spell The brothers, peers of Indra, fell. That foe, if seen by Ráma’s eye One moment, had not lived to fly. Though swift as thought, his utmost speed Had failed him in the hour of need. No might, no tear, no prayer may stay Fate’s dark inevitable day. Nor could their matchless valour shield These heroes on the battle field. I sorrow for the noble dead, I mourn my hopes for ever fled; But chief my weeping eyes o’erflow For Queen Kauśalyá’s hopeless woe. The widowed queen is counting now Each hour prescribed by Ráma’s vow, And lives because she longs to see Once more her princely sons and me.”

  Then Trijaṭá,(958) of gentler mould Though Rákshas born, her grief consoled: “Dear Queen, thy causeless woe dispel: Thy husband lives, and all is well. Look round: in every Vánar face The light of joyful hope I trace. Not thus, believe me, shine the eyes Of warriors when their leader dies. An Army, when the chief is dead, Flies from the field dispirited. Here, undisturbed in firm array, The Vánars by the brothers stay. Love prompts my speech; no longer grieve; Ponder my counsel, and believe. These lips of mine from earliest youth Have spoken, and shall speak, the truth. Deep in my heart thy gentle grace And patient virtues hold their place. Turn, lady, turn once more thine eye: Though pierced with shafts the heroes lie, On brows and cheeks with blood-drops wet The light of beauty lingers yet. Such beauty ne’er is found in death, But vanishes with parting breath. O, trust the hope these tokens give: The heroes are not dead, but live.”

  Then Sítá joined her hands, and sighed, “O, may thy words be verified!” The car was turned, which fleet as thought The mourning queen to Lanká brought. They led her to the garden, where Again she yielded to despair, Lamenting for the chiefs who bled On earth’s cold bosom with the dead.




Canto XLIX. Ráma’s Lament.


Ranged round the spot where Ráma fell Each Vánar chief stood sentinel. At length the mighty hero broke The trance that held him, and awoke. He saw his senseless brother, dyed With blood from head to foot, and cried: “What have I now to do with life Or rescue of my prisoned wife, When thus before my weeping eyes, Slain in the fight, my brother lies? A queen like Sítá I may find Among the best of womankind, But never such a brother, tried In war, my guardian, friend, and guide. If he be dead, the brave and true, I will not live but perish too. How, reft of Lakshmaṇ, shall I meet My mother, and Kaikeyí greet? My brother’s eager question brook, And fond Sumitrá’s longing look? What shall I say, o’erwhelmed with shame To cheer the miserable dame? How, when she hears her son is dead, Will her sad heart be comforted? Ah me, for longer life unfit This mortal body will I quit; For Lakshmaṇ slaughtered for my sake, From sleep of death will never wake. Ah when I sank oppressed with care, Thy gentle voice could soothe despair. And art thou, O my brother, killed? Is that dear voice for ever stilled? Cold are those lips, my brother, whence Came never word to breed offence? Ah stretched upon the gory plain My brother lies untimely slain: Numbed is the mighty arm that slew The leaders of the giant crew. Transfixed with shafts, with blood-streams red, Thou liest on thy lowly bed: So sinks to rest, his journey done, Mid arrowy rays the crimson sun. Thou, when from home and sire I fled, The wood’s wild ways with me wouldst tread: Now close to thine my steps shall be, For I in death will follow thee. Vibhishaṇ now will curse my name, And Ráma as a braggart blame, Who promised—but his word is vain— That he in Lanká’s isle should reign. Return, Sugríva: reft of me Lead back thy Vánars o’er the sea, Nor hope to battle face to face With him who rules the giant race. Well have ye done and nobly fought, And death in desperate combat sought. All that heroic might can do, Brave Vánars, has been done by you. My faithful friends I now dismiss: Return: my last farewell is this.”

  Bedewed with tears was every cheek As thus the Vánars heard him speak. Vibhishaṇ on the field had stayed The Vánar hosts who fled dismayed. Now lifting up his mace on high With martial step the chief drew nigh. The hosts who watched by Ráma’s side Beheld his shape and giant stride. ’Tis he, ’tis Rávaṇ’s son, they thought: And all in flight their safety sought.




Canto L. The Broken Spell.


Sugríva viewed the flying crowd, And thus to Angad cried aloud: “Why run the trembling hosts, as flee Storm-scattered barks across the sea?” “Dost thou not mark,” the chief replied, “Transfixed with shafts, with bloodstreams dyed, With arrowy toils about them wound, The sons of Raghu on the ground?”

  That moment brought Vibhishaṇ near. Sugríva knew the cause of fear, And ordered Jámbaván, who led The bears, to check the hosts that fled. The king of bears his hest obeyed: The Vánars’ headlong flight was stayed. A little while Vibhishaṇ eyed The brothers fallen side by side. His giant fingers wet with dew Across the heroes’ eyes he drew, Still on the pair his sad look bent, And spoke these word in wild lament: “Ah for the mighty chiefs brought low By coward hand and stealthy blow! Brave pair who loved the open fight, Slain by that rover of the night. Dishonest is the victory won By Indrajít my brother’s son. I on their might for aid relied, And in my cause they fought and died. Lost is the hope that soothed each pain: I live, but live no more to reign, While Lanká’s lord, untouched by ill, Exults in safe defiance still.”

  “Not thus,” Sugríva said, “repine, For Lanká’s isle shall still be thine. Nor let the tyrant and his son Exult before the fight be done. These royal chiefs, though now dismayed, Freed from the spell by Garuḍ’s aid, Triumphant yet the foe shall meet And lay the robber at their feet.”

  His hope the Vánar monarch told, And thus Vibhishaṇ’s grief consoled. Then to Susheṇ who at his side Expectant stood, Sugríva cried: “When these regain their strength and sense, Fly, bear them to Kishkindhá hence. Here with my legions will I stay, The tyrant and his kinsmen slay, And, rescued from the giant king, The Maithil lady will I bring, Like Glory lost of old, restored By Śakra, heaven’s almighty lord.”

  Susheṇ made answer: “Hear me yet: When Gods and fiends in battle met, So fiercely fought the demon crew, So wild a storm of arrows flew, That heavenly warriors faint with pain, Sank smitten by the ceaseless rain. Vṛihaspati,(959) with herb and spell, Cured the sore wounds of those who fell. And, skilled in arts that heal and save, New life and sense and vigour gave. Far, on the Milky Ocean’s shore, Still grow those herbs in boundless store; Let swiftest Vánars thither speed And bring them for our utmost need. Those herbs that on the mountain spring Let Panas and Sampáti bring, For well the wondrous leaves they know, That heal each wound and life bestow. Beside that sea which, churned of yore, The amrit on its surface bore, Where the white billows lash the land, Chandra’s fair height and Droṇa stand. Planted by Gods each glittering steep Looks down upon the milky deep. Let fleet Hanúmán bring us thence Those herbs of wondrous influence.”

  Meanwhile the rushing wind grew loud, Red lightnings flashed from banks of cloud. The mountains shook, the wild waves rose, And smitten with resistless blows Unrooted fell each stately tree That fringed the margin of the sea. All life within the waters feared Then, as the Vánars gazed, appeared King Garuḍ’s self, a wondrous sight, Disclosed in flames of fiery light. From his fierce eye in sudden dread All serpents in a moment fled. And those transformed to shaft that bound The princes vanished in the ground. On Raghu’s sons his eyes he bent, And hailed the lords armipotent. Then o’er them stooped the feathered king, And touched their faces with his wing. His healing touch their pangs allayed, And closed each rent the shafts had made. Again their eyes were bright and bold, Again the smooth skin shone like gold. Again within their shell enshrined Came memory and each power of mind: And, from those numbing bonds released, Their spirit, zeal, and strength increased. Firm on their feet they stood, and then Thus Ráma spake, the lord of men:

  “By thy dear grace in sorest need From deadly bonds we both are freed. To these glad eyes as welcome now As Aja(960) or my sire art thou. Who art thou, mighty being? say, Thus glorious in thy bright array.” He ceased: the king of birds replied, While flashed his eye with joy and pride: “In me, O Raghu’s son, behold One who has loved thee from of old: Garuḍ, the lord of all that fly, Thy guardian and thy friend am I. Not all the Gods in heaven could loose These numbing bonds, this serpent noose, Wherewith fierce Rávaṇ’s son, renowned For magic arts, your limbs had bound. Those arrows fixed in every limb Were mighty snakes, transformed by him. Blood thirsty race, they live beneath The earth, and slay with venomed teeth. On, smite the lord of Lanká’s isle, But guard you from the giants’ guile Who each dishonest art employ And by deceit brave foes destroy. So shall the tyrant Rávaṇ bleed, And Sítá from his power be freed.” Thus Garuḍ spake: then, swift as thought, The region of the sky he sought, Where in the distance like a blaze Of fire he vanished from the gaze.

  Then the glad Vánars’ joy rang out In many a wild tumultuous shout, And the loud roar of drum and shell Startled each distant sentinel.




Canto LI. Dhúmráksha’s Sally.


King Rávaṇ, where he sat within, Heard from his hall the deafening din, And with a spirit ill at ease Addressed his lords in words like these:

  “That warlike shout, those joyous cries, Loud as the thunder of the skies, Upsent from every Vánar throat, Some new-born confidence denote. Hark, how the sea and trembling shore Re-echo with the Vánars’ roar. Though arrowy chains, securely twined Both Ráma and his brother bind, Still must the fierce triumphant shout Disturb my soul with rising doubt. Swift envoys to the army send, And learn what change these cries portend.”

  Obedient, at their master’s call, Fleet giants clomb the circling wall. They saw the Vánars formed and led: They saw Sugríva at their head, The brothers from their bonds released: And hope grew faint and fear increased. Their faces pale with doubt and dread, Back to the giant king they sped, And to his startled ear revealed The tidings of the battle field.

  The flush of rage a while gave place To chilling fear that changed his face:

  “What?” cried the tyrant, “are my foes Freed from the binding snakes that close With venomed clasp round head and limb, Bright as the sun and fierce like him: The spell a God bestowed of yore, The spell that never failed before? If arts like these be useless, how Shall giant strength avail us now? Go forth, Dhúmráksha, good at need, The bravest of my warriors lead: Force through the foe thy conquering way, And Ráma and the Vánars slay.”

  Before his king with reverence due Dhúmráksha bowed him, and withdrew. Around him at his summons came Fierce legions led by chiefs of fame. Well armed with sword and spear and mace, They hurried to the gathering place, And rushed to battle, borne at speed By elephant and car and steed.




Canto LII. Dhúmráksha’s Death.


The Vánars saw the giant foe Pour from the gate in gallant show, Rejoiced with warriors’ fierce delight And shouted, longing for the fight. Near came the hosts and nearer yet: Dire was the tumult as they met, As, serried line to line opposed, The Vánars and the giants closed. Fierce on the foe the Vánars rushed, And, wielding trees, the foremost crushed; But, feathered from the heron’s wing, With eager flight from sounding string, Against them shot with surest aim A ceaseless storm of arrows came: And, pierced in head and chest and side, Full many a Vánar fell and died. They perished slain in fierce attacks With sword and pike and battle-axe; But myriads following undismayed Their valour in the fight displayed. Unnumbered Vánars rent and torn With shaft and spear to earth were borne. But crushed by branchy trees and blocks Of jagged stone and shivered rocks Which the wild Vánars wielded well The bravest of the giants fell. Their trampled banners strewed the fields, And broken swords and spears and shields; And, crushed by blows which none might stay, Cars, elephants, and riders lay. Dhúmráksha turned his furious eye And saw his routed legions fly. Still dauntless, with terrific blows, He struck and slew his foremost foes. At every blow, at every thrust, He laid a Vánar in the dust. So fell they neath the sword and lance In battle’s wild Gandharva(961) dance, Where clang of bow and clash of sword Did duty for the silvery chord, And hoofs that rang and steeds that neighed Loud concert for the dancers made. So fiercely from Dhúmráksha’s bow His arrows rained in ceaseless flow, The Vánar legions turned and fled To all the winds discomfited. Hanúmán saw the Vánars fly; He heaved a mighty rock on high. His keen eyes flashed with wrathful fire, And, rapid as the Wind his sire, Strong as the rushing tempests are, He hurled it at the advancing car. Swift through the air the missile sang: The giant from the chariot sprang, Ere crushed by that terrific blow Lay pole and wheel and flag and bow. Hanúmán’s eyes with fury blazed: A mountain’s rocky peak he raised, Poised it on high in act to throw, And rushed upon his giant foe. Dhúmráksha saw: he raised his mace And smote Hanúmán on the face, Who maddened by the wound’s keen pang Again upon his foeman sprang; And on the giant’s head the rock Descended with resistless shock. Crushed was each limb: a shapeless mass He lay upon the blood-stained grass.




Canto LIII. Vajradanshtra’s Sally.


When Rávaṇ in his palace heard The mournful news, his wrath was stirred; And, gasping like a furious snake, To Vajradanshṭra thus he spake:

  “Go forth, my fiercest captain, lead The bravest of the giants’ breed. Go forth, the sons of Raghu slay And by their side Sugríva lay.”

  He ceased: the chieftain bowed his head And forth with gathered troops he sped. Cars, camels, steeds were well arrayed, And coloured banners o’er them played. Rings decked his arms: about his waist The life-protecting mail was braced, And on the chieftain’s forehead set Glittered his cap and coronet. Borne on a bannered car that glowed With golden sheen the warrior rode, And footmen marched with spear and sword And bow and mace behind their lord. In pomp and pride of warlike state They sallied from the southern gate, But saw, as on their way they sped, Dread signs around and overhead. For there were meteors falling fast, Though not a cloud its shadow cast; And each ill-omened bird and beast, Forboding death, the fear increased, While many a giant slipped and reeled, Falling before he reached the field. They met in mortal strife engaged, And long and fierce the battle raged. Spears, swords uplifted, gleamed and flashed, And many a chief to earth was dashed. A ceaseless storm of arrows rained, And limbs were pierced and blood-distained. Terrific was the sound that filled The air, and every heart was chilled, As hurtling o’er the giants flew The rocks and trees which Vánars threw. Fierce as a hungry lion when Unwary deer approach his den, Angad, his eyes with fury red, Waving a tree above his head, Rushed with wild charge which none could stay Where stood the giants’ dense array. Like tall trees levelled by the blast Before him fell the giants fast, And earth that streamed with blood was strown With warriors, steeds, and cars o’erthrown.




Canto LIV. Vajradanshtra’s Death.


The giant leader fiercely rained His arrows and the fight maintained. Each time the clanging cord he drew His certain shaft a Vánar slew. Then, as the creatures he has made Fly to the Lord of Life for aid, To Angad for protection fled The Vánar hosts dispirited. Then raged the battle fiercer yet When Angad and the giant met. A hundred thousand arrows, hot With flames of fire, the giant shot; And every shaft he deftly sent His foeman’s body pierced and rent. From Angad’s limbs ran floods of gore: A stately tree from earth he tore, Which, maddened as his gashes bled, He hurled at his opponent’s head. His bow the dauntless giant drew; To meet the tree swift arrows flew, Checked the huge missile’s onward way, And harmless on the earth it lay. A while the Vánar chieftain gazed, Then from the earth a rock he raised Rent from a thunder-splitten height, And cast it with resistless might. The giant marked, and, mace in hand, Leapt from his chariot to the sand, Ere the rough mass descending broke The seat, the wheel, the pole and yoke.

  Then Angad seized a shattered hill, Whereon the trees were flowering still, And with full force the jagged peak Fell crashing on the giant’s cheek. He staggered, reeled, and fell: the blood Gushed from the giant in a flood. Reft of his might, each sense astray, A while upon the sand he lay. But strength and wandering sense returned Again his eyes with fury burned, And with his mace upraised on high He wounded Angad on the thigh. Then from his hand his mace he threw, And closer to his foeman drew. Then with their fists they fought, and smote On brow and cheek and chest and throat. Worn out with toil, their limbs bedewed, With blood, the strife they still renewed, Like Mercury and fiery Mars Met in fierce battle mid the stars.

  A while the deadly fight was stayed: Each armed him with his trusty blade Whose sheath with tinkling bells supplied, And golden net, adorned his side; And grasped his ponderous leather shield To fight till one should fall or yield. Unnumbered wounds they gave and took: Their wearied bodies reeled and shook. At length upon the sand that drank Streams of their blood the warriors sank, But as a serpent rears his head Sore wounded by a peasant’s tread, So Angad, fallen on his knees, Yet gathered strength his sword to seize; And, severed by the glittering blade, The giant’s head on earth was laid.

[I omit Cantos LV, LVI, LVII, and LVIII, which relate how Akampan and Prahasta sally out and fall. There is little novelty of incident in these Cantos and the results are exactly the same as before. In Canto LV, Akampan, at the command of Rávaṇ, leads forth his troops. Evil omens are seen and heard. The enemies meet, and many fall on each side, the Vánars transfixed with arrows, the Rákshases crushed with rocks and trees.

In Canto LVI Akampan sees that the Rákshases are worsted, and fights with redoubled rage and vigour. The Vánars fall fast under his “nets of arrows.” Hanumán comes to the rescue. He throws mountain peaks at the giant which are dexterously stopped with flights of arrows; and at last beats him down and kills him with a tree.

In Canto LVII, Rávaṇ is seriously alarmed. He declares that he himself, Kumbhakarṇa or Prahasta, must go forth. Prahasta sallies out vaunting that the fowls of the air shall eat their fill of Vánar flesh.

In Canto LVIII, the two armies meet. Dire is the conflict; ceaseless is the rain of stones and arrows. At last Níla meets Prahasta and breaks his bow. Prahasta leaps from his car, and the giant and the Vánar fight on foot. Níla with a huge tree crushes his opponent who falls like a tree when its roots are cut.]




Canto LIX. Rávan’s Sally.


They told him that the chief was killed, And Rávaṇ’s breast with rage was filled. Then, fiercely moved by wrath and pride, Thus to his lords the tyrant cried:

  “No longer, nobles, may we show This lofty scorn for such a foe By whom our bravest, with his train Of steeds and elephants, is slain. Myself this day will take the field, And Raghu’s sons their lives shall yield.”

  High on the royal car, that glowed With glory from his face, he rode; And tambour shell and drum pealed out, And joyful was each giant’s shout. A mighty host, with eyeballs red Like flames of kindled fire, he led. He passed the city gate, and viewed, Arrayed, the Vánar multitude, Those wielding massy rocks, and these Armed with the stems of uptorn trees, And Ráma with his eyes aglow With warlike ardour viewed the foe, And thus the brave Vibhishaṇ, best Of weapon-wielding chiefs, addressed: “What captain leads this bright array Where lances gleam and banners play, And thousands armed with spear and sword Await the bidding of their lord?”

  “Seest, thou,” Vibhishaṇ answered, “one Whose face is as the morning sun, Preëminent for hugest frame? Akampan(962) is the giant’s name. Behold that chieftain, chariot-borne, Whom Brahmá’s chosen gifts adorn. He wields a bow like Indra’s own; A lion on his flag is shown, His eyes with baleful fire are lit: ’Tis Rávaṇ’s son, ’tis Indrajít. There, brandishing in mighty hands His huge bow, Atikáya stands. And that proud warrior o’er whose head A moon-bright canopy is spread: Whose might, in many a battle tried, Has tamed imperial Indra’s pride; Who wears a crown of burnished gold, Is Lanká’s lord the lofty-souled.”

  He ceased: and Ráma knew his foe, And laid an arrow on his bow: “Woe to the wretch,” he cried, “whom fate Abandons to my deadly hate.” He spoke, and, firm by Lakshmaṇ’s side, The giant to the fray defied. The lord of Lanká bade his train Of warriors by the gates remain, To guard the city from surprise By Ráma’s forest born allies. Then as some monster of the sea Cleaves swift-advancing billows, he Charged with impetuous onset through The foe, and cleft the host in two. Sugríva ran, the king to meet: A hill uprooted from its seat He hurled, with trees that graced the height Against the rover of the night: But cleft with shafts that checked its way Harmless upon the earth it lay. Then fiercer Rávaṇ’s fury grew, An arrow from his side he drew, Swift as a thunderbolt, aglow With fire, and launched it at the foe. Through flesh and bone a way it found, And stretched Sugríva on the ground. Susheṇ and Nala saw him fall, Gaváksha, Gavaya heard their call, And, poising hills, in act to fling They charged amain the giant king. They charged, they hurled the hills in vain, He checked them with his arrowy rain, And every brave assailant felt The piercing wounds his missiles dealt, Then smitten by the shafts that came Keen, fleet, and thick, with certain aim, They fled to Ráma, sure defence Against the oppressor’s violence, Then, reverent palm to palm applied, Thus Lakshmaṇ to his brother cried: “To me, my lord, the task entrust To lay this giant in the dust.” “Go, then,” said Ráma, “bravely fight; Beat down this rover of the night. But he, unmatched in bold emprise, Fears not the Lord of earth and skies, Keep on thy guard: with keenest eye Thy moments of attack espy. Let hand and eye in due accord Protect thee with the bow and sword.”

  Then Lakshmaṇ round his brother threw His mighty arms in honour due, Bent lowly down his reverent head, And onward to the battle sped. Hanúmán from afar beheld How Rávaṇ’s shafts the Vánars quelled: To meet the giant’s car he ran, Raised his right arm and thus began: “If Brahmá’s boon thy life has screened From Yaksha, God, Gandharva, fiend, With these contending fear no ill, But tremble at a Vánar still.” With fury flashing from his eye The lord of Lanká made reply: “Strike, Vánar, strike: the fray begin, And hope eternal fame to win. This arm shall prove thee in the strife And end thy glory and thy life.” “Remember,” cried the Wind-God’s son, “Remember all that I have done, My prowess, King, thou knowest well, Shown in the fight when Aksha(963) fell.”

  With heavy hand the giant smote Hanúmán on the chest and throat, Who reeled and staggered to and fro, Stunned for a moment by the blow. Till, mustering strength, his hand he reared And struck the foe whom Indra feared. His huge limbs bent beneath the shock, As mountains, in an earthquake, rock, And from the Gods and sages pealed Shouts of loud triumph as he reeled. But strength returning nerved his frame: His eyeballs flashed with fiercer flame. No living creature might resist That blow of his tremendous fist Which fell upon Hanúmán’s flank: And to the ground the Vánar sank, No sign of life his body showed: And Rávaṇ in his chariot rode At Níla; and his arrowy rain Fell on the captain and his train. Fierce Níla stayed his Vánar band, And, heaving with his single hand A mountain peak, with vigorous swing Hurled the huge missile at the king.

  Hanúmán life and strength regained, Burned for the fight and thus complained: “Why, coward giant, didst thou flee And leave the doubtful fight with me?” Seven mighty arrows keen and fleet The giant launched, the hill to meet; And, all its force and fury stayed, The harmless mass on earth was laid. Enraged the Vánar chief beheld The mountain peak by force repelled, And rained upon the foe a shower Of trees uptorn with branch and flower. Still his keen shafts which pierced and rent Each flying tree the giant sent: Still was the Vánar doomed to feel The tempest of the winged steel. Then, smarting from that arrowy storm, The Vánar chief condensed his form,(964) And lightly leaping from the ground On Rávaṇ’s standard footing found; Then springing unimpeded down Stood on his bow and golden crown. The Vánar’s nimble leaps amazed Ikshváku’s son who stood and gazed. The giant, raging in his heart, Laid on his bow a fiery dart; The Vánar on his flagstaff eyed, And thus in tones of fury cried: “Well skilled in magic lore art thou: But will thine art avail thee now? See if thy magic will defend Thy life against the dart I send.”

  Thus Rávaṇ spake, the giant king, And loosed the arrow from the string. It pierced, with direst fury sped, The Vánar with its flaming head. His father’s might, his power innate Preserved him from the threatened fate. Upon his knees he fell, distained With streams of blood, but life remained.

  Still Rávaṇ for the battle burned: At Lakshmaṇ next his car he turned, And charged amain with furious show, Straining in mighty hands his bow. “Come,” Lakshmaṇ cried, “assay the fight: Leave foes unworthy of thy might.” Thus Lakshmaṇ spoke: and Lanká’s lord Heard the dread thunder of the cord. And mad with burning rage and pride In hasty words like these replied: “Joy, joy is mine, O Raghu’s son: Thy fate to-day thou canst not shun. Slain by mine arrows thou shalt tread The gloomy pathway of the dead.”

  Thus as he spoke his bow he drew, And seven keen shafts at Lakshmaṇ flew, But Raghu’s son with surest aim Cleft every arrow as it came. Thus with fleet shafts each warrior shot Against his foe, and rested not. Then one choice weapon from his store, By Brahmá’s self bestowed of yore, Fierce as the flames that end the world, The giant king at Lakshmaṇ hurled. The hero fell, and racked with pain, Scarce could his hand his bow retain. But sense and strength resumed their seat And, lightly springing to his feet, He struck with one tremendous stroke And Rávaṇ’s bow in splinters broke. From Lakshmaṇ’s cord three arrows flew And pierced the giant monarch through. Sore wounded Rávaṇ closed, and round Ikshváku’s son his strong arms wound. With strength unrivalled, Brahmá’s gift, He strove from earth his foe to lift. “Shall I,” he cried, “who overthrow Mount Meru and the Lord of Snow, And heaven and all who dwell therein, Be foiled by one of Ráma’s kin?” But though he heaved, and toiled, and strained, Unmoved Ikshváku’s son remained. His frame by those huge arms compressed The giant’s God-given force confessed, But conscious that himself was part Of Vishṇu, he was firm in heart.

  The Wind-God’s son the fight beheld, And rushed at Rávaṇ, rage-impelled. Down crashed his mighty hand; the foe Full in the chest received the blow. His eyes grew dim, his knees gave way, And senseless on the earth he lay.

  The Wind-God’s son to Ráma bore Deep-wounded Lakshmaṇ stained with gore. He whom no foe might lift or bend Was light as air to such a friend. The dart that Lakshmaṇ’s side had cleft, Untouched, the hero’s body left, And flashing through the air afar Resumed its place in Rávaṇ’s car; And, waxing well though wounded sore, He felt the deadly pain no more. And Rávaṇ, though with deep wounds pained, Slowly his sense and strength regained, And furious still and undismayed On bow and shaft his hand he laid.

  Then Hanumán to Ráma cried: “Ascend my back, great chief, and ride Like Vishṇu borne on Garuḍ’s wing, To battle with the giant king.” So, burning for the dire attack, Rode Ráma on the Vánar’s back, And with fierce accents loud and slow Thus gave defiance to the foe, While his strained bowstring made a sound Like thunder when it shakes the ground: “Stay, Monarch of the giants, stay, The penalty of sin to pay. Stay! whither wilt thou fly, and how Escape the death that waits thee now?”

  No word the giant king returned: His eyes with flames of fury burned. His arm was stretched, his bow was bent, And swift his fiery shafts were sent. Red torrents from the Vánar flowed: Then Ráma near to Rávaṇ strode, And with keen darts that never failed, The chariot of the king assailed. With surest aim his arrows flew: The driver and the steeds he slew. And shattered with the pointed steel Car, flag, and pole and yoke and wheel. As Indra hurls his bolt to smite Mount Meru’s heaven-ascending height, So Ráma with a flaming dart Struck Lanká’s monarch near the heart, Who reeled and fell beneath the blow And from loose fingers dropped his bow. Bright as the sun, with crescent head, From Ráma’s bow an arrow sped, And from his forehead, proud no more, Cleft the bright coronet he wore. Then Ráma stood by Rávaṇ’s side And to the conquered giant cried: “Well hast thou fought: thine arm has slain Strong heroes of the Vánar train. I will not strike or slay thee now, For weary, faint with fight art thou. To Lanká’s town thy footsteps bend, And there the night securely spend. To-morrow come with car and bow, And then my prowess shalt thou know.”

  He ceased: the king in humbled pride Rose from the earth and naught replied. With wounded limbs and shattered crown He sought again his royal town.




Canto LX. Kumbhakarna Roused.


With humbled heart and broken pride Through Lanká’s gate the giant hied, Crushed, like an elephant beneath A lion’s spring and murderous teeth, Or like a serpent ’neath the wing And talons of the Feathered King. Such was the giant’s wild alarm At arrows shot by Ráma’s arm; Shafts with red lightning round them curled, Like Brahmá’s bolts that end the world.

  Supported on his golden throne, With failing eye and humbled tone, “Giants,” he cried, “the toil is vain, Fruitless the penance and the pain, If I whom Indra owned his peer, Secure from Gods, a mortal fear. My soul remembers, now too late, Lord Brahmá’s words who spoke my fate: “Tremble, proud Giant,” thus they ran, “And dread thy death from slighted man. Secure from Gods and demons live, And serpents, by the boon I give. Against their power thy life is charmed, But against man is still unarmed.” This Ráma is the man foretold By Anaraṇya’s(965) lips of old:

  “Fear, Rávaṇ, basest of the base: For of mine own imperial race A prince in after time shall spring And thee and thine to ruin bring. And Vedavatí,(966) ere she died Slain by my ruthless insult, cried: “A scion of my royal line Shall slay, vile wretch, both thee and thine.” She in a later birth became King Janak’s child, now Ráma’s dame. Nandíśvara(967) foretold this fate, And Umá(968) when I moved her hate, And Rambhá,(969) and the lovely child Of Varuṇ(970) by my touch defiled. I know the fated hour is nigh: Hence, captains, to your stations fly. Let warders on the rampart stand: Place at each gate a watchful band; And, terror of immortal eyes, Let mightiest Kumbhakarṇa rise. He, slumbering, free from care and pain, By Brahmá’s curse, for months has lain. But when Prahasta’s death he hears, Mine own defeat and doubts and fears, The chief will rise to smite the foe And his unrivalled valour show. Then Raghu’s royal sons and all The Vánars neath his might will fall.”

  The giant lords his hest obeyed, They left him, trembling and afraid, And from the royal palace strode To Kumbhakarṇa’s vast abode. They carried garlands sweet and fresh, And reeking loads of blood and flesh. They reached the dwelling where he lay, A cave that reached a league each way, Sweet with fair blooms of lovely scent And bright with golden ornament. His breathings came so fierce and fast, Scarce could the giants brook the blast. They found him on a golden bed With his huge limbs at length outspread. They piled their heaps of venison near, Fat buffaloes and boars and deer. With wreaths of flowers they fanned his face, And incense sweetened all the place. Each raised his mighty voice as loud As thunders of an angry cloud, And conchs their stirring summons gave That echoed through the giant’s cave. Then on his breast they rained their blows, And high the wild commotion rose When cymbal vied with drum and horn. And war cries on the gale upborne. Through all the air loud discord spread, And, struck with fear, the birds fell dead. But still he slept and took his rest. Then dashed they on his shaggy chest Clubs, maces, fragments of the rock: He moved not once, nor felt the shock. The giants made one effort more With shell and drum and shout and roar. Club, mallet, mace, in fury plied, Rained blows upon his breast and side. And elephants were urged to aid, And camels groaned and horses neighed. They drenched him with a hundred pails, They tore his ears with teeth and nails. They bound together many a mace And beat him on the head and face; And elephants with ponderous tread Stamped on his limbs and chest and head. The unusual weight his slumber broke: He started, shook his sides, and woke; And, heedless of the wounds and blows, Yawning with thirst and hunger rose, His jaws like hell gaped fierce and wide, Dire as the flame neath ocean’s tide. Red as the sun on Meru’s crest The giant’s face his wrath expressed, And every burning breath he drew Was like the blast that rushes through The mountain cedars. Up he raised His awful head with eyes that blazed Like comets, dire as Death in form Who threats the worlds with fire and storm. The giants pointed to their stores Of buffaloes and deer and boars, And straight he gorged him with a flood Of wine, with marrow, flesh, and blood. He ceased: the giants ventured near And bent their lowly heads in fear. Then Kumbhakar[n.]a glared with eyes Still heavy in their first surprise, Still drowsy from his troubled rest, And thus the giant band addressed. “How have ye dared my sleep to break? No trifling cause should bid me wake. Say, is all well? or tell the need That drives you with unruly speed To wake me. Mark the words I say, The king shall