[ADA-ramayana  —  part 6 of 12, continuation of part 5]
============================================================

There lay the shattered car, the steed, The elephant of noblest breed, The splintered spear, the shivered mace, Chouris and screens to shade the face. The giants saw with bitterest pain Their warriors weltering on the plain, Nor dared again his might oppose Who scourged the cities of his foes.




Canto XXVI. Dúshan’s Death.


When Dúshaṇ saw his giant band Slaughtered by Ráma’s conquering hand, He called five thousand fiends, and gave His orders. Bravest of the brave, Invincible, of furious might, Ne’er had they turned their backs in flight. They, as their leader bade them seize Spears, swords, and clubs, and rocks, and trees, Poured on the dauntless prince again A ceaseless shower of deadly rain. The virtuous Ráma, undismayed, Their missiles with his arrows stayed, And weakened, ere it fell, the shock Of that dire hail of tree and rock, And like a bull with eyelids closed, The pelting of the storm opposed.

  Then blazed his ire: he longed to smite To earth the rovers of the night. The wrath that o’er his spirit came Clothed him with splendour as of flame, While showers of mortal darts he poured Fierce on the giants and their lord. Dúshaṇ, the foeman’s dusky dread, By frenzied rage inspirited, On Raghu’s son his missiles cast Like Indra’s bolts which rend and blast. But Ráma with a trenchant dart Cleft Dúshaṇ’s ponderous bow apart. And then the gold-decked steeds who drew The chariot, with four shafts he slew. One crescent dart he aimed which shred Clean from his neck the driver’s head; Three more with deadly skill addressed Stood quivering in the giant’s breast. Hurled from his car, steeds, driver slain, The bow he trusted cleft in twain, He seized his mace, strong, heavy, dread, High as a mountain’s towering head. With plates of gold adorned and bound, Embattled Gods it crushed and ground. Its iron spikes yet bore the stains Of mangled foemen’s blood and brains. Its heavy mass of jagged steel Was like a thunderbolt to feel. It shattered, as on foes it fell, The city where the senses dwell.(469) Fierce Dúshaṇ seized that ponderous mace Like monstrous form of serpent race, And all his savage soul aglow With fury, rushed upon the foe. But Raghu’s son took steady aim, And as the rushing giant came, Shore with two shafts the arms whereon The demon’s glittering bracelets shone. His arm at each huge shoulder lopped, The mighty body reeled and dropped, And the great mace to earth was thrown Like Indra’s staff when storms have blown. As some vast elephant who lies Shorn of his tusks, and bleeding dies, So, when his arms were rent away, Low on the ground the giant lay. The spirits saw the monster die, And loudly rang their joyful cry, “Honour to Ráma! nobly done! Well hast thou fought, Kakutstha’s son!” But the great three, the host who led, Enraged to see their chieftain dead, As though Death’s toils were round them cast, Rushed upon Ráma fierce and fast, Mahákapála seized, to strike His foeman down, a ponderous pike: Sthúláksha charged with spear to fling, Pramáthi with his axe to swing. When Ráma saw, with keen darts he Received the onset of the three, As calm as though he hailed a guest In each, who came for shade and rest. Mahákapála’s monstrous head Fell with the trenchant dart he sped. His good right hand in battle skilled Sthúláksha’s eyes with arrows filled, And trusting still his ready bow He laid the fierce Pramáthi low, Who sank as some tall tree falls down With bough and branch and leafy crown. Then with five thousand shafts he slew The rest of Dúshaṇ’s giant crew: Five thousand demons, torn and rent, To Yáma’s gloomy realm he sent.

  When Khara knew the fate of all The giant band and Dúshaṇ’s fall, He called the mighty chiefs who led His army, and in fury said:

  “Now Dúshaṇ and his armèd train Lie prostrate on the battle plain. Lead forth an army mightier still, Ráma this wretched man, to kill. Fight ye with darts of every shape, Nor let him from your wrath escape.”

  Thus spoke the fiend, by rage impelled, And straight his course toward Ráma held. With Śyenagámí and the rest Of his twelve chiefs he onward pressed, And every giant as he went A storm of well-wrought arrows sent. Then with his pointed shafts that came With gold and diamond bright as flame, Dead to the earth the hero threw The remnant of the demon crew. Those shafts with feathers bright as gold, Like flames which wreaths of smoke enfold, Smote down the fiends like tall trees rent By red bolts from the firmament. A hundred shafts he pointed well: By their keen barbs a hundred fell: A thousand,—and a thousand more In battle’s front lay drenched in gore. Of all defence and guard bereft, With sundered bows and harness cleft. Their bodies red with bloody stain Fell the night-rovers on the plain, Which, covered with the loosened hair Of bleeding giants prostrate there, Like some great altar showed, arrayed For holy rites with grass o’erlaid. The darksome wood, each glade and dell Where the wild demons fought and fell Was like an awful hell whose floor Is thick with mire and flesh and gore.

  Thus twice seven thousand fiends, a band With impious heart and bloody hand, By Raghu’s son were overthrown, A man, on foot, and all alone. Of all who met on that fierce day, Khara, great chief, survived the fray, The monster of the triple head,(470) And Raghu’s son, the foeman’s dread. The other demon warriors, all Skilful and brave and strong and tall, In front of battle, side by side, Struck down by Lakshmaṇ’s brother died.   When Khara saw the host he led     Triumphant forth to fight   Stretched on the earth, all smitten dead,     By Ráma’s nobler might,   Upon his foe he fiercely glared,     And drove against him fast,   Like Indra when his arm is bared     His thundering bolt to cast.




Canto XXVII. The Death Of Trisirás.


But Triśirás,(471) a chieftain dread, Marked Khara as he onward sped. And met his car and cried, to stay The giant from the purposed fray: “Mine be the charge: let me attack, And turn thee from the contest back. Let me go forth, and thou shalt see The strong-armed Ráma slain by me. True are the words I speak, my lord: I swear it as I touch my sword: That I this Ráma’s blood will spill, Whom every giant’s hand should kill. This Ráma will I slay, or he In battle fray shall conquer me. Restrain thy spirit: check thy car, And view the combat from afar. Thou, joying o’er the prostrate foe, To Janasthán again shalt go, Or, if I fall in battle’s chance, Against my conqueror advance.”

  Thus Triśirás for death who yearned: And Khara from the conflict turned, “Go forth to battle,” Khara cried; And toward his foe the giant hied. Borne on a car of glittering hue Which harnessed coursers fleetly drew, Like some huge hill with triple peak He onward rushed the prince to seek. Still, like a big cloud, sending out His arrowy rain with many a shout Like the deep sullen roars that come Discordant from a moistened drum. But Raghu’s son, whose watchful eye Beheld the demon rushing nigh, From the great bow he raised and bent A shower of shafts to meet him sent. Wild grew the fight and wilder yet As fiend and man in combat met, As when in some dark wood’s retreat An elephant and a lion meet.

  The giant bent his bow, and true To Ráma’s brow three arrows flew. Then, raging as he felt the stroke, These words in anger Ráma spoke: “Heroic chief! is such the power Of fiends who rove at midnight hour? Soft as the touch of flowers I feel The gentle blows thine arrows deal. Receive in turn my shafts, and know What arrows fly from Ráma’s bow.” Thus as he spoke his wrath grew hot, And twice seven deadly shafts he shot, Which, dire as serpent’s deadly fang, Straight to the giant’s bosom sprang. Four arrows more,—each shaped to deal A mortal wound with barbèd steel,— The glorious hero shot, and slew The four good steeds the car that drew. Eight other shafts flew straight and fleet, And hurled the driver from his seat, And in the dust the banner laid That proudly o’er the chariot played. Then as the fiend prepared to bound Forth from his useless car to ground, The hero smote him to the heart, And numbed his arm with deadly smart. Again the chieftain, peerless-souled, Sent forth three rapid darts, and rolled With each keen arrow, deftly sped, Low in the dust a monstrous head. Then yielding to each deadly stroke, Forth spouting streams of blood and smoke, The headless trunk bedrenched with gore Fell to the ground and moved no more. The fiends who yet were left with life, Routed and crushed in battle strife, To Khara’s side, like trembling deer Scared by the hunter, fled in fear. King Khara saw with furious eye His scattered giants turn and fly; Then rallying his broken train At Raghu’s son he drove amain, Like Ráhu(472) when his deadly might Comes rushing on the Lord of Night.




Canto XXVIII. Khara Dismounted.


But when he turned his eye where bled Both Triśirás and Dúshaṇ dead, Fear o’er the giant’s spirit came Of Ráma’s might which naught could tame. He saw his savage legions, those Whose force no creature dared oppose,— He saw the leader of his train By Ráma’s single prowess slain. With burning grief he marked the few Still left him of his giant crew. As Namuchi(473) on Indra, so Rushed the dread demon on his foe. His mighty bow the monster strained, And angrily on Ráma rained His mortal arrows in a flood, Like serpent fangs athirst for blood. Skilled in the bowman’s warlike art, He plied the string and poised the dart. Here, on his car, and there, he rode, And passages of battle showed, While all the skyey regions grew Dark with his arrows as they flew. Then Ráma seized his ponderous bow, And straight the heaven was all aglow With shafts whose stroke no life might bear That filled with flash and flame the air, Thick as the blinding torrents sent Down from Parjanya’s(474) firmament. In space itself no space remained, But all was filled with arrows rained Incessantly from each great bow Wielded by Ráma and his foe. As thus in furious combat, wrought To mortal hate, the warriors fought, The sun himself grew faint and pale, Obscured behind that arrowy veil.

  As when beneath the driver’s steel An elephant is forced to kneel, So from the hard and pointed head Of many an arrow Ráma bled. High on his car the giant rose Prepared in deadly strife to close, And all the spirits saw him stand Like Yáma with his noose in hand. For Khara deemed in senseless pride That he, beneath whose hand had died The giant legions, failed at length Slow sinking with exhausted strength. But Ráma, like a lion, when A trembling deer comes nigh his den, Feared not the demon mad with hate,— Of lion might and lion gait. Then in his lofty car that glowed With sunlike brilliance Khara rode At Ráma: madly on he came Like a poor moth that seeks the flame. His archer skill the fiend displayed, And at the place where Ráma laid His hand, an arrow cleft in two The mighty bow the hero drew. Seven arrows by the giant sent, Bright as the bolts of Indra, rent Their way through mail and harness joints, And pierced him with their iron points. On Ráma, hero unsurpassed, A thousand shafts smote thick and fast, While as each missile struck, rang out The giant’s awful battle-shout. His knotted arrows pierced and tore The sunbright mail the hero wore, Till, band and buckle rent away, Glittering on the ground it lay. Then pierced in shoulder, breast, and side, Till every limb with blood was dyed, The chieftain in majestic ire Shone glorious as the smokeless fire. Then loud and long the war-cry rose Of Ráma, terror of his foes, As, on the giant’s death intent, A ponderous bow he strung and bent,— Lord Vishṇu’s own, of wondrous size,— Agastya gave the heavenly prize. Then rushing on the demon foe, He raised on high that mighty bow, And with his well-wrought shafts, whereon Bright gold between the feathers shone, He struck the pennon fluttering o’er The chariot, and it waved no more. That glorious flag whose every fold Was rich with blazonry and gold, Fell as the sun himself by all The Gods’ decree might earthward fall. From wrathful Khara’s hand, whose art Well knew each vulnerable part, Four keenly-piercing arrows flew, And blood in Ráma’s bosom drew, With every limb distained with gore From deadly shafts which rent and tore, From Khara’s clanging bowstring shots, The prince’s wrath waxed wondrous hot. His hand upon his bow that best Of mighty archers firmly pressed, And from the well-drawn bowstring, true Each to its mark, six arrows flew. One quivered in the giant’s head, With two his brawny shoulders bled; Three, with the crescent heads they bore, Deep in his breast a passage tore. Thirteen, to which the stone had lent The keenest point, were swiftly sent On the fierce giant, every one Destructive, gleaming like the sun. With four the dappled steeds he slew; One cleft the chariot yoke in two, One, in the heat of battle sped, Smote from the neck the driver’s head. The poles were rent apart by three; Two broke the splintered axle-tree. Then from the hand of Ráma, while Across his lips there came a smile, The twelfth, like thunderbolt impelled, Cut the great hand and bow it held. Then, scarce by Indra’s self surpassed, He pierced the giant with the last. The bow he trusted cleft in twain, His driver and his horses slain, Down sprang the giant, mace in hand, On foot against the foe to stand.   The Gods and saints in bright array     Close gathered in the skies,   The prince’s might in battle-fray     Beheld with joyful eyes.   Uprising from their golden seats,     Their hands in honour raised,   They looked on Ráma’s noble feats,     And blessed him as they praised.




Canto XXIX. Khara’s Defeat.


When Ráma saw the giant nigh, On foot, alone, with mace reared high, In mild reproof at first he spoke, Then forth his threatening anger broke: “Thou with the host ’twas thine to lead, With elephant and car and steed, Hast wrought an act of sin and shame, An act which all who live must blame. Know that the wretch whose evil mind Joys in the grief of human kind, Though the three worlds confess him lord, Must perish dreaded and abhorred. Night-rover, when a villain’s deeds Distress the world he little heeds, Each hand is armed his life to take, And crush him like a deadly snake. The end is near when men begin Through greed or lust a life of sin, E’en as a Bráhman’s dame, unwise, Eats of the fallen hail(475) and dies. Thy hand has slain the pure and good, The hermit saints of Daṇḍak wood, Of holy life, the heirs of bliss; And thou shalt reap the fruit of this. Not long shall they whose cruel breasts Joy in the sin the world detests Retain their guilty power and pride, But fade like trees whose roots are dried. Yes, as the seasons come and go, Each tree its kindly fruit must show, And sinners reap in fitting time The harvest of each earlier crime. As those must surely die who eat Unwittingly of poisoned meat, They too whose lives in sin are spent Receive ere long the punishment. And know, thou rover of the night, That I, a king, am sent to smite The wicked down, who court the hate Of men whose laws they violate. This day my vengeful hand shall send Shafts bright with gold to tear and rend, And pass with fury through thy breast As serpents pierce an emmet’s nest. Thou with thy host this day shalt be Among the dead below, and see The saints beneath thy hand who bled, Whose flesh thy cruel maw has fed. They, glorious on their seats of gold, Their slayer shall in hell behold. Fight with all strength thou callest thine, Mean scion of ignoble line, Still, like the palm-tree’s fruit, this day My shafts thy head in dust shall lay.”

  Such were the words that Ráma said: Then Khara’s eyes with wrath glowed red, Who, maddened by the rage that burned Within him, with a smile returned:

  “Thou Daśaratha’s son, hast slain The meaner giants of my train: And canst thou idly vaunt thy might And claim the praise not thine by right? Not thus in self-laudation rave The truly great, the nobly brave: No empty boasts like thine disgrace The foremost of the human race. The mean of soul, unknown to fame, Who taint their warrior race with shame, Thus speak in senseless pride as thou, O Raghu’s son, hast boasted now. What hero, when the war-cry rings, Vaunts the high race from which he springs, Or seeks, when warriors meet and die, His own descent to glorify? Weakness and folly show confessed In every vaunt thou utterest, As when the flames fed high with grass Detect the simulating brass. Dost thou not see me standing here Armed with the mighty mace I rear, Firm as an earth upholding hill Whose summit veins of metal fill? Lo, here I stand before thy face To slay thee with my murderous mace, As Death, the universal lord, Stands threatening with his fatal cord. Enough of this. Much more remains That should be said: but time constrains. Ere to his rest the sun descend, And shades of night the combat end, The twice seven thousand of my band Who fell beneath thy bloody hand Shall have their tears all wiped away And triumph in thy fall to-day.”

  He spoke, and loosing from his hold His mighty mace ringed round with gold, Like some red bolt alive with fire Hurled it at Ráma, mad with ire. The ponderous mace which Khara threw Sent fiery flashes as it flew. Trees, shrubs were scorched beneath the blast, As onward to its aim it passed. But Ráma, watching as it sped Dire as His noose who rules the dead, Cleft it with arrows as it came On rushing with a hiss and flame. Its fury spent and burnt away, Harmless upon the ground it lay Like a great snake in furious mood By herbs of numbing power subdued.




Canto XXX. Khara’s Death.


  When Ráma, pride of Raghu’s race, Virtue’s dear son, had cleft the mace, Thus with superior smile the best Of chiefs the furious fiend addressed:

  “Thou, worst of giant blood, at length Hast shown the utmost of thy strength, And forced by greater might to bow, Thy vaunting threats are idle now. My shafts have cut thy club in twain: Useless it lies upon the plain, And all thy pride and haughty trust Lie with it levelled in the dust. The words that thou hast said to-day, That thou wouldst wipe the tears away Of all the giants I have slain, My deeds shall render void and vain. Thou meanest of the giants’ breed, Evil in thought and word and deed, My hand shall take that life of thine As Garuḍ(476) seized the juice divine. Thou, rent by shafts, this day shalt die: Low on the ground thy corse shall lie, And bubbles from the cloven neck With froth and blood thy skin shall deck. With dust and mire all rudely dyed, Thy torn arms lying by thy side, While streams of blood each limb shall steep, Thou on earth’s breast shalt take thy sleep Like a fond lover when he strains The beauty whom at length he gains. Now when thy heavy eyelids close For ever in thy deep repose, Again shall Daṇḍak forest be Safe refuge for the devotee. Thou slain, and all thy race who held The realm of Janasthán expelled, Again shall happy hermits rove, Fearing no danger, through the grove. Within those bounds, their brethren slain, No giant shall this day remain, But all shall fly with many a tear And fearing, rid the saints of fear. This bitter day shall misery bring On all the race that calls thee king. Fierce as their lord, thy dames shall know, Bereft of joys, the taste of woe. Base, cruel wretch, of evil mind, Plaguer of Bráhmans and mankind, With trembling hands each devotee Feeds holy fires in dread of thee.”

  Thus with wild fury unrepressed Raghu’s brave son the fiend addressed; And Khara, as his wrath grew high, Thus thundered forth his fierce reply:

  “By senseless pride to madness wrought, By danger girt thou fearest naught, Nor heedest, numbered with the dead, What thou shouldst say and leave unsaid. When Fate’s tremendous coils enfold The captive in resistless hold, He knows not right from wrong, each sense Numbed by that deadly influence.”

  He spoke, and when his speech was done Bent his fierce brows on Raghu’s son. With eager eyes he looked around If lethal arms might yet be found. Not far away and full in view A Sál-tree towering upward grew. His lips in mighty strain compressed, He tore it up with root and crest, With huge arms waved it o’er his head And hurled it shouting, Thou art dead. But Ráma, unsurpassed in might, Stayed with his shafts its onward flight, And furious longing seized his soul The giant in the dust to roll. Great drops of sweat each limb bedewed, His red eyes showed his wrathful mood. A thousand arrows, swiftly sent, The giant’s bosom tore and rent. From every gash his body showed The blood in foamy torrents flowed, As springing from their caverns leap Swift rivers down the mountain steep. When Khara felt each deadened power Yielding beneath that murderous shower, He charged, infuriate with the scent Of blood, in dire bewilderment. But Ráma watched, with ready bow, The onset of his bleeding foe, And ere the monster reached him, drew Backward in haste a yard or two. Then from his side a shaft he took Whose mortal stroke no life might brook: Of peerless might, it bore the name Of Brahmá’s staff, and glowed with flame: Lord Indra, ruler of the skies, Himself had given the glorious prize. His bow the virtuous hero drew, And at the fiend the arrow flew. Hissing and roaring like the blast Of tempest through the air it passed, And fixed, by Ráma’s vigour sped, In the foe’s breast its pointed head. Then fell the fiend: the quenchless flame Burnt furious in his wounded frame. So burnt by Rudra Andhak(477) fell In Śvetáraṇya’s silvery dell: So Namuchi and Vritra(478) died By steaming bolts that tamed their pride: So Bala(479) fell by lightning sent By Him who rules the firmament.

  Then all the Gods in close array With the bright hosts who sing and play, Filled full of rapture and amaze, Sang hymns of joy in Ráma’s praise, Beat their celestial drums and shed Rain of sweet flowers upon his head. For three short hours had scarcely flown, And by his pointed shafts o’erthrown The twice seven thousand fiends, whose will Could change their shapes, in death were still, With Triśirás and Dúshaṇ slain, And Khara, leader of the train. “O wondrous deed,” the bards began, “The noblest deed of virtuous man! Heroic strength that stood alone, And firmness e’en as Vishṇu’s own!”

  Thus having sung, the shining train Turned to their heavenly homes again. Then the high saints of royal race And loftiest station sought the place, And by the great Agastya led, With reverence to Ráma said:

  “For this, Lord Indra, glorious sire, Majestic as the burning fire, Who crushes cities in his rage, Sought Śarabhanga’s hermitage. Thou wast, this great design to aid, Led by the saints to seek this shade, And with thy mighty arm to kill The giants who delight in ill. Thou Daśaratha’s noble son, The battle for our sake hast won, And saints in Daṇḍak’s wild who live Their days to holy tasks can give.”

  Forth from the mountain cavern came The hero Lakshmaṇ with the dame. And rapture beaming from his face, Resought the hermit dwelling-place. Then when the mighty saints had paid Due honour for the victor’s aid, The glorious Ráma honoured too By Lakshmaṇ to his cot withdrew. When Sítá looked upon her lord, His foemen slain, the saints restored, In pride and rapture uncontrolled She clasped him in her loving hold. On the dead fiends her glances fell: She saw her lord alive and well, Victorious after toil and pain, And Janak’s child was blest again. Once more, once more with new delight   Her tender arms she threw Round Ráma whose victorious might   Had crushed the demon crew. Then as his grateful reverence paid   Each saint of lofty soul, O’er her sweet face, all fears allayed,   The flush of transport stole.




Canto XXXI. Rávan.


But of the host of giants one, Akampan, from the field had run And sped to Lanká(480) to relate In Rávaṇ’s ear the demons’ fate:

  “King, many a giant from the shade Of Janasthán in death is laid: Khara the chief is slain, and I Could scarcely from the battle fly.”

  Fierce anger, as the monarch heard, Inflamed his look, his bosom stirred, And while with scorching glance he eyed The messenger, he thus replied:

  “What fool has dared, already dead, Strike Janasthán, the general dread? Who is the wretch shall vainly try In earth, heaven, hell, from me to fly? Vaiśravaṇ,(481) Indra, Vishṇu, He Who rules the dead, must reverence me; For not the mightiest lord of these Can brave my will and live at ease. Fate finds in me a mightier fate To burn the fires that devastate. With unresisted influence I Can force e’en Death himself to die, With all-surpassing might restrain The fury of the hurricane, And burn in my tremendous ire The glory of the sun and fire.”

  As thus the fiend’s hot fury blazed, His trembling hands Akampan raised, And with a voice which fear made weak, Permission craved his tale to speak. King Rávaṇ gave the leave he sought, And bade him tell the news he brought. His courage rose, his voice grew bold, And thus his mournful tale he told:

  “A prince with mighty shoulders, sprung From Daśaratha, brave and young, With arms well moulded, bears the name Of Ráma with a lion’s frame. Renowned, successful, dark of limb, Earth has no warrior equals him. He fought in Janasthán and slew Dúshaṇ the fierce and Khara too.”

  Rávaṇ the giants’ royal chief. Received Akampan’s tale of grief. Then, panting like an angry snake, These words in turn the monarch spake:

  “Say quick, did Ráma seek the shade Of Janasthán with Indra’s aid, And all the dwellers in the skies To back his hardy enterprise?”

  Akampan heard, and straight obeyed His master, and his answer made. Then thus the power and might he told Of Raghu’s son the lofty-souled:

  “Best is that chief of all who know With deftest art to draw the bow. His are strange arms of heavenly might, And none can match him in the fight. His brother Lakshmaṇ brave as he, Fair as the rounded moon to see, With eyes like night and voice that comes Deep as the roll of beaten drums, By Ráma’s side stands ever near, Like wind that aids the flame’s career. That glorious chief, that prince of kings, On Janasthán this ruin brings. No Gods were there,—dismiss the thought No heavenly legions came and fought. His swift-winged arrows Ráma sent, Each bright with gold and ornament. To serpents many-faced they turned: The giant hosts they ate and burned. Where’er these fled in wild dismay Ráma was there to strike and slay. By him O King of high estate, Is Janasthán left desolate.”

  Akampan ceased: in angry pride The giant monarch thus replied: “To Janasthán myself will go And lay these daring brothers low.”

  Thus spoke the king in furious mood: Akampan then his speech renewed: “O listen while I tell at length The terror of the hero’s strength. No power can check, no might can tame Ráma, a chief of noblest fame. He with resistless shafts can stay The torrent foaming on its way. Sky, stars, and constellations, all To his fierce might would yield and fall. His power could earth itself uphold Down sinking as it sank of old.(482) Or all its plains and cities drown, Breaking the wild sea’s barrier down; Crush the great deep’s impetuous will, Or bid the furious wind be still. He glorious in his high estate The triple world could devastate, And there, supreme of men, could place His creatures of a new-born race. Never can mighty Ráma be O’ercome in fight, my King, by thee. Thy giant host the day might win From him, if heaven were gained by sin. If Gods were joined with demons, they Could ne’er, I ween, that hero slay, But guile may kill the wondrous man; Attend while I disclose the plan. His wife, above all women graced, Is Sítá of the dainty waist, With limbs to fair proportion true, And a soft skin of lustrous hue, Round neck and arm rich gems are twined: She is the gem of womankind. With her no bright Gandharví vies, No nymph or Goddess in the skies; And none to rival her would dare ’Mid dames who part the long black hair. That hero in the wood beguile, And steal his lovely spouse the while. Reft of his darling wife, be sure, Brief days the mourner will endure.”

  With flattering hope of triumph moved The giant king that plan approved, Pondered the counsel in his breast, And then Akampan thus addressed: “Forth in my car I go at morn, None but the driver with me borne, And this fair Sítá will I bring Back to my city triumphing.”

  Forth in his car by asses drawn The giant monarch sped at dawn, Bright as the sun, the chariot cast Light through the sky as on it passed. Then high in air that best of cars Traversed the path of lunar stars, Sending a fitful radiance pale As moonbeams shot through cloudy veil. Far on his airy way he flew: Near Táḍakeya’s(483) grove he drew. Márícha welcomed him, and placed Before him food which giants taste, With honour led him to a seat, And brought him water for his feet; And then with timely words addressed Such question to his royal guest:

  “Speak, is it well with thee whose sway The giant multitudes obey? I know not all, and ask in fear The cause, O King, why thou art here.”

  Ráva, the giants’ mighty king, Heard wise Márícha’s questioning, And told with ready answer, taught In eloquence, the cause he sought: “My guards, the bravest of my band, Are slain by Ráma’s vigorous hand, And Janasthán, that feared no hate Of foes, is rendered desolate. Come, aid me in the plan I lay To steal the conqueror’s wife away.”

  Márícha heard the king’s request, And thus the giant chief addressed:

  “What foe in friendly guise is he Who spoke of Sítá’s name to thee? Who is the wretch whose thought would bring Destruction on the giants’ king? Whose is the evil counsel, say, That bids thee bear his wife away, And careless of thy life provoke Earth’s loftiest with threatening stroke? A foe is he who dared suggest This hopeless folly to thy breast, Whose ill advice would bid thee draw The venomed fang from serpent’s jaw. By whose unwise suggestion led Wilt thou the path of ruin tread? Whence falls the blow that would destroy Thy gentle sleep of ease and joy?   Like some wild elephant is he     That rears his trunk on high,   Lord of an ancient pedigree,     Huge tusks, and furious eye.   Rávaṇ, no rover of the night     With bravest heart can brook,   Met in the front of deadly fight,     On Raghu’s son to look.   The giant hosts were brave and strong,     Good at the bow and spear:   But Ráma slew the routed throng,     A lion ’mid the deer.   No lion’s tooth can match his sword,     Or arrows fiercely shot:   He sleeps, he sleeps—the lion lord;     Be wise and rouse him not.   O Monarch of the giants, well     Upon my counsel think,   Lest thou for ever in the hell     Of Ráma’s vengeance sink:   A hell, where deadly shafts are sent     From his tremendous-bow,   While his great arms all flight prevent,     Like deepest mire below:   Where the wild floods of battle rave     Above the foeman’s head,   And each with many a feathery wave     Of shafts is garlanded.   O, quench the flames that in thy breast     With raging fury burn;   And pacified and self-possessed     To Lanká’s town return.   Rest thou in her imperial bowers     With thine own wives content,   And in the wood let Ráma’s hours     With Sítá still be spent.”

  The lord of Lanká’s isle obeyed The counsel, and his purpose stayed. Borne on his car he parted thence And gained his royal residence.




Canto XXXII. Rávan Roused.


But Śúrpaṇakhá saw the plain Spread with the fourteen thousand slain, Doers of cruel deeds o’erthrown By Ráma’s mighty arm alone, Add Triśirás and Dúshaṇ dead, And Khara, with the hosts they led. Their death she saw, and mad with pain, Roared like a cloud that brings the rain, And fled in anger and dismay To Lanká, seat of Rávaṇ’s sway. There on a throne of royal state Exalted sat the potentate, Begirt with counsellor and peer, Like Indra with the Storm Gods near. Bright as the sun’s full splendour shone The glorious throne he sat upon, As when the blazing fire is red Upon a golden altar fed. Wide gaped his mouth at every breath, Tremendous as the jaws of Death. With him high saints of lofty thought, Gandharvas, Gods, had vainly fought. The wounds were on his body yet From wars where Gods and demons met. And scars still marked his ample chest By fierce Airávat’s(484) tusk impressed. A score of arms, ten necks, had he, His royal gear was brave to see. His massive form displayed each sign That marks the heir of kingly line. In stature like a mountain height, His arms were strong, his teeth were white, And all his frame of massive mould Seemed lazulite adorned with gold. A hundred seams impressed each limp Where Vishṇu’s arm had wounded him, And chest and shoulder bore the print Of sword and spear and arrow dint, Where every God had struck a blow In battle with the giant foe. His might to wildest rage could wake The sea whose faith naught else can shake, Hurl towering mountains to the earth, And crush e’en foes of heavenly birth. The bonds of law and right he spurned: To others’ wives his fancy turned. Celestial arms he used in fight, And loved to mar each holy rite. He went to Bhogavatí’s town,(485) Where Vásuki was beaten down, And stole, victorious in the strife, Lord Takshaka’s beloved wife. Kailása’s lofty crest he sought, And when in vain Kuvera fought, Stole Pushpak thence, the car that through The air, as willed the master, flew. Impelled by furious anger, he Spoiled Nandan’s(486) shade and Naliní, And Chaitraratha’s heavenly grove, The haunts where Gods delight to rove. Tall as a hill that cleaves the sky, He raised his mighty arms on high To check the blessed moon, and stay The rising of the Lord of Day. Ten thousand years the giant spent On dire austerities intent, And of his heads an offering, laid Before the Self-existent, made. No God or fiend his life could take, Gandharva, goblin, bird, or snake: Safe from all fears of death, except From human arm, that life was kept. Oft when the priests began to raise Their consecrating hymns of praise, He spoiled the Soma’s sacred juice Poured forth by them in solemn use. The sacrifice his hands o’erthrew, And cruelly the Bráhmans slew. His was a heart that naught could melt, Joying in woes which others felt.

  She saw the ruthless monster there, Dread of the worlds, unused to spare. In robes of heavenly texture dressed, Celestial wreaths adorned his breast. He sat a shape of terror, like Destruction ere the worlds it strike. She saw him in his pride of place, The joy of old Pulastya’s(487) race, Begirt by counsellor and peer, Rávaṇ, the foeman’s mortal fear, And terror in her features shown, The giantess approached the throne.   Then Śúrpaṇakhá bearing yet     Each deeply printed trace   Where the great-hearted chief had set     A mark upon her face,   Impelled by terror and desire,     Still fierce, no longer bold,   To Rávaṇ of the eyes of fire     Her tale, infuriate, told.




Canto XXXIII. Súrpanakhá’s Speech.


Burning with anger, in the ring Of counsellors who girt their king, To Rávaṇ, ravener of man, With bitter words she thus began:

  “Wilt thou absorbed in pleasure, still Pursue unchecked thy selfish will: Nor turn thy heedless eyes to see The coming fate which threatens thee? The king who days and hours employs In base pursuit of vulgar joys Must in his people’s sight be vile As fire that smokes on funeral pile. He who when duty calls him spares No time for thought of royal cares, Must with his realm and people all Involved in fatal ruin fall. As elephants in terror shrink From the false river’s miry brink, Thus subjects from a monarch flee Whose face their eyes may seldom see, Who spends the hours for toil ordained In evil courses unrestrained. He who neglects to guard and hold His kingdom by himself controlled, Sinks nameless like a hill whose head Is buried in the ocean’s bed. Thy foes are calm and strong and wise, Fiends, Gods, and warriors of the skies,— How, heedless, wicked, weak, and vain, Wilt thou thy kingly state maintain? Thou, lord of giants, void of sense, Slave of each changing influence, Heedless of all that makes a king, Destruction on thy head wilt bring. O conquering chief, the prince, who boasts, Of treasury and rule and hosts, By others led, though lord of all, Is meaner than the lowest thrall. For this are monarchs said to be Long-sighted, having power to see Things far away by faithful eyes Of messengers and loyal spies. But aid from such thou wilt not seek: Thy counsellors are blind and weak, Or thou from these hadst surely known Thy legions and thy realm o’erthrown. Know, twice seven thousand, fierce in might, Are slain by Ráma in the fight, And they, the giant host who led, Khara and Dúshaṇ, both are dead. Know, Ráma with his conquering arm Has freed the saints from dread of harm, Has smitten Janasthán and made Asylum safe in Daṇḍak’s shade. Enslaved and dull, of blinded sight, Intoxicate with vain delight, Thou closest still thy heedless eyes To dangers in thy realm that rise. A king besotted, mean, unkind, Of niggard hand and slavish mind. Will find no faithful followers heed Their master in his hour of need. The friend on whom he most relies, In danger, from a monarch flies, Imperious in his high estate, Conceited, proud, and passionate; Who ne’er to state affairs attends With wholesome fear when woe impends Most weak and worthless as the grass, Soon from his sway the realm will pass. For rotting wood a use is found, For clods and dust that strew the ground, But when a king has lost his sway, Useless he falls, and sinks for aye. As raiment by another worn, As faded garland crushed and torn, So is, unthroned, the proudest king, Though mighty once, a useless thing. But he who every sense subdues And each event observant views, Rewards the good and keeps from wrong, Shall reign secure and flourish long. Though lulled in sleep his senses lie He watches with a ruler’s eye, Untouched by favour, ire, and hate, And him the people celebrate. O weak of mind, without a trace Of virtues that a king should grace, Who hast not learnt from watchful spy That low in death the giants lie. Scorner of others, but enchained     By every base desire,   By thee each duty is disdained     Which time and place require.   Soon wilt thou, if thou canst not learn,     Ere yet it be too late,   The good from evil to discern,     Fall from thy high estate.”   As thus she ceased not to upbraid     The king with cutting speech,   And every fault to view displayed,     Naming and marking each,   The monarch of the sons of night,     Of wealth and power possessed,   And proud of his imperial might,     Long pondered in his breast.




Canto XXXIV. Súrpanakhá’s Speech.


Then forth the giant’s fury broke As Śúrpaṇakhá harshly spoke. Girt by his lords the demon king Looked on her, fiercely questioning:

  “Who is this Ráma, whence, and where? His form, his might, his deeds declare. His wandering steps what purpose led To Daṇḍak forest, hard to tread? What arms are his that he could smite In fray the rovers of the night, And Triśirás and Dúshaṇ lay Low on the earth, and Khara slay? Tell all, my sister, and declare Who maimed thee thus, of form most fair.”

  Thus by the giant king addressed, While burnt her fury unrepressed, The giantess declared at length The hero’s form and deeds and strength:

  “Long are his arms and large his eyes: A black deer’s skin his dress supplies. King Daśaratha’s son is he, Fair as Kandarpa’s self to see. Adorned with many a golden band, A bow, like Indra’s, arms his hand, And shoots a flood of arrows fierce As venomed snakes to burn and pierce. I looked, I looked, but never saw His mighty hand the bowstring draw That sent the deadly arrows out, While rang through air his battle-shout. I looked, I looked, and saw too well How with that hail the giants fell, As falls to earth the golden grain, Struck by the blows of Indra’s rain. He fought, and twice seven thousand, all Terrific giants, strong and tall, Fell by the pointed shafts o’erthrown Which Ráma shot on foot, alone. Three little hours had scarcely fled,— Khara and Dúshaṇ both were dead, And he had freed the saints and made Asylum sure in Daṇḍak’s shade. Me of his grace the victor spared, Or I the giants’ fate had shared. The high-souled Ráma would not deign His hand with woman’s blood to stain. The glorious Lakshmaṇ, justly dear, In gifts and warrior might his peer, Serves his great brother with the whole Devotion of his faithful soul: Impetuous victor, bold and wise, First in each hardy enterprise, Still ready by his side to stand, A second self or better hand. And Ráma has a large-eyed spouse, Pure as the moon her cheek and brows, Dearer than life in Ráma’s sight, Whose happiness is her delight. With beauteous hair and nose the dame From head to foot has naught to blame. She shines the wood’s bright Goddess, Queen Of beauty with her noble mien. First in the ranks of women placed Is Sítá of the dainty waist. In all the earth mine eyes have ne’er Seen female form so sweetly fair. Goddess nor nymph can vie with her, Nor bride of heavenly chorister. He who might call this dame his own, Her eager arms about him thrown, Would live more blest in Sítá’s love Than Indra in the world above. She, peerless in her form and face And rich in every gentle grace, Is worthy bride, O King, for thee, As thou art meet her lord to be. I even I, will bring the bride In triumph to her lover’s side— This beauty fairer than the rest, With rounded limb and heaving breast. Each wound upon my face I owe To cruel Lakshmaṇ’s savage blow. But thou, O brother, shalt survey Her moonlike loveliness to-day, And Káma’s piercing shafts shall smite Thine amorous bosom at the sight. If in thy breast the longing rise To make thine own the beauteous prize, Up, let thy better foot begin The journey and the treasure win. If, giant Lord, thy favouring eyes Regard the plan which I advise, Up, cast all fear and doubt away And execute the words I say Come, giant King, this treasure seek, For thou art strong and they are weak. Let Sítá of the faultless frame Be borne away and be thy dame. Thy host in Janasthán who dwelt   Forth to the battle hied. And by the shafts which Ráma dealt   They perished in their pride. Dúshaṇ and Khara breathe no more,   Laid low upon the plain. Arise, and ere the day be o’er   Take vengeance for the slain.”




Canto XXXV. Rávan’s Journey.


When Rávaṇ, by her fury spurred, That terrible advice had heard, He bade his nobles quit his side, And to the work his thought applied. He turned his anxious mind to scan On every side the hardy plan: The gain against the risk he laid, Each hope and fear with care surveyed, And in his heart at length decreed To try performance of the deed. Then steady in his dire intent The giant to the courtyard went. There to his charioteer he cried, “Bring forth the car whereon I ride.” Aye ready at his master’s word The charioteer the order heard, And yoked with active zeal the best Of chariots at his lord’s behest. Asses with heads of goblins drew That wondrous car where’er it flew. Obedient to the will it rolled Adorned with gems and glistering gold. Then mounting, with a roar as loud As thunder from a labouring cloud, The mighty monarch to the tide Of Ocean, lord of rivers, hied. White was the shade above him spread, White chouris waved around his head, And he with gold and jewels bright Shone like the glossy lazulite. Ten necks and twenty arms had he: His royal gear was good to see. The heavenly Gods’ insatiate foe, Who made the blood of hermits flow, He like the Lord of Hills appeared With ten huge heads to heaven upreared. In the great car whereon he rode, Like some dark cloud the giant showed, When round it in their close array The cranes ’mid wreaths of lightning play. He looked, and saw, from realms of air, The rocky shore of ocean, where Unnumbered trees delightful grew With flower and fruit of every hue. He looked on many a lilied pool With silvery waters fresh and cool, And shores like spacious altars meet For holy hermits’ lone retreat. The graceful palm adorned the scene, The plantain waved her glossy green. There grew the sál and betel, there On bending boughs the flowers were fair. There hermits dwelt who tamed each sense By strictest rule of abstinence: Gandharvas, Kinnars,(488) thronged the place, Nágas and birds of heavenly race. Bright minstrels of the ethereal quire, And saints exempt from low desire, With Ájas, sons of Brahmá’s line, Maríchipas of seed divine, Vaikhánasas and Máshas strayed, And Bálakhilyas(489) in the shade. The lovely nymphs of heaven were there, Celestial wreaths confined their hair, And to each form new grace was lent By wealth of heavenly ornament. Well skilled was each in play and dance And gentle arts of dalliance. The glorious wife of many a God Those beautiful recesses trod, There Gods and Dánavs, all who eat The food of heaven, rejoiced to meet. The swan and Sáras thronged each bay With curlews, ducks, and divers gay, Where the sea spray rose soft and white O’er rocks of glossy lazulite. As his swift way the fiend pursued Pale chariots of the Gods he viewed, Bearing each lord whose rites austere Had raised him to the heavenly sphere. Thereon celestial garlands hung, There music played and songs were sung. Then bright Gandharvas met his view, And heavenly nymphs, as on he flew. He saw the sandal woods below, And precious trees of odorous flow, That to the air around them lent Their riches of delightful scent; Nor failed his roving eye to mark Tall aloe trees in grove and park. He looked on wood with cassias filled, And plants which balmy sweets distilled, Where her fair flowers the betel showed And the bright pods of pepper glowed. The pearls in many a silvery heap Lay on the margin of the deep. And grey rocks rose amid the red Of coral washed from ocean’s bed. High soared the mountain peaks that bore Treasures of gold and silver ore, And leaping down the rocky walls Came wild and glorious waterfalls. Fair towns which grain and treasure held, And dames who every gem excelled, He saw outspread beneath him far, With steed, and elephant, and car. That ocean shore he viewed that showed Fair as the blessed Gods’ abode Where cool delightful breezes played O’er levels in the freshest shade. He saw a fig-tree like a cloud With mighty branches earthward bowed. It stretched a hundred leagues and made For hermit bands a welcome shade. Thither the feathered king of yore An elephant and tortoise bore, And lighted on a bough to eat The captives of his taloned feet. The bough unable to sustain The crushing weight and sudden strain, Loaded with sprays and leaves of spring Gave way beneath the feathered king. Under the shadow of the tree Dwelt many a saint and devotee, Ájas, the sons of Brahmá’s line, Máshas, Maríchipas divine. Vaikhánasas, and all the race Of Bálakhilyas, loved the place. But pitying their sad estate The feathered monarch raised the weight Of the huge bough, and bore away The loosened load and captured prey. A hundred leagues away he sped, Then on his monstrous booty fed, And with the bough he smote the lands Where dwell the wild Nisháda bands. High joy was his because his deed From jeopardy the hermits freed. That pride for great deliverance wrought A double share of valour brought. His soul conceived the high emprise To snatch the Amrit from the skies. He rent the nets of iron first, Then through the jewel chamber burst, And bore the drink of heaven away That watched in Indra’s palace lay.

  Such was the hermit-sheltering tree Which Rávaṇ turned his eye to see. Still marked where Garuḍ sought to rest, The fig-tree bore the name of Blest.

  When Rávaṇ stayed his chariot o’er The ocean’s heart-enchanting shore, He saw a hermitage that stood Sequestered in the holy wood. He saw the fiend Márícha there With deerskin garb, and matted hair Coiled up in hermit guise, who spent His days by rule most abstinent. As guest and host are wont to meet, They met within that lone retreat. Before the king Márícha placed Food never known to human taste. He entertained his guest with meat And gave him water for his feet, And then addressed the giant king With timely words of questioning:

  “Lord, is it well with thee, and well With those in Lanká’s town who dwell? What sudden thought, what urgent need Has brought thee with impetuous speed?”

  The fiend Márícha thus addressed Rávaṇ the king, his mighty guest, And he, well skilled in arts that guide The eloquent, in turn replied:




Canto XXXVI. Rávan’s Speech.


“Hear me, Márícha, while I speak, And tell thee why thy home I seek. Sick and distressed am I, and see My surest hope and help in thee. Of Janasthán I need not tell, Where Śúrpaṇakhá, Khara, dwell, And Dúshaṇ with the arm of might, And Triśirás, the fierce in fight, Who feeds on human flesh and gore, And many noble giants more, Who roam in dark of midnight through The forest, brave and strong and true. By my command they live at ease And slaughter saints and devotees. Those twice seven thousand giants, all Obedient to their captain’s call, Joying in war and ruthless deeds Follow where mighty Khara leads. Those fearless warrior bands who roam Through Janasthán their forest home, In all their terrible array Met Ráma in the battle fray. Girt with all weapons forth they sped With Khara at the army’s head. The front of battle Ráma held: With furious wrath his bosom swelled. Without a word his hate to show He launched the arrows from his bow. On the fierce hosts the missiles came, Each burning with destructive flame, The twice seven thousand fell o’erthrown By him, a man, on foot, alone. Khara the army’s chief and pride, And Dúshaṇ, fearless warrior, died, And Triśirás the fierce was slain, And Daṇḍak wood was free again.

  He, banished by his angry sire, Roams with his wife in mean attire. This wretch, his Warrior tribe’s disgrace Has slain the best of giant race. Harsh, wicked, fierce and greedy-souled, A fool, with senses uncontrolled, No thought of duty stirs his breast: He joys to see the world distressed. He sought the wood with fair pretence Of truthful life and innocence, But his false hand my sister left Mangled, of nose and ears bereft. This Ráma’s wife who bears the name Of Sítá, in her face and frame Fair as a daughter of the skies,— Her will I seize and bring the prize Triumphant from the forest shade: For this I seek thy willing aid. If thou, O mighty one, wilt lend Thy help and stand beside thy friend, I with my brothers may defy All Gods embattled in the sky. Come, aid me now, for thine the power To succour in the doubtful hour. Thou art in war and time of fear, For heart and hand, without a peer. For thou art skilled in art and wile, A warrior brave and trained in guile. With this one hope, this only aim, O Rover of the Night, I came. Now let me tell what aid I ask To back me in my purposed task. In semblance of a golden deer Adorned with silver spots appear. Go, seek his dwelling: in the way Of Ráma and his consort stray. Doubt not the lady, when she sees The wondrous deer amid the trees, Will bid her lord and Lakshmaṇ take The creature for its beauty’s sake. Then when the chiefs have parted thence, And left her lone, without defence, As Ráhu storms the moonlight, I Will seize the lovely dame and fly. Her lord will waste away and weep For her his valour could not keep. Then boldly will I strike the blow And wreak my vengeance on the foe.”

  When wise Márícha heard the tale His heart grew faint, his cheek was pale, He stared with open orbs, and tried To moisten lips which terror dried, And grief, like death, his bosom rent As on the king his look he bent.   The monarch’s will he strove to stay,     Distracted with alarm,   For well he knew the might that lay     In Ráma’s matchless arm.   With suppliant hands Márícha stood     And thus began to tell   His counsel for the tyrant’s good,     And for his own as well:




Canto XXXVII. Márícha’s Speech.


Márícha gave attentive ear The ruler of the fiends to hear: Then, trained in all the rules that teach The eloquent, began his speech: “’Tis easy task, O King, to find Smooth speakers who delight the mind. But they who urge and they who do Distasteful things and wise, are few. Thou hast not learnt, by proof untaught, And borne away by eager thought, That Ráma, formed for high emprise, With Varuṇ or with Indra vies. Still let thy people live in peace, Nor let their name and lineage cease, For Ráma with his vengeful hand Can sweep the giants from the land. O, let not Janak’s daughter bring Destruction on the giant king. Let not the lady Sítá wake A tempest, on thy head to break. Still let the dame, by care untried, Be happy by her husband’s side, Lest swift avenging ruin fall On glorious Lanká, thee, and all. Men such as thou with wills unchained, Advised by sin and unrestrained, Destroy themselves, the king, the state, And leave the people desolate. Ráma, in bonds of duty held, Was never by his sire expelled. He is no wretch of greedy mind, Dishonour of his Warrior kind. Free from all touch of rancorous spite, All creatures’ good is his delight. He saw his sire of truthful heart Deceived by Queen Kaikeyí’s art, And said, a true and duteous son, “What thou hast promised shall be done.” To gratify the lady’s will, His father’s promise to fulfil, He left his realm and all delight For Daṇḍak wood, an anchorite. No cruel wretch, no senseless fool Is Ráma, unrestrained by rule. This groundless charge has ne’er been heard, Nor shouldst thou speak the slanderous word. Ráma in truth and goodness bold Is Virtue’s self in human mould, The sovereign of the world confessed As Indra rules among the Blest. And dost thou plot from him to rend The darling whom his arms defend? Less vain the hope to steal away The glory of the Lord of Day. O Rávaṇ, guard thee from the fire Of vengeful Ráma’s kindled ire,— Each spark a shaft with deadly aim, While bow and falchion feed the flame. Cast not away in hopeless strife Thy realm, thy bliss, thine own dear life. O Rávaṇ of his might beware, A God of Death who will not spare. That bow he knows so well to draw Is the destroyer’s flaming jaw, And with his shafts which flash and glow He slays the armies of the foe. Thou ne’er canst win—the thought forego— From the safe guard of shaft and bow King Janak’s child, the dear delight Of Ráma unapproached in might. The spouse of Raghu’s son, confessed Lion of men with lion chest,— Dearer than life, through good and ill Devoted to her husband’s will, The slender-waisted, still must be From thy polluting touches free. Far better grasp with venturous hand The flame to wildest fury fanned. What, King of giants, canst thou gain From this attempt so wild and vain? If in the fight his eye he bend Upon thee, Lord, thy days must end, So life and bliss and royal sway, Lost beyond hope, will pass away. Summon each lord of high estate, And chief, Vibhishaṇ(490) to debate. With peers in lore of counsel tried Consider, reason, and decide Scan strength and weakness, count the cost, What may be gained and what be lost. Examine and compare aright Thy proper power and Ráma’s might, Then if thy weal be still thy care, Thou wilt be prudent and forbear. O giant King, the contest shun,   Thy force is all too weak The lord of Kosál’s mighty son   In deadly fray to seek. King of the hosts that rove at night,   O hear what I advise: My prudent counsel do not slight;   Be patient and be wise.”




Canto XXXVIII. Márícha’s Speech.


“Once in my strength and vigour’s pride I roamed this earth from side to side, And towering like a mountain’s crest, A thousand Nágas’(491) might possessed. Like some vast sable cloud I showed: My golden armlets flashed and glowed. A crown I wore, an axe I swayed, And all I met were sore afraid. I roved where Daṇḍak wood is spread; On flesh of slaughtered saints I fed. Then Viśvámitra, sage revered, Holy of heart, my fury feared. To Daśaratha’s court he sped And went before the king and said:(492)

  “With me, my lord, thy Ráma send On holy days his aid to lend. Márícha fills my soul with dread And keeps me sore disquieted.”

  The monarch heard the saint’s request And thus the glorious sage addressed:

  “My boy as yet in arms untrained The age of twelve has scarce attained. But I myself a host will lead To guard thee in the hour of need. My host with fourfold troops complete, The rover of the night shall meet, And I, O best of saints, will kill Thy foeman and thy prayer fulfil.” The king vouchsafed his willing aid: The saint again this answer made:

  “By Ráma’s might, and his alone, Can this great fiend be overthrown. I know in days of yore the Blest Thy saving help in fight confessed. Still of thy famous deeds they tell In heaven above, in earth, and hell, A mighty host obeys thy hest: Here let it still, I pray thee, rest. Thy glorious son, though yet a boy, Will in the fight that fiend destroy. Ráma alone with me shall go: Be happy, victor of the foe.”

  He spoke: the monarch gave assent, And Ráma to the hermit lent. So to his woodland home in joy Went Viśvámitra with the boy. With ready bow the champion stood To guard the rites in Daṇḍak wood. With glorious eyes, most bright to view, Beardless as yet and dark of hue; A single robe his only wear, His temples veiled with waving hair, Around his neck a chain of gold, He grasped the bow he loved to hold; And the young hero’s presence made A glory in the forest shade. Thus Ráma with his beauteous mien, Like the young rising moon was seen, I, like a cloud which tempest brings, My arms adorned with golden rings, Proud of the boon which lent me might, Approached where dwelt the anchorite. But Ráma saw me venturing nigh, Raising my murderous axe on high; He saw, and fearless of the foe, Strung with calm hand his trusty bow. By pride of conscious strength beguiled, I scorned him as a feeble child, And rushed with an impetuous bound On Viśvámitra’s holy ground. A keen swift shaft he pointed well, The foeman’s rage to check and quell, And hurled a hundred leagues away Deep in the ocean waves I lay. He would not kill, but, nobly brave, My forfeit life he chose to save. So there I lay with wandering sense Dazed by that arrow’s violence. Long in the sea I lay: at length Slowly returned my sense and strength, And rising from my watery bed To Lanká’s town again I sped. Thus was I spared, but all my band Fell slain by Ráma’s conquering hand,— A boy, untrained in warrior’s skill, Of iron arm and dauntless will. If thou with Ráma still, in spite Of warning and of prayer, wilt fight, I see terrific woes impend, And dire defeat thy days will end. Thy giants all will feel the blow And share the fatal overthrow, Who love the taste of joy and play, The banquet and the festal day. Thine eyes will see destruction take Thy Lanká, lost for Sítá’s sake, And stately pile and palace fall With terrace, dome, and jewelled wall. The good will die: the crime of kings Destruction on the people brings: The sinless die, as in the lake The fish must perish with the snake. The prostrate giants thou wilt see Slain for this folly wrought by thee, Their bodies bright with precious scent And sheen of heavenly ornament; Or see the remnant of thy train Seek refuge far, when help is vain And with their wives, or widowed, fly To every quarter of the sky; Thy mournful eyes, where’er they turn, Will see thy stately city burn, When royal homes with fire are red, And arrowy nets around are spread. A sin that tops all sins in shame Is outrage to another’s dame, A thousand wives thy palace fill, And countless beauties wait thy will. O rest contented with thine own, Nor let thy race be overthrown. If thou, O King, hast still delight In rank and wealth and power and might, In noble wives, in troops of friends, In all that royal state attends, I warn thee, cast not all away, Nor challenge Ráma to the fray. If deaf to every friendly prayer,   Thou still wilt seek the strife, And from the side of Ráma tear   His lovely Maithil wife, Soon will thy life and empire end   Destroyed by Ráma’s bow, And thou, with kith and kin and friend,   To Yáma’s realm must go.”




Canto XXXIX. Márícha’s Speech.


“I told thee of that dreadful day When Ráma smote and spared to slay. Now hear me, Rávaṇ, while I tell What in the after time befell. At length, restored to strength and pride, I and two mighty fiends beside Assumed the forms of deer and strayed Through Daṇḍak wood in lawn and glade, I reared terrific horns: beneath Were flaming tongue and pointed teeth. I roamed where’er my fancy led, And on the flesh of hermits fed, In sacred haunt, by hallowed tree, Where’er the ritual fires might be. A fearful shape, I wandered through The wood, and many a hermit slew. With ruthless rage the saints I killed Who in the grove their tasks fulfilled. When smitten to the earth they sank, Their flesh I ate, their blood I drank, And with my cruel deeds dismayed All dwellers in the forest shade, Spoiling their rites in bitter hate, With human blood inebriate. Once in the wood I chanced to see Ráma again, a devotee, A hermit, fed on scanty fare, Who made the good of all his care. His noble wife was by his side, And Lakshmaṇ in the battle tried. In senseless pride I scorned the might Of that illustrious anchorite, And heedless of a hermit foe, Recalled my earlier overthrow. I charged him in my rage and scorn To slay him with my pointed horn, In heedless haste, to fury wrought As on my former wounds I thought. Then from the mighty bow he drew Three foe-destroying arrows flew, Keen-pointed, leaping from the string, Swift as the wind or feathered king. Dire shafts, on flesh of foemen fed, Like rushing thunderbolts they sped, With knots well smoothed and barbs well bent, Shot e’en as one, the arrows went. But I who Ráma’s might had felt, And knew the blows the hero dealt, Escaped by rapid flight. The two Who lingered on the spot, he slew. I fled from mortal danger, freed From the dire shaft by timely speed. Now to deep thought my days I give, And as a humble hermit live. In every shrub, in every tree I view that noblest devotee. In every knotted trunk I mark His deerskin and his coat of bark, And see the bow-armed Ráma stand Like Yáma with his noose in hand. I tell thee Rávaṇ, in my fright A thousand Rámas mock my sight, This wood with every bush and bough Seems all one fearful Ráma now. Throughout the grove there is no spot So lonely where I see him not. He haunts me in my dreams by night, And wakes me with the wild affright. The letter that begins his name Sends terror through my startled frame. The rapid cars whereon we ride, The rich rare jewels, once my pride, Have names(493) that strike upon mine ear With hated sound that counsels fear. His mighty strength too well I know, Nor art thou match for such a foe. Too strong were Raghus’s son in fight For Namuchi or Bali’s might. Then Ráma to the battle dare, Or else be patient and forbear; But, wouldst thou see me live in peace, Let mention of the hero cease. The good whose holy lives were spent In deepest thought, most innocent, With all their people many a time Have perished through another’s crime. So in the common ruin, I Must for another’s folly die, Do all thy strength and courage can, But ne’er will I approve the plan. For he, in might supremely great, The giant world could extirpate, Since, when impetuous Khara sought The grove of Janasthán and fought For Śúrpaṇakhá’s sake, he died By Ráma’s hand in battle tried. How has he wronged thee? Soothly swear, And Ráma’s fault and sin declare.   I warn thee, and my words are wise,     I seek thy people’s weal:   But if this rede thou wilt despise,     Nor hear my last appeal,   Thou with thy kin and all thy friends     In fight this day wilt die,   When his great bow the hero bends,     And shafts unerring fly.”




Canto XL. Rávan’s Speech.


But Rávaṇ scorned the rede he gave In timely words to warn and save, E’en as the wretch who hates to live Rejects the herb the leeches give. By fate to sin and ruin spurred, That sage advice the giant heard, Then in reproaches hard and stern Thus to Márícha spoke in turn:

  “Is this thy counsel, weak and base, Unworthy of thy giant race? Thy speech is fruitless, vain, thy toil Like casting seed on barren soil. No words of thine shall drive me back From Ráma and the swift attack. A fool is he, inured to sin, And more, of human origin. The craven, at a woman’s call To leave his sire, his mother, all The friends he loved, the power and sway, And hasten to the woods away! But now his anger will I rouse, Stealing away his darling spouse. I in thy sight will ravish her From Khara’s cruel murderer. Upon this plan my soul is bent, And naught shall move my firm intent, Not if the way through demons led And Gods with Indra at their head. ’Tis thine, when questioned, to explain The hope and fear, the loss and gain, And, when thy king thy thoughts would know, The triumph or the danger show. A prudent counsellor should wait, And speak when ordered in debate, With hands uplifted, calm and meek, If honour and reward he seek. Or, when some prudent course he sees Which, spoken, may his king displease He should by hints of dexterous art His counsel to his lord impart. But prudent words are said in vain When the blunt speech brings grief and pain. A high-souled king will scarcely thank The man who shames his royal rank. Five are the shapes that kings assume, Of majesty, of grace, and gloom: Like Indra now, or Agni, now Like the dear Moon, with placid brow: Like mighty Varuṇ now they show, Now fierce as He who rules below. O giant, monarchs lofty-souled Are kind and gentle, stern and bold, With gracious love their gifts dispense And swiftly punish each offence. Thus subjects should their rulers view With all respect and honour due. But folly leads thy heart to slight Thy monarch and neglect his right. Thou hast in lawless pride addressed With bitter words thy royal guest. I asked thee not my strength to scan, Or loss and profit in the plan. I only spoke to tell the deed O mighty one, by me decreed, And bid thee in the peril lend Thy succour to support thy friend. Hear me again, and I will tell How thou canst aid my venture well. In semblance of a golden deer Adorned with silver drops, appear: And near the cottage in the way Of Ráma and his consort stray. Draw nigh, and wandering through the brake With thy strange form her fancy take. The Maithil dame with wondering eyes Will took upon thy fair disguise, And quickly bid her husband go And bring the deer that charms her so, When Raghu’s son has left the place, Still pressing onward in the chase, Cry out, “O Lakshmaṇ! Ah, mine own!” With voice resembling Ráma’s tone. When Lakshmaṇ hears his brother’s cry, Impelled by Sítá he will fly, Restless with eager love, to aid The hunter in the distant shade. When both her guards have left her side, Even as Indra, thousand-eyed, Clasps Śachí, will I bear away The Maithil dame an easy prey. When thou, my friend, this aid hast lent, Go where thou wilt and live content. True servant, faithful to thy vow, With half my realm I thee endow. Go forth, may luck thy way attend That leads thee to the happy end. I in my car will quickly be In Daṇḍak wood, and follow thee. So will I cheat this Ráma’s eyes And win without a blow the prize; And safe return to Lanká’s town With thee, my friend, this day shall crown. But if thou wilt not aid my will, My hand this day thy blood shall spill. Yea, thou must share the destined task, For force will take the help I ask. No bliss that rebel’s life attends Whose stubborn will his lord offends.   Thy life, if thou the task assay,     In jeopardy may stand;   Oppose me, and this very day     Thou diest by this hand.   Now ponder all that thou hast heard     Within thy prudent breast:   Reflect with care on every word,     And do what seems the best.”




Canto XLI. Márícha’s Reply.


Against his judgment sorely pressed By his imperious lord’s behest, Márícha threats of death defied And thus with bitter words replied: “Ah, who, my King, with sinful thought This wild and wicked counsel taught, By which destruction soon will fall On thee, thy sons, thy realm and all? Who is the guilty wretch who sees With envious eye thy blissful ease, And by this plan, so falsely shown, Death’s gate for thee has open thrown? With souls impelled by mean desire Thy foes against thy life conspire. They urge thee to destruction’s brink, And gladly would they see thee sink. Who with base thought to work thee woe This fatal road has dared to show, And, triumph in his wicked eye, Would see thee enter in and die? To all thy counsellors, untrue, The punishment of death is due, Who see thee tempt the dangerous way, Nor strain each nerve thy foot to stay. Wise lords, whose king, by passion led, The path of sin begins to tread, Restrain him while there yet is time: But thine,—they see nor heed the crime. These by their master’s will obtain Merit and fame and joy and gain. ’Tis only by their master’s grace That servants hold their lofty place. But when the monarch stoops to sin They lose each joy they strive to win, And all the people people high and low Fall in the common overthrow. Merit and fame and honour spring, Best of the mighty, from the king. So all should strive with heart and will To keep the king from every ill. Pride, violence, and sullen hate Will ne’er maintain a monarch’s state, And those who cruel deeds advise Must perish when their master dies, Like drivers with their cars o’erthrown In places rough with root and stone. The good whose holy lives were spent On duty’s highest laws intent, With wives and children many a time Have perished for another’s crime. Hapless are they whose sovereign lord, Opposed to all, by all abhorred, Is cruel-hearted, harsh, severe: Thus might a jackal tend the deer. Now all the giant race await, Destroyed by thee, a speedy fate, Ruled by a king so cruel-souled, Foolish in heart and uncontrolled. Think not I fear the sudden blow That threatens now to lay me low: I mourn the ruin that I see Impending o’er thy host and thee. Me first perchance will Ráma kill, But soon his hand thy blood will spill. I die, and if by Ráma slain And not by thee, I count it gain. Soon as the hero’s face I see His angry eyes will murder me, And if on her thy hands thou lay Thy friends and thou are dead this day. If with my help thou still must dare The lady from her lord to tear, Farewell to all our days are o’er, Lanká and giants are no more.   In vain, in vain, an earnest friend,     I warn thee, King, and pray.   Thou wilt not to my prayers attend,     Or heed the words I say   So men, when life is fleeting fast     And death’s sad hour is nigh,   Heedless and blinded to the last     Reject advice and die.”




Canto XLII. Márícha Transformed.


Márícha thus in wild unrest With bitter words the king addressed. Then to his giant lord in dread, “Arise, and let us go,” he said. “Ah, I have met that mighty lord Armed with his shafts and bow and sword, And if again that bow he bend Our lives that very hour will end. For none that warrior can provoke And think to fly his deadly stroke. Like Yáma with his staff is he, And his dread hand will slaughter thee. What can I more? My words can find No passage to thy stubborn mind. I go, great King, thy task to share, And may success attend thee there.”

  With that reply and bold consent The giant king was well content. He strained Márícha to his breast And thus with joyful words addressed: “There spoke a hero dauntless still, Obedient to his master’s will, Márícha’s proper self once more: Some other took thy shape before. Come, mount my jewelled car that flies. Will-governed, through the yielding skies. These asses, goblin-faced, shall bear Us quickly through the fields of air. Attract the lady with thy shape, Then through the wood, at will, escape. And I, when she has no defence, Will seize the dame and bear her thence.”

  Again Márícha made reply, Consent and will to signify. With rapid speed the giants two From the calm hermit dwelling flew, Borne in that wondrous chariot, meet For some great God’s celestial seat. They from their airy path looked down On many a wood and many a town, On lake and river, brook and rill, City and realm and towering hill. Soon he whom giant hosts obeyed, Márícha by his side, surveyed The dark expanse of Daṇḍak wood Where Ráma’s hermit cottage stood. They left the flying car, whereon The wealth of gold and jewels shone, And thus the giant king addressed Márícha as his hand he pressed:

  “Márícha, look! before our eyes Round Ráma’s home the plantains rise. His hermitage is now in view: Quick to the work we came to do!”

  Thus Rávaṇ spoke, Márícha heard Obedient to his master’s word, Threw off his giant shape and near The cottage strayed a beauteous deer. With magic power, by rapid change, His borrowed form was fair and strange. A sapphire tipped each horn with light; His face was black relieved with white. The turkis and the ruby shed A glory from his ears and head. His arching neck was proudly raised, And lazulites beneath it blazed. With roseate bloom his flanks were dyed, And lotus tints adorned his hide. His shape was fair, compact, and slight; His hoofs were carven lazulite. His tail with every changing glow Displayed the hues of Indra’s bow. With glossy skin so strangely flecked, With tints of every gem bedecked. A light o’er Ráma’s home he sent, And through the wood, where’er he went. The giant clad in that strange dress That took the soul with loveliness, To charm the fair Videhan’s eyes With mingled wealth of mineral dyes, Moved onward, cropping in his way, The grass and grain and tender spray. His coat with drops of silver bright, A form to gaze on with delight, He raised his fair neck as he went To browse on bud and filament. Now in the Cassia grove he strayed, Now by the cot in plantains’ shade. Slowly and slowly on he came To catch the glances of the dame, And the tall deer of splendid hue Shone full at length in Sítá’s view. He roamed where’er his fancy chose Where Ráma’s leafy cottage rose. Now near, now far, in careless ease, He came and went among the trees. Now with light feet he turned to fly, Now, reassured, again drew nigh: Now gambolled close with leap and bound, Now lay upon the grassy ground: Now sought the door, devoid of fear, And mingled with the troop of deer; Led them a little way, and thence Again returned with confidence. Now flying far, now turning back Emboldened on his former track, Seeking to win the lady’s glance He wandered through the green expanse. Then thronging round, the woodland deer Gazed on his form with wondering fear; A while they followed where he led, Then snuffed the tainted gale and fled. The giant, though he longed to slay The startled quarry, spared the prey, And mindful of the shape he wore To veil his nature, still forbore. Then Sítá of the glorious eye, Returning from her task drew nigh; For she had sought the wood to bring Each loveliest flower of early spring. Now would the bright-eyed lady choose Some gorgeous bud with blending hues, Now plucked the mango’s spray, and now The bloom from an Aśoka bough. She with her beauteous form, unmeet For woodland life and lone retreat, That wondrous dappled deer beheld Gemmed with rich pearls, unparalleled, His silver hair the lady saw, His radiant teeth and lips and jaw, And gazed with rapture as her eyes Expanded in their glad surprise. And when the false deer’s glances fell On her whom Ráma loved so well, He wandered here and there, and cast A luminous beauty as he passed; And Janak’s child with strange delight Kept gazing on the unwonted sight.




Canto XLIII. The Wondrous Deer.


She stooped, her hands with flowers to fill, But gazed upon the marvel still: Gazed on its back and sparkling side Where silver hues with golden vied. Joyous was she of faultless mould, With glossy skin like polished gold. And loudly to her husband cried And bow-armed Lakshmaṇ by his side: Again, again she called in glee: “O come this glorious creature see; Quick, quick, my lord, this deer to view. And bring thy brother Lakshmaṇ too.” As through the wood her clear tones rang, Swift to her side the brothers sprang. With eager eyes the grove they scanned, And saw the deer before them stand. But doubt was strong in Lakshmaṇ’s breast, Who thus his thought and fear expressed:

  “Stay, for the wondrous deer we see The fiend Márícha’s self may be. Ere now have kings who sought this place To take their pastime in the chase, Met from his wicked art defeat, And fallen slain by like deceit. He wears, well trained in magic guile, The figure of a deer a while, Bright as the very sun, or place Where dwell the gay Gandharva race. No deer, O Ráma, e’er was seen Thus decked with gold and jewels’ sheen. ’Tis magic, for the world has ne’er, Lord of the world, shown aught so fair.”

  But Sítá of the lovely smile, A captive to the giant’s wile, Turned Lakshmaṇ’s prudent speech aside And thus with eager words replied: “My honoured lord, this deer I see With beauty rare enraptures me. Go, chief of mighty arm, and bring For my delight this precious thing. Fair creatures of the woodland roam Untroubled near our hermit home. The forest cow and stag are there, The fawn, the monkey, and the bear, Where spotted deer delight to play, And strong and beauteous Kinnars(494) stray. But never, as they wandered by, Has such a beauty charmed mine eye As this with limbs so fair and slight, So gentle, beautiful and bright. O see, how fair it is to view With jewels of each varied hue: Bright as the rising moon it glows, Lighting the wood where’er it goes. Ah me, what form and grace are there! Its limbs how fine, its hues how fair! Transcending all that words express, It takes my soul with loveliness. O, if thou would, to please me, strive To take the beauteous thing alive, How thou wouldst gaze with wondering eyes Delighted on the lovely prize! And when our woodland life is o’er, And we enjoy our realm once more, The wondrous animal will grace The chambers of my dwelling-place, And a dear treasure will it be To Bharat and the queens and me, And all with rapture and amaze Upon its heavenly form will gaze. But if the beauteous deer, pursued, Thine arts to take it still elude, Strike it, O chieftain, and the skin Will be a treasure, laid within. O, how I long my time to pass Sitting upon the tender grass, With that soft fell beneath me spread Bright with its hair of golden thread! This strong desire, this eager will, Befits a gentle lady ill: But when I first beheld, its look My breast with fascination took. See, golden hair its flank adorns, And sapphires tip its branching horns. Resplendent as the lunar way, Or the first blush of opening day, With graceful form and radiant hue It charmed thy heart, O chieftain, too.”

  He heard her speech with willing ear, He looked again upon the deer. Its lovely shape his breast beguiled Moved by the prayer of Janak’s child, And yielding for her pleasure’s sake, To Lakshmaṇ Ráma turned and spake:

  “Mark, Lakshmaṇ, mark how Sítá’s breast With eager longing is possessed. To-day this deer of wondrous breed Must for his passing beauty bleed, Brighter than e’er in Nandan strayed, Or Chaitraratha’s heavenly shade. How should the groves of earth possess Such all-surpassing loveliness! The hair lies smooth and bright and fine, Or waves upon each curving line, And drops of living gold bedeck The beauty of his side and neck. O look, his crimson tongue between His teeth like flaming fire is seen, Flashing, whene’er his lips he parts, As from a cloud the lightning darts. O see his sunlike forehead shine With emerald tints and almandine, While pearly light and roseate glow Of shells adorn his neck below. No eye on such a deer can rest But soft enchantment takes the breast: No man so fair a thing behold Ablaze with light of radiant gold, Celestial, bright with jewels’ sheen, Nor marvel when his eyes have seen. A king equipped with bow and shaft Delights in gentle forest craft, And as in boundless woods he strays The quarry for the venison slays. There as he wanders with his train A store of wealth he oft may gain. He claims by right the precious ore, He claims the jewels’ sparkling store. Such gains are dearer in his eyes Than wealth that in his chamber lies, The dearest things his spirit knows, Dear as the bliss which Śukra chose. But oft the rich expected gain Which heedless men pursue in vain, The sage, who prudent counsels know, Explain and in a moment show. This best of deer, this gem of all, To yield his precious spoils must fall, And tender Sítá by my side Shall sit upon the golden hide. Ne’er could I find so rich a coat On spotted deer or sheep or goat. No buck or antelope has such, So bright to view, so soft to touch. This radiant deer and one on high That moves in glory through the sky, Alike in heavenly beauty are, One on the earth and one a star. But, brother, if thy fears be true, And this bright creature that we view Be fierce Márícha in disguise, Then by this hand he surely dies. For that dire fiend who spurns control With bloody hand and cruel soul, Has roamed this forest and dismayed The holiest saints who haunt the shade. Great archers, sprung of royal race, Pursuing in the wood the chase, Have fallen by his wicked art, And now my shaft shall strike his heart. Vatápi, by his magic power Made heedless saints his flesh devour, Then, from within their frames he rent Forth bursting from imprisonment. But once his art in senseless pride Upon the mightiest saint he tried, Agastya’s self, and caused him taste The baited meal before him placed. Vátápi, when the rite was o’er, Would take the giant form he wore, But Saint Agastya knew his wile And checked the giant with smile. “Vátápi, thou with cruel spite Hast conquered many an anchorite The noblest of the Bráhman caste,— And now thy ruin comes at last.” Now if my power he thus defies, This giant, like Vátápi dies, Daring to scorn a man like me, A self subduing devotee. Yea, as Agastya slew the foe, My hand shall lay Márícha low Clad in thine arms thy bow in hand, To guard the Maithil lady stand, With watchful eye and thoughtful breast Keeping each word of my behest I go, and hunting through the brake This wondrous deer will bring or take. Yea surely I will bring the spoil Returning from my hunter’s toil See, Lakshmaṇ how my consort’s eyes Are longing for the lovely prize. This day it falls, that I may win The treasure of so fair a skin. Do thou and Sítá watch with care Lest danger seize you unaware. Swift from my bow one shaft will fly; The stricken deer will fall and die Then quickly will I strip the game And bring the trophy to my dame.   Jaṭáyus, guardian good and wise,     Our old and faithful friend,   The best and strongest bird that flies,     His willing aid will lend   The Maithil lady well protect,     For every chance provide,   And in thy tender care suspect     A foe on every side.”




Canto XLIV. Márícha’s Death.


Thus having warned his brother bold He grasped his sword with haft of gold, And bow with triple flexure bent, His own delight and ornament; Then bound two quivers to his side, And hurried forth with eager stride. Soon as the antlered monarch saw The lord of monarchs near him draw, A while with trembling heart he fled, Then turned and showed his stately head. With sword and bow the chief pursued Where’er the fleeing deer he viewed Sending from dell and lone recess The splendour of his loveliness. Now full in view the creature stood Now vanished in the depth of wood; Now running with a languid flight, Now like a meteor lost to sight. With trembling limbs away he sped; Then like the moon with clouds o’erspread Gleamed for a moment bright between The trees, and was again unseen. Thus in the magic deer’s disguise Márícha lured him to the prize, And seen a while, then lost to view, Far from his cot the hero drew. Still by the flying game deceived The hunter’s heart was wroth and grieved, And wearied with the fruitless chase He stayed him in a shady place. Again the rover of the night Enraged the chieftain, full in sight, Slow moving in the coppice near, Surrounded by the woodland deer. Again the hunter sought the game That seemed a while to court his aim: But seized again with sudden dread, Beyond his sight the creature fled. Again the hero left the shade, Again the deer before him strayed. With surer hope and stronger will The hunter longed his prey to kill. Then as his soul impatient grew, An arrow from his side he drew, Resplendent at the sunbeam’s glow, The crusher of the smitten foe. With skillful heed the mighty lord Fixed well shaft and strained the cord. Upon the deer his eyes he bent, And like a fiery serpent went The arrow Brahma’s self had framed, Alive with sparks that hissed and flamed, Like Indra’s flashing levin, true To the false deer the missile flew Cleaving his flesh that wonderous dart Stood quivering in Márícha’s heart. Scarce from the ground one foot he sprang, Then stricken fell with deadly pang. Half lifeless, as he pressed the ground, He gave a roar of awful sound And ere the wounded giant died He threw his borrowed form aside Remembering still his lord’s behest He pondered in his heart how best Sítá might send her guard away, And Rávaṇ seize the helpless prey. The monster knew the time was nigh, And called aloud with eager cry, “Ho, Sítá, Lakshmaṇ” and the tone He borrowed was like Ráma’s own.

  So by that matchless arrow cleft, The deer’s bright form Márícha left, Resumed his giant shape and size And closed in death his languid eyes. When Ráma saw his awful foe Gasp, smeared with blood, in deadly throe, His anxious thoughts to Sítá sped, And the wise words that Lakshmaṇ said, That this was false Márícha’s art, Returned again upon his heart. He knew the foe he triumphed o’er The name of great Márícha bore. “The fiend,” he pondered, ’ere he died, “Ho, Lakshmaṇ! ho, my Sítá!” cried Ah, if that cry has reached her ear, How dire must be my darling’s fear! And Lakshmaṇ of the mighty arm, What thinks he in his wild alarm? As thus he thought in sad surmise, Each startled hair began to rise, And when he saw the giant slain And thought upon that cry again, His spirit sank and terror pressed Full sorely on the hero’s breast. Another deer he chased and struck, He bore away the the fallen buck, To Janasthán then turned his face And hastened to his dwelling place.




Canto XLV. Lakshman’s Departure.


But Sítá hearing as she thought, Her husband’s cry with anguish fraught, Called to her guardian, “Lakshmaṇ, run And in the wood seek Raghu’s son. Scarce can my heart retain its throne, Scarce can my life be called mine own, As all my powers and senses fail At that long, loud and bitter wail. Haste to the wood with all thy speed And save thy brother in his need. Go, save him in the distant glade Where loud he calls, for timely aid. He falls beneath some giant foe— A bull whom lions overthrow.”

  Deaf to her prayer, no step he stirred Obedient to his mother’s word, Then Janak’s child, with ire inflamed, In words of bitter scorn exclaimed exclaimed

  “Sumitrá’s son, a friend in show, Thou art in truth thy brother’s foe, Who canst at such any hour deny Thy succour and neglect his cry. Yes, Lakshmaṇ, smit with love of me Thy brother’s death thou fain wouldst see. This guilty love thy heart has swayed And makes thy feet so loth to aid. Thou hast no love for Ráma, no: Thy joy is vice, thy thoughts are low Hence thus unmoved thou yet canst stay While my dear lord is far away. If aught of ill my lord betide Who led thee here, thy chief and guide, Ah, what will be my hapless fate Left in the wild wood desolate!”

  Thus spoke the lady sad with fear, With many a sigh and many a tear, Still trembling like a captured doe: And Lakshmaṇ spoke to calm her woe:

  “Videhan Queen, be sure of this,— And at the thought thy fear dismiss,— Thy husband’s mightier power defies All Gods and angels of the skies, Gandharvas, and the sons of light, Serpents, and rovers of the night. I tell thee, of the sons of earth, Of Gods who boast celestial birth, Of beasts and birds and giant hosts, Of demigods, Gandharvas, ghosts, Of awful fiends, O thou most fair, There lives not one whose heart would dare To meet thy Ráma in the fight, Like Indra’s self unmatched in might. Such idle words thou must not say Thy Ráma lives whom none may slay. I will not, cannot leave thee here In the wild wood till he be near. The mightiest strength can ne’er withstand His eager force, his vigorous hand. No, not the triple world allied With all the immortal Gods beside. Dismiss thy fear, again take heart, Let all thy doubt and woe depart. Thy lord, be sure, will soon be here And bring thee back that best of deer. Not his, not his that mournful cry, Nor haply came it from the sky. Some giant’s art was busy there And framed a castle based on air. A precious pledge art thou, consigned To me by him of noblest mind, Nor can I fairest dame, forsake The pledge which Ráma bade me take. Upon our heads, O Queen, we drew The giants’ hate when Ráma slew Their chieftain Khara, and the shade Of Janasthán in ruin laid. Through all this mighty wood they rove With varied cries from grove to grove On rapine bent they wander here: But O, dismiss thy causeless fear.”

  Bright flashed her eye as Lakshmaṇ spoke And forth her words of fury broke Upon her truthful guardian, flung With bitter taunts that pierced and stung: “Shame on such false compassion, base Defiler of thy glorious race! ’Twere joyous sight I ween to thee My lord in direst strait to see. Thou knowest Ráma sore bested, Or word like this thou ne’er hadst said. No marvel if we find such sin In rivals false to kith and kin. Wretches like thee of evil kind, Concealing crime with crafty mind. Thou, wretch, thine aid wilt still deny, And leave my lord alone to die. Has love of me unnerved thy hand, Or Bharat’s art this ruin planned? But be the treachery his or thine, In vain, in vain the base design. For how shall I, the chosen bride Of dark-hued Ráma, lotus-eyed, The queen who once called Ráma mine, To love of other men decline? Believe me, Lakshmaṇ, Ráma’s wife Before thine eyes will quit this life, And not a moment will she stay If her dear lord have passed away.”

  The lady’s bitter speech, that stirred Each hair upon his frame, he heard. With lifted hands together laid, His calm reply he gently made:

  “No words have I to answer now: My deity, O Queen, art thou. But ’tis no marvel, dame, to find Such lack of sense in womankind. Throughout this world, O Maithil dame, Weak women’s hearts are still the same. Inconstant, urged by envious spite, They sever friends and hate the right. I cannot brook, Videhan Queen, Thy words intolerably keen. Mine ears thy fierce reproaches pain As boiling water seethes the brain. And now to bear me witness all The dwellers in the wood I call, That, when with words of truth I plead, This harsh reply is all my meed. Ah, woe is thee! Ah, grief, that still Eager to do my brother’s will, Mourning thy woman’s nature, I Must see thee doubt my truth and die. I fly to Ráma’s side, and Oh, May bliss attend thee while I go! May all attendant wood-gods screen Thy head from harm, O large-eyed Queen! And though dire omens meet my sight And fill my soul with wild affright, May I return in peace and see The son of Raghu safe with thee!”

  The child of Janak heard him speak, And the hot tear-drops down her cheek, Increasing to a torrent, ran, As thus once more the dame began: “O Lakshmaṇ, if I widowed be Godávarí’s flood shall cover me, Or I will die by cord, or leap, Life weary, from yon rocky steep; Or deadly poison will I drink, Or ’neath the kindled flames will sink, But never, reft of Ráma, can Consent to touch a meaner man.”

  The Maithil dame with many sighs, And torrents pouring from her eyes, The faithful Lakshmaṇ thus addressed, And smote her hands upon her breast.   >Sumitrá’s son, o’erwhelmed by fears,     Looked on the large-eyed queen:   He saw that flood of burning tears,     He saw that piteous mien.   He yearned sweet comfort to afford,     He strove to soothe her pain;   But to the brother of her lord     She spoke no word again.   His reverent hands once more he raised,     His head he slightly bent,   Upon her face he sadly gazed,     And then toward Ráma went.




Canto XLVI. The Guest.


The angry Lakshmaṇ scarce could brook Her bitter words, her furious look. With dark forebodings in his breast To Ráma’s side he quickly pressed.

  Then ten necked Rávaṇ saw the time Propitious for his purposed crime. A mendicant in guise he came And stood before the Maithil dame. His garb was red, with tufted hair And sandalled feet a shade he bare, And from the fiend’s left shoulder slung A staff and water-vessel hung. Near to the lovely dame he drew, While both the chiefs were far from view, As darkness takes the evening air When neither sun nor moon is there. He bent his eye upon the dame, A princess fair, of spotless fame: So might some baleful planet be Near Moon-forsaken Rohiṇí.(495) As the fierce tyrant nearer drew, The trees in Janasthán that grew Waved not a leaf for fear and woe, And the hushed wind forbore to blow. Godávarí’s waters as they fled, Saw his fierce eye-balls flashing red, And from each swiftly-gliding wave A melancholy murmur gave. Then Rávaṇ, when his eager eye Beheld the longed-for moment nigh, In mendicant’s apparel dressed Near to the Maithil lady pressed. In holy guise, a fiend abhorred, He found her mourning for her lord. Thus threatening draws Śaniśchar(496) nigh To Chitrá(497) in the evening sky; Thus the deep well by grass concealed Yawns treacherous in the verdant field. He stood and looked upon the dame Of Ráma, queen of spotless fame With her bright teeth and each fair limb Like the full moon she seemed to him, Sitting within her leafy cot, Weeping for woe that left her not. Thus, while with joy his pulses beat, He saw her in her lone retreat, Eyed like the lotus, fair to view In silken robes of amber hue. Pierced to the core by Káma’s dart He murmured texts with lying art, And questioned with a soft address The lady in her loneliness. The fiend essayed with gentle speech The heart of that fair dame to reach, Pride of the worlds, like Beauty’s Queen Without her darling lotus seen:

  “O thou whose silken robes enfold A form more fair than finest gold, With lotus garland on thy head, Like a sweet spring with bloom o’erspread, Who art thou, fair one, what thy name, Beauty, or Honour, Fortune, Fame, Spirit, or nymph, or Queen of love Descended from thy home above? Bright as the dazzling jasmine shine Thy small square teeth in level line. Like two black stars aglow with light Thine eyes are large and pure and bright. Thy charms of smile and teeth and hair And winning eyes, O thou most fair, Steal all my spirit, as the flow Of rivers mines the bank below. How bright, how fine each flowing tress! How firm those orbs beneath thy dress! That dainty waist with ease were spanned, Sweet lady, by a lover’s hand. Mine eyes, O beauty, ne’er have seen Goddess or nymph so fair of mien, Or bright Gandharva’s heavenly dame, Or woman of so perfect frame. In youth’s soft prime thy years are few, And earth has naught so fair to view. I marvel one like thee in face Should make the woods her dwelling-place. Leave, lady, leave this lone retreat In forest wilds for thee unmeet, Where giants fierce and strong assume All shapes and wander in the gloom. These dainty feet were formed to tread Some palace floor with carpets spread, Or wander in trim gardens where Each opening bud perfumes the air. The richest robe thy form should deck, The rarest gems adorn thy neck, The sweetest wreath should bind thy hair, The noblest lord thy bed should share. Art thou akin, O fair of form, To Rudras,(498) or the Gods of storm,(499) Or to the glorious Vasus(500)? How Can less than these be bright as thou? But never nymph or heavenly maid Or Goddess haunts this gloomy shade. Here giants roam, a savage race; What led thee to so dire a place? Here monkeys leap from tree to tree, And bears and tigers wander free; Here ravening lions prowl, and fell Hyenas in the thickets yell, And elephants infuriate roam, Mighty and fierce, their woodland home. Dost thou not dread, so soft and fair, Tiger and lion, wolf and bear? Hast thou, O beauteous dame, no fear In the wild wood so lone and drear? Whose and who art thou? whence and why Sweet lady, with no guardian nigh, Dost thou this awful forest tread By giant bands inhabited?”

  The praise the high-souled Rávaṇ spoke No doubt within her bosom woke. His saintly look and Bráhman guise Deceived the lady’s trusting eyes. With due attention on the guest Her hospitable rites she pressed. She bade the stranger to a seat, And gave him water for his feet. The bowl and water-pot he bare, And garb which wandering Bráhmans wear   Forbade a doubt to rise. Won by his holy look she deemed The stranger even as he seemed   To her deluded eyes. Intent on hospitable care, She brought her best of woodland fare,   And showed her guest a seat. She bade the saintly stranger lave His feet in water which she gave,   And sit and rest and eat. He kept his eager glances bent On her so kindly eloquent, Wife of the noblest king; And longed in heart to steal her thence, Preparing by the dire offence, Death on his head to bring. The lady watched with anxious face For Ráma coming from the chase   With Lakshmaṇ by his side: But nothing met her wandering glance Save the wild forest’s green expanse   Extending far and wide.




Canto XLVII. Rávan’s Wooing.


As, clad in mendicant’s disguise, He questioned thus his destined prize, She to the seeming saintly man The story of her life began. “My guest is he,” she thought, “and I, To ’scape his curse, must needs reply:” “Child of a noble sire I spring From Janak, fair Videha’s king. May every good be thine! my name Is Sítá, Ráma’s cherished dame. Twelve winters with my lord I spent Most happily with sweet content In the rich home of Raghu’s line, And every earthly joy was mine. Twelve pleasant years flew by, and then His peers advised the king of men, Ráma, my lord, to consecrate Joint ruler of his ancient state. But when the rites were scarce begun, To consecrate Ikshváku’s son, The queen Kaikeyí, honoured dame, Sought of her lord an ancient claim. Her plea of former service pressed, And made him grant her new request, To banish Ráma to the wild And consecrate instead her child. This double prayer on him, the best And truest king, she strongly pressed: “Mine eyes in sleep I will not close, Nor eat, nor drink, nor take repose. This very day my death shall bring If Ráma be anointed king.” As thus she spake in envious ire, The aged king, my husband’s sire, Besought with fitting words; but she Was cold and deaf to every plea. As yet my days are few; eighteen The years of life that I have seen; And Ráma, best of all alive, Has passed of years a score and five— Ráma the great and gentle, through All region famed as pure and true, Large-eyed and mighty-armed and tall, With tender heart that cares for all. But Daśaratha, led astray By woman’s wile and passion’s sway, By his strong love of her impelled, The consecrating rites withheld. When, hopeful of the promised grace, My Ráma sought his father’s face, The queen Kaikeyí, ill at ease, Spoke to my lord brief words like these: “Hear, son of Raghu, hear from me The words thy father says to thee: “I yield this day to Bharat’s hand, Free from all foes, this ancient land. Fly from this home no longer thine, And dwell in woods five years and nine. Live in the forest and maintain Mine honour pure from falsehood’s stain.’ ” Then Ráma spoke, untouched by dread: “Yea, it shall be as thou hast said.” And answered, faithful to his vows, Obeying Daśaratha’s spouse: “The offered realm I would not take, But still keep true the words he spake.” Thus, gentle Bráhman, Ráma still Clung to his vow with firmest will. And valiant Lakshmaṇ, dear to fame, His brother by a younger dame, Bold victor in the deadly fray, Would follow Ráma on his way. On sternest vows his heart was set, And he, a youthful anchoret, Bound up in twisted coil his hair And took the garb which hermits wear; Then with his bow to guard us, he Went forth with Ráma and with me. By Queen Kaikeyí’s art bereft The kingdom and our home we left, And bound by stern religious vows We sought this shade of forest boughs. Now, best of Bráhmans, here we tread These pathless regions dark and dread. But come, refresh thy soul, and rest Here for a while an honoured guest, For he, my lord, will soon be here With fresh supply of woodland cheer, Large store of venison of the buck, Or some great boar his hand has struck. Meanwhile, O stranger, grant my prayer: Thy name, thy race, thy birth declare, And why with no companion thou Roamest in Daṇḍak forest now.”

  Thus questioned Sítá, Ráma’s dame. Then fierce the stranger’s answer came: “Lord of the giant legions, he From whom celestial armies flee,— The dread of hell and earth and sky, Rávaṇ the Rákshas king am I. Now when thy gold-like form I view Arrayed in silks of amber hue, My love, O thou of perfect mould, For all my dames is dead and cold. A thousand fairest women, torn From many a land my home adorn. But come, loveliest lady, be The queen of every dame and me. My city Lanká, glorious town, Looks from a mountain’s forehead down Where ocean with his flash and foam Beats madly on mine island home. With me, O Sítá, shalt thou rove Delighted through each shady grove, Nor shall thy happy breast retain Fond memory of this life of pain. In gay attire, a glittering band, Five thousand maids shall round thee stand, And serve thee at thy beck and sign, If thou, fair Sítá, wilt be mine.”

  Then forth her noble passion broke As thus in turn the lady spoke: “Me, me the wife of Ráma, him The lion lord with lion’s limb, Strong as the sea, firm as the rock, Like Indra in the battle shock. The lord of each auspicious sign, The glory of his princely line, Like some fair Bodh tree strong and tall, The noblest and the best of all, Ráma, the heir of happy fate Who keeps his word inviolate, Lord of the lion gait, possessed Of mighty arm and ample chest, Ráma the lion-warrior, him Whose moon bright face no fear can dim, Ráma, his bridled passions’ lord, The darling whom his sire adored,— Me, me the true and loving dame Of Ráma, prince of deathless fame— Me wouldst thou vainly woo and press? A jackal woo a lioness! Steal from the sun his glory! such Thy hope Lord Ráma’s wife to touch. Ha! Thou hast seen the trees of gold, The sign which dying eyes behold, Thus seeking, weary of thy life, To win the love of Ráma’s wife. Fool! wilt thou dare to rend away The famished lion’s bleeding prey, Or from the threatening jaws to take The fang of some envenomed snake? What, wouldst thou shake with puny hand Mount Mandar,(501) towering o’er the land, Put poison to thy lips and think The deadly cup a harmless drink? With pointed needle touch thine eye, A razor to thy tongue apply, Who wouldst pollute with impious touch The wife whom Ráma loves so much? Be round thy neck a millstone tied, And swim the sea from side to side; Or raising both thy hands on high Pluck sun and moon from yonder sky; Or let the kindled flame be pressed, Wrapt in thy garment, to thy breast; More wild the thought that seeks to win Ráma’s dear wife who knows not sin. The fool who thinks with idle aim To gain the love of Ráma’s dame, With dark and desperate footing makes His way o’er points of iron stakes. As Ocean to a bubbling spring, The lion to a fox, the king Of all the birds that ply the wing   To an ignoble crow As gold to lead of little price, As to the drainings of the rice The drink they quaff in Paradise,   The Amrit’s heavenly flow, As sandal dust with perfume sweet Is to the mire that soils our feet,   A tiger to a cat, As the white swan is to the owl, The peacock to the waterfowl,   An eagle to a bat, Such is my lord compared with thee; And when with bow and arrows he, Mighty as Indra’s self shall see   His foeman, armed to slay, Thou, death-doomed like the fly that sips The oil that on the altar drips, Shalt cast the morsel from thy lips   And lose thy half-won prey.” Thus in high scorn the lady flung The biting arrows of her tongue In bitter words that pierced and stung   The rover of the night. She ceased. Her gentle cheek grew pale, Her loosened limbs began to fail, And like a plantain in the gale   She trembled with affright. He terrible as Death stood nigh, And watched with fierce exulting eye   The fear that shook her frame. To terrify the lady more, He counted all his triumphs o’er, Proclaimed the titles that he bore,   His pedigree and name.




Canto XLVIII. Rávan’s Speech.


With knitted brow and furious eye The stranger made his fierce reply: “In me O fairest dame, behold The brother of the King of Gold. The Lord of Ten Necks my title, named Rávaṇ, for might and valour famed. Gods and Gandharva hosts I scare; Snakes, spirits, birds that roam the air Fly from my coming, wild with fear, Trembling like men when Death is near. Vaiśravaṇ once, my brother, wrought To ire, encountered me and fought, But yielding to superior might Fled from his home in sore affright. Lord of the man-drawn chariot, still He dwells on famed Kailása’s hill. I made the vanquished king resign The glorious car which now is mine,— Pushpak, the far-renowned, that flies Will-guided through the buxom skies. Celestial hosts by Indra led Flee from my face disquieted, And where my dreaded feet appear The wind is hushed or breathless is fear. Where’er I stand, where’er I go The troubled waters cease to flow, Each spell-bound wave is mute and still And the fierce sun himself is chill. Beyond the sea my Lanká stands Filled with fierce forms and giant bands, A glorious city fair to see As Indra’s Amarávatí. A towering height of solid wall, Flashing afar, surrounds it all, Its golden courts enchant the sight, And gates aglow with lazulite. Steeds, elephants, and cars are there, And drums’ loud music fills the air, Fair trees in lovely gardens grow Whose boughs with varied fruitage glow. Thou, beauteous Queen, with me shalt dwell In halls that suit a princess well, Thy former fellows shall forget Nor think of women with regret, No earthly joy thy soul shall miss, And take its fill of heavenly bliss. Of mortal Ráma think no more, Whose terms of days will soon be o’er. King Daśaratha looked in scorn On Ráma though the eldest born, Sent to the woods the weakling fool, And set his darling son to rule. What, O thou large-eyed dame, hast thou To do with fallen Ráma now, From home and kingdom forced to fly, A wretched hermit soon to die? Accept thy lover, nor refuse The giant king who fondly woos. O listen, nor reject in scorn A heart by Káma’s arrows torn. If thou refuse to hear my prayer, Of grief and coming woe beware; For the sad fate will fall on thee Which came on hapless Urvaśí, When with her foot she chanced to touch Purúravas, and sorrowed much.(502) My little finger raised in fight Were more than match for Ráma’s might. O fairest, blithe and happy be With him whom fortune sends to thee.”

  Such were the words the giant said, And Sítá’s angry eyes were red. She answered in that lonely place The monarch of the giant race:

  “Art thou the brother of the Lord Of Gold by all the world adored, And sprung of that illustrious seed Wouldst now attempt this evil deed? I tell thee, impious Monarch, all The giants by thy sin will fall, Whose reckless lord and king thou art, With foolish mind and lawless heart. Yea, one may hope to steal the wife Of Indra and escape with life. But he who Ráma’s dame would tear From his loved side must needs despair. Yea, one may steal fair Śachí, dame Of Him who shoots the thunder flame, May live successful in his aim   And length of day may see; But hope, O giant King, in vain, Though cups of Amrit thou may drain, To shun the penalty and pain   Of wronging one like me.”




Canto XLIX. The Rape Of Sítá.


The Rákshas monarch, thus addressed, His hands a while together pressed, And straight before her startled eyes Stood monstrous in his giant size. Then to the lady, with the lore Of eloquence, he spoke once more: “Thou scarce,” he cried, “hast heard aright The glories of my power and might. I borne sublime in air can stand And with these arms upheave the land, Drink the deep flood of Ocean dry And Death with conquering force defy, Pierce the great sun with furious dart And to her depths cleave earth apart. See, thou whom love and beauty blind, I wear each form as wills my mind.”

  As thus he spake in burning ire His glowing eyes were red with fire. His gentle garb aside was thrown And all his native shape was shown. Terrific, monstrous, wild, and dread As the dark God who rules the dead, His fiery eyes in fury rolled, His limbs were decked with glittering gold. Like some dark cloud the monster showed, And his fierce breast with fury glowed. The ten-faced rover of the night, With twenty arms exposed to sight, His saintly guise aside had laid And all his giant height displayed. Attired in robes of crimson dye He stood and watched with angry eye The lady in her bright array Resplendent as the dawn of day When from the east the sunbeams break, And to the dark-haired lady spake: “If thou would call that lord thine own Whose fame in every world is known, Look kindly on my love, and be Bride of a consort meet for thee. With me let blissful years be spent, For ne’er thy choice shalt thou repent. No deed of mine shall e’er displease My darling as she lives at ease. Thy love for mortal man resign, And to a worthier lord incline. Ah foolish lady, seeming wise In thine own weak and partial eyes, By what fair graces art thou held To Ráma from his realm expelled? Misfortunes all his life attend, And his brief days are near their end. Unworthy prince, infirm of mind! A woman spoke and he resigned His home and kingdom and withdrew From troops of friends and retinue. And sought this forest dark and dread By savage beasts inhabited.”

  Thus Rávaṇ urged the lady meet For love, whose words were soft and sweet. Near and more near the giant pressed As love’s hot fire inflamed his breast. The leader of the giant crew His arm around the lady threw: Thus Budha(503) with ill-omened might Steals Rohiṇí’s delicious light. One hand her glorious tresses grasped, One with its ruthless pressure clasped The body of his lovely prize, The Maithil dame with lotus eyes. The silvan Gods in wild alarm Marked his huge teeth and ponderous arm, And from that Death-like presence fled, Of mountain size and towering head. Then seen was Rávaṇ’s magic car Aglow with gold which blazed afar,— The mighty car which asses drew Thundering as it onward flew. He spared not harsh rebuke to chide The lady as she moaned and cried, Then with his arm about her waist His captive in the car he placed. In vain he threatened: long and shrill Rang out her lamentation still, O Ráma! which no fear could stay: But her dear lord was far away. Then rose the fiend, and toward the skies Bore his poor helpless struggling prize: Hurrying through the air above The dame who loathed his proffered love. So might a soaring eagle bear A serpent’s consort through the air. As on he bore her through the sky She shrieked aloud her bitter cry. As when some wretch’s lips complain In agony of maddening pain; “O Lakshmaṇ, thou whose joy is still To do thine elder brother’s will, This fiend, who all disguises wears, From Ráma’s side his darling tears. Thou who couldst leave bliss, fortune, all, Yea life itself at duty’s call, Dost thou not see this outrage done To hapless me, O Raghu’s son? ’Tis thine, O victor of the foe, To bring the haughtiest spirit low, How canst thou such an outrage see And let the guilty fiend go free? Ah, seldom in a moment’s time Comes bitter fruit of sin and crime, But in the day of harvest pain Comes like the ripening of the grain. So thou whom fate and folly lead To ruin for this guilty deed, Shalt die by Ráma’s arm ere long A dreadful death for hideous wrong. Ah, too successful in their ends Are Queen Kaikeyí and her friends, When virtuous Ráma, dear to fame, Is mourning for his ravished dame. Ah me, ah me! a long farewell To lawn and glade and forest dell In Janasthán’s wild region, where The Cassia trees are bright and fair With all your tongues to Ráma say That Rávaṇ bears his wife away. Farewell, a long farewell to thee, O pleasant stream Godávarí, Whose rippling waves are ever stirred By many a glad wild water-bird! All ye to Ráma’s ear relate The giant’s deed and Sítá’s fate. O all ye Gods who love this ground Where trees of every leaf abound, Tell Ráma I am stolen hence, I pray you all with reverence. On all the living things beside That these dark boughs and coverts hide, Ye flocks of birds, ye troops of deer, I call on you my prayer to hear. All ye to Ráma’s ear proclaim That Rávaṇ tears away his dame With forceful arms,—his darling wife, Dearer to Ráma than his life. O, if he knew I dwelt in hell, My mighty lord, I know full well, Would bring me, conqueror, back to-day, Though Yáma’s self reclaimed his prey.”

  Thus from the air the lady sent With piteous voice her last lament, And as she wept she chanced to see The vulture on a lofty tree. As Rávaṇ bore her swiftly by, On the dear bird she bent her eye, And with a voice which woe made faint Renewed to him her wild complaint:

  “O see, the king who rules the race Of giants, cruel, fierce and base, Rávaṇ the spoiler bears me hence The helpless prey of violence. This fiend who roves in midnight shade By thee, dear bird, can ne’er be stayed, For he is armed and fierce and strong Triumphant in the power to wrong. For thee remains one only task, To do, kind friend, the thing I ask. To Ráma’s ear by thee be borne How Sítá from her home is torn, And to the valiant Lakshmaṇ tell The giant’s deed and what befell.”




Canto L. Jatáyus.


The vulture from his slumber woke And heard the words which Sítá spoke He raised his eye and looked on her, Looked on her giant ravisher. That noblest bird with pointed beak, Majestic as a mountain peak, High on the tree addressed the king Of giants, wisely counselling: “O Ten-necked lord, I firmly hold To faith and laws ordained of old, And thou, my brother, shouldst refrain From guilty deeds that shame and stain. The vulture king supreme in air, Jaṭáyus is the name I bear. Thy captive, known by Sítá’s name, Is the dear consort and the dame Of Ráma, Daśaratha’s heir Who makes the good of all his care. Lord of the world in might he vies With the great Gods of seas and skies. The law he boasts to keep allows No king to touch another’s spouse, And, more than all, a prince’s dame High honour and respect may claim. Back to the earth thy way incline, Nor think of one who is not thine. Heroic souls should hold it shame To stoop to deeds which others blame, And all respect by them is shown To dames of others as their own. Not every case of bliss and gain The Scripture’s holy texts explain, And subjects, when that light is dim, Look to their prince and follow him. The king is bliss and profit, he Is store of treasures fair to see, And all the people’s fortunes spring, Their joy and misery, from the king. If, lord of giant race, thy mind Be fickle, false, to sin inclined, How wilt thou kingly place retain? High thrones in heaven no sinners gain. The soul which gentle passions sway Ne’er throws its nobler part away, Nor will the mansion of the base Long be the good man’s dwelling-place. Prince Ráma, chief of high renown, Has wronged thee not in field or town. Ne’er has he sinned against thee: how Canst thou resolve to harm him now? If moved by Śúrpaṇakhá’s prayer The giant Khara sought him there, And fighting fell with baffled aim, His and not Ráma’s is the blame. Say, mighty lord of giants, say What fault on Ráma canst thou lay? What has the world’s great master done That thou should steal his precious one? Quick, quick the Maithil dame release; Let Ráma’s consort go in peace, Lest scorched by his terrific eye Beneath his wrath thou fall and die Like Vritra when Lord Indra threw The lightning flame that smote and slew. Ah fool, with blinded eyes to take Home to thy heart a venomed snake! Ah foolish eyes, too blind to see That Death’s dire coils entangle thee! The prudent man his strength will spare, Nor lift a load too great to bear. Content is he with wholesome food Which gives him life and strength renewed, But who would dare the guilty deed That brings no fame or glorious meed, Where merit there is none to win And vengeance soon o’ertakes the sin? My course of life, Pulastya’s son, For sixty thousand years has run. Lord of my kind I still maintain Mine old hereditary reign. I, worn by years, am older far Than thou, young lord of bow and car, In coat of glittering mail encased And armed with arrows at thy waist, But not unchallenged shalt thou go, Or steal the dame without a blow. Thou canst not, King, before mine eyes Bear off unchecked thy lovely prize, Safe as the truth of Scripture bent By no close logic’s argument. Stay if thy courage let thee, stay And meet me in the battle fray, And thou shalt stain the earth with gore Falling as Khara fell before. Soon Ráma, clothed in bark, shall smite Thee, his proud foe, in deadly fight,— Ráma, from whom have oft times fled The Daitya hosts discomfited. No power have I to kill or slay: The princely youths are far away, But soon shalt thou with fearful eye Struck down beneath their arrows lie. But while I yet have life and sense, Thou shalt not, tyrant, carry hence Fair Sítá, Ramá’s honoured queen, With lotus eyes and lovely mien. Whate’er the pain, whate’er the cost, Though in the struggle life be lost, The will of Raghu’s noblest son And Daśaratha must be done. Stay for a while, O Rávaṇ, stay, One hour thy flying car delay, And from that glorious chariot thou Shalt fall like fruit from shaken bough, For I to thee, while yet I live, The welcome of a foe will give.”




Canto LI. The Combat.


Rávaṇ’s red eyes in fury rolled: Bright with his armlets’ flashing gold, In high disdain, by passion stirred He rushed against the sovereign bird. With clash and din and furious blows Of murderous battle met the foes: Thus urged by winds two clouds on high Meet warring in the stormy sky. Then fierce the dreadful combat raged As fiend and bird in war engaged, As if two winged mountains sped To dire encounter overhead. Keen pointed arrows thick and fast, In never ceasing fury cast, Rained hurtling on the vulture king And smote him on the breast and wing. But still that noblest bird sustained The cloud of shafts which Rávaṇ rained, And with strong beak and talons bent The body of his foeman rent. Then wild with rage the ten-necked king Laid ten swift arrows on his string,— Dread as the staff of Death were they, So terrible and keen to slay. Straight to his ear the string he drew, Straight to the mark the arrows flew, And pierced by every iron head The vulture’s mangled body bled. One glance upon the car he bent Where Sítá wept with shrill lament, Then heedless of his wounds and pain Rushed at the giant king again. Then the brave vulture with the stroke Of his resistless talons broke The giant’s shafts and bow whereon The fairest pearls and jewels shone. The monster paused, by rage unmanned: A second bow soon armed his hand, Whence pointed arrows swift and true In hundreds, yea in thousands, flew. The monarch of the vultures, plied With ceaseless darts on every side, Showed like a bird that turns to rest Close covered by the branch-built nest. He shook his pinions to repel The storm of arrows as it fell; Then with his talons snapped in two The mighty bow which Rávaṇ drew. Next with terrific wing he smote So fiercely on the giant’s coat, The harness, glittering with the glow Of fire, gave way beneath the blow. With storm of murderous strokes he beat The harnessed asses strong and fleet,— Each with a goblin’s monstrous face And plates of gold his neck to grace. Then on the car he turned his ire,— The will-moved car that shone like fire, And broke the glorious chariot, broke The golden steps and pole and yoke. The chouris and the silken shade Like the full moon to view displayed, Together with the guards who held Those emblems, to the ground he felled. The royal vulture hovered o’er The driver’s head, and pierced and tore With his strong beak and dreaded claws His mangled brow and cheek and jaws. With broken car and sundered bow, His charioteer and team laid low, One arm about the lady wound, Sprang the fierce giant to the ground. Spectators of the combat, all The spirits viewed the monster’s fall: Lauding the vulture every one Cried with glad voice, Well done! well done! But weak with length of days, at last The vulture’s strength was failing fast. The fiend again assayed to bear The lady through the fields of air. But when the vulture saw him rise Triumphant with his trembling prize, Bearing the sword that still was left When other arms were lost or cleft, Once more, impatient of repose, Swift from the earth her champion rose, Hung in the way the fiend would take, And thus addressing Rávaṇ spake: “Thou, King of giants, rash and blind, Wilt be the ruin of thy kind, Stealing the wife of Ráma, him With lightning scars on chest and limb. A mighty host obeys his will And troops of slaves his palace fill; His lords of state are wise and true, Kinsmen has he and retinue. As thirsty travellers drain the cup, Thou drinkest deadly poison up. The rash and careless fool who heeds No coming fruit of guilty deeds, A few short years of life shall see, And perish doomed to death like thee. Say whither wilt thou fly to loose Thy neck from Death’s entangling noose, Caught like the fish that finds too late The hook beneath the treacherous bait? Never, O King—of this be sure— Will Raghu’s fiery sons endure, Terrific in their vengeful rage, This insult to their hermitage. Thy guilty hands this day have done A deed which all reprove and shun, Unworthly of a noble chief, The pillage loved by coward thief. Stay, if thy heart allow thee, stay And meet me in the deadly fray. Soon shall thou stain the earth with gore, And fall as Khara fell before. The fruits of former deeds o’erpower The sinner in his dying hour: And such a fate on thee, O King, Thy tyranny and madness bring. Not e’en the Self-existent Lord, Who reigns by all the worlds adored, Would dare attempt a guilty deed Which the dire fruits of crime succeed.”

  Thus brave Jaṭáyus, best of birds, Addressed the fiend with moving words, Then ready for the swift attack Swooped down upon the giant’s back. Down to the bone the talons went; With many a wound the flesh was rent: Such blows infuriate drivers deal Their elephants with pointed steel. Fixed in his back the strong beak lay, The talons stripped the flesh away. He fought with claws and beak and wing, And tore the long hair of the king. Still as the royal vulture beat The giant with his wings and feet, Swelled the fiend’s lips, his body shook With furious rage too great to brook. About the Maithil dame he cast One huge left arm and held her fast. In furious rage to frenzy fanned He struck the vulture with his hand. Jatáyus mocked the vain assay, And rent his ten left arms away. Down dropped the severed limbs: anew Ten others from his body grew: Thus bright with pearly radiance glide Dread serpents from the hillock side, Again in wrath the giant pressed The lady closer to his breast, And foot and fist sent blow on blow In ceaseless fury at the foe. So fierce and dire the battle, waged Between those mighty champions, raged: Here was the lord of giants, there The noblest of the birds of air. Thus, as his love of Ráma taught, The faithful vulture strove and fought. But Rávaṇ seized his sword and smote His wings and side and feet and throat. At mangled side and wing he bled; He fell, and life was almost fled. The lady saw her champion lie, His plumes distained with gory dye, And hastened to the vulture’s side Grieving as though a kinsman died.   The lord of Lanká’s island viewed     The vulture as he lay:   Whose back like some dark cloud was hued,     His breast a paly grey,   Like ashes, when by none renewed,     The flame has died away.   The lady saw with mournful eye,     Her champion press the plain,—   The royal bird, her true ally     Whom Rávaṇ’s might had slain.   Her soft arms locked in strict embrace     Around his neck she kept,   And lovely with her moon-bright face     Bent o’er her friend and wept.




Canto LII. Rávan’s Flight.


Fair as the lord of silvery rays Whom every star in heaven obeys, The Maithil dame her plaint renewed O’er him by Rávaṇ’s might subdued: “Dreams, omens, auguries foreshow Our coming lot of weal and woe: But thou, my Ráma, couldst not see The grievous blow which falls on thee. The birds and deer desert the brakes And show the path my captor takes, And thus e’en now this royal bird Flew to mine aid by pity stirred. Slain for my sake in death he lies, The broad-winged rover of the skies. O Ráma, haste, thine aid I crave: O Lakshmaṇ, why delay to save? Brave sons of old Ikshváku, hear And rescue in this hour of fear.”

  Her flowery wreath was torn and rent, Crushed was each sparkling ornament. She with weak arms and trembling knees Clung like a creeper to the trees, And like some poor deserted thing With wild shrieks made the forest ring. But swift the giant reached her side, As loud on Ráma’s name she cried. Fierce as grim Death one hand he laid Upon her tresses’ lovely braid. “That touch, thou impious King, shall be The ruin of thy race and thee.” The universal world in awe That outrage on the lady saw, All nature shook convulsed with dread, And darkness o’er the land was spread. The Lord of Day grew dark and chill, And every breath of air was still. The Eternal Father of the sky Beheld the crime with heavenly eye, And spake with solemn voice, “The deed, The deed is done, of old decreed.” Sad were the saints within the grove, But triumph with their sorrow strove. They wept to see the Maithil dame Endure the outrage, scorn, and shame: They joyed because his life should pay The penalty incurred that day. Then Rávaṇ raised her up, and bare His captive through the fields of air, Calling with accents loud and shrill On Ráma and on Lakshmaṇ still. With sparkling gems on arm and breast, In silk of paly amber dressed, High in the air the Maithil dame Gleamed like the lightning’s flashing flame. The giant, as the breezes blew Upon her robes of amber hue, And round him twined that gay attire, Showed like a mountain girt with fire. The lady, fairest of the fair, Had wreathed a garland round her hair; Its lotus petals bright and sweet Rained down about the giant’s feet. Her vesture, bright as burning gold, Gave to the wind each glittering fold, Fair as a gilded cloud that gleams Touched by the Day-God’s tempered beams. Yet struggling in the fiend’s embrace, The lady with her sweet pure face, Far from her lord, no longer wore The light of joy that shone before. Like some sad lily by the side Of waters which the sun has dried; Like the pale moon uprising through An autumn cloud of darkest hue, So was her perfect face between The arms of giant Rávaṇ seen: Fair with the charm of braided tress And forehead’s finished loveliness; Fair with the ivory teeth that shed White lustre through the lips’ fine red, Fair as the lotus when the bud Is rising from the parent flood. With faultless lip and nose and eye, Dear as the moon that floods the sky With gentle light, of perfect mould, She seemed a thing of burnished gold, Though on her cheek the traces lay Of tears her hand had brushed away. But as the moon-beams swiftly fade Ere the great Day-God shines displayed, So in that form of perfect grace Still trembling in the fiend’s embrace, From her beloved Ráma reft, No light of pride or joy was left. The lady with her golden hue O’er the swart fiend a lustre threw, As when embroidered girths enfold An elephant with gleams of gold. Fair as the lily’s bending stem,— Her arms adorned with many a gem, A lustre to the fiend she lent Gleaming from every ornament, As when the cloud-shot flashes light The shadows of a mountain height. Whene’er the breezes earthward bore The tinkling of the zone she wore, He seemed a cloud of darkness hue Sending forth murmurs as it flew. As on her way the dame was sped From her sweet neck fair flowers were shed, The swift wind caught the flowery rain And poured it o’er the fiend again. The wind-stirred blossoms, sweet to smell, On the dark brows of Rávaṇ fell, Like lunar constellations set On Meru for a coronet. From her small foot an anklet fair With jewels slipped, and through the air, Like a bright circlet of the flame Of thunder, to the valley came. The Maithil lady, fair to see As the young leaflet of a tree Clad in the tender hues of spring, Flashed glory on the giant king, As when a gold-embroidered zone Around an elephant is thrown. While, bearing far the lady, through The realms of sky the giant flew, She like a gleaming meteor cast A glory round her as she passed. Then from each limb in swift descent Dropped many a sparkling ornament: On earth they rested dim and pale Like fallen stars when virtues fail.(504) Around her neck a garland lay Bright as the Star-God’s silvery ray: It fell and flashed like Gangá sent From heaven above the firmament.(505) The birds of every wing had flocked To stately trees by breezes rocked: These bowed their wind-swept heads and said: “My lady sweet, be comforted.” With faded blooms each brook within Whose waters moved no gleamy fin, Stole sadly through the forest dell Mourning the dame it loved so well. From every woodland region near Came lions, tigers, birds, and deer, And followed, each with furious look, The way her flying shadow took. For Sítá’s loss each lofty hill Whose tears were waterfall, and rill, Lifting on high each arm-like steep, Seemed in the general woe to weep. When the great sun, the lord of day, Saw Rávaṇ tear the dame away, His glorious light began to fail And all his disk grew cold and pale. “If Rávaṇ from the forest flies With Ráma’s Sítá as his prize, Justice and truth have vanished hence, Honour and right and innocence.” Thus rose the cry of wild despair From spirits as they gathered there. In trembling troops in open lawns Wept, wild with woe, the startled fawns, And a strange terror changed the eyes They lifted to the distant skies. On silvan Gods who love the dell A sudden fear and trembling fell, As in the deepest woe they viewed The lady by the fiend subdued. Still in loud shrieks was heard afar That voice whose sweetness naught could mar, While eager looks of fear and woe She bent upon the earth below. The lady of each winning wile With pearly teeth and lovely smile, Seized by the lord of Lanká’s isle,   Looked down for friends in vain. She saw no friend to aid her, none, Not Ráma nor the younger son Of Daśaratha, and undone   She swooned with fear and pain.




Canto LIII. Sítá’s Threats.


Soon as the Maithil lady knew That high through air the giant flew, Distressed with grief and sore afraid Her troubled spirit sank dismayed. Then, as anew the waters welled From those red eyes which sorrow swelled, Forth in keen words her passion broke, And to the fierce-eyed fiend she spoke: “Canst thou attempt a deed so base, Untroubled by the deep disgrace,— To steal me from my home and fly, When friend or guardian none was nigh? Thy craven soul that longed to steal, Fearing the blows that warriors deal, Upon a magic deer relied To lure my husband from my side, Friend of his sire, the vulture king Lies low on earth with mangled wing, Who gave his aged life for me And died for her he sought to free. Ah, glorious strength indeed is thine, Thou meanest of thy giant line, Whose courage dared to tell thy name And conquer in the fight a dame. Does the vile deed that thou hast done Cause thee no shame, thou wicked one— A woman from her home to rend When none was near his aid to lend? Through all the worlds, O giant King, The tidings of this deed will ring, This deed in law and honour’s spite By one who claims a hero’s might. Shame on thy boasted valour, shame! Thy prowess is an empty name. Shame, giant, on this cursed deed For which thy race is doomed to bleed! Thou fliest swifter than the gale, For what can strength like thine avail? Stay for one hour, O Rávaṇ, stay; Thou shalt not flee with life away. Soon as the royal chieftains’ sight Falls on the thief who roams by night, Thou wilt not, tyrant, live one hour Though backed by all thy legions’ power. Ne’er can thy puny strength sustain The tempest of their arrowy rain: Have e’er the trembling birds withstood The wild flames raging in the wood? Hear me, O Rávaṇ, let me go, And save thy soul from coming woe. Or if thou wilt not set me free, Wroth for this insult done to me. With his brave brother’s aid my lord Against thy life will raise his sword. A guilty hope inflames thy breast His wife from Ráma’s home to wrest. Ah fool, the hope thou hast is vain; Thy dreams of bliss shall end in pain. If torn from all I love by thee My godlike lord no more I see, Soon will I die and end my woes, Nor live the captive of my foes. Ah fool, with blinded eyes to choose The evil and the good refuse! So the sick wretch with stubborn will Turns fondly to the cates that kill, And madly draws his lips away From medicine that would check decay. About thy neck securely wound The deadly coil of Fate is bound, And thou, O Rávaṇ, dost not fear Although the hour of death is near. With death-doomed sight thine eyes behold The gleaming of the trees of gold,— See dread Vaitaraṇi, the flood That rolls a stream of foamy blood,— See the dark wood by all abhorred— Its every leaf a threatening sword. The tangled thickets thou shall tread Where thorns with iron points are spread. For never can thy days be long, Base plotter of this shame and wrong To Ráma of the lofty soul: He dies who drinks the poisoned bowl. The coils of death around thee lie: They hold thee and thou canst not fly. Ah whither, tyrant, wouldst thou run The vengeance of my lord to shun? By his unaided arm alone Were twice seven thousand fiends o’erthrown: Yes, in the twinkling of an eye He forced thy mightiest fiends to die. And shall that lord of lion heart, Skilled in the bow and spear and dart, Spare thee, O fiend, in battle strife, The robber of his darling wife?”

  These were her words, and more beside, By wrath and bitter hate supplied. Then by her woe and fear o’erthrown She wept again and made her moan. As long she wept in grief and dread, Scarce conscious of the words she said, The wicked giant onward fled   And bore her through the air. As firm he held the Maithil dame, Still wildly struggling, o’er her frame With grief and bitter misery came   The trembling of despair.




Canto LIV. Lanká.


He bore her on in rapid flight, And not a friend appeared in sight. But on a hill that o’er the wood Raised its high top five monkeys stood. From her fair neck her scarf she drew, And down the glittering vesture flew. With earring, necklet, chain, and gem, Descending in the midst of them: “For these,” she thought, “my path may show, And tell my lord the way I go.” Nor did the fiend, in wild alarm, Mark when she drew from neck and arm And foot the gems and gold, and sent To earth each gleaming ornament. The monkeys raised their tawny eyes That closed not in their first surprise, And saw the dark-eyed lady, where She shrieked above them in the air. High o’er their heads the giant passed Holding the weeping lady fast. O’er Pampa’s flashing flood he sped And on to Lanká’s city fled. He bore away in senseless joy The prize that should his life destroy, Like the rash fool who hugs beneath His robe a snake with venomed teeth. Swift as an arrow from a bow, Speeding o’er lands that lay below, Sublime in air his course he took O’er wood and rock and lake and brook. He passed at length the sounding sea Where monstrous creatures wander free,— Seat of Lord Varuṇ’s ancient reign, Controller of the eternal main. The angry waves were raised and tossed As Rávaṇ with the lady crossed, And fish and snake in wild unrest Showed flashing fin and gleaming crest. Then from the blessed troops who dwell In air celestial voices fell: “O ten-necked King,” they cried, “attend: This guilty deed will bring thine end.”

  Then Rávaṇ speeding like the storm, Bearing his death in human form, The struggling Sítá, lighted down In royal Lanká’s glorious town; A city bright and rich, that showed Well-ordered street and noble road; Arranged with just division, fair With multitudes in court and square. Thus, all his journey done, he passed Within his royal home at last. There in a queenly bower he placed The black-eyed dame with dainty waist: Thus in her chamber Máyá laid The lovely Máyá, demon maid. Then Rávaṇ gave command to all The dread she-fiends who filled the hall: “This captive lady watch and guard From sight of man and woman barred. But all the fair one asks beside Be with unsparing hand supplied: As though ’twere I that asked, withhold No pearls or dress or gems or gold. And she among you that shall dare Of purpose or through want of care One word to vex her soul to say, Throws her unvalued life away.”

  Thus spake the monarch of their race To those she-fiends who thronged the place, And pondering on the course to take Went from the chamber as he spake. He saw eight giants, strong and dread, On flesh of bleeding victims fed, Proud in the boon which Brahmá gave, And trusting in its power to save. He thus the mighty chiefs addressed Of glorious power and strength possessed: “Arm, warriors, with the spear and bow; With all your speed from Lanká go, For Janasthán, our own no more, Is now defiled with giants’ gore; The seat of Khara’s royal state Is left unto us desolate. In your brave hearts and might confide, And cast ignoble fear aside. Go, in that desert region dwell Where the fierce giants fought and fell. A glorious host that region held, For power and might unparalleled, By Dúshaṇ and brave Khara led,— All, slain by Ráma’s arrows, bled. Hence boundless wrath that spurns control Reigns paramount within my soul, And naught but Ráma’s death can sate The fury of my vengeful hate. I will not close my slumbering eyes Till by this hand my foeman dies. And when mine arm has slain the foe Who laid those giant princes low, Long will I triumph in the deed, Like one enriched in utmost need. Now go; that I this end may gain, In Janasthán, O chiefs, remain. Watch Ráma there with keenest eye, And all his deeds and movements spy. Go forth, no helping art neglect, Be brave and prompt and circumspect, And be your one endeavour still To aid mine arm this foe to kill. Oft have I seen your warrior might Proved in the forehead of the fight, And sure of strength I know so well Send you in Janasthán to dwell.”   The giants heard with prompt assent     The pleasant words he said,   And each before his master bent     For meet salute, his head.   Then as he bade, without delay,     From Lanká’s gate they passed,   And hurried forward on their way     Invisible and fast.




Canto LV. Sítá In Prison.


Thus Rávaṇ his commandment gave To those eight giants strong and brave, So thinking in his foolish pride Against all dangers to provide. Then with his wounded heart aflame With love he thought upon the dame, And took with hasty steps the way To the fair chamber where she lay. He saw the gentle lady there Weighed down by woe too great to bear, Amid the throng of fiends who kept Their watch around her as she wept: A pinnace sinking neath the wave When mighty winds around her rave: A lonely herd-forsaken deer, When hungry dogs are pressing near. Within the bower the giant passed: Her mournful looks were downward cast. As there she lay with streaming eyes The giant bade the lady rise, And to the shrinking captive showed The glories of his rich abode, Where thousand women spent their days In palaces with gold ablaze; Where wandered birds of every sort, And jewels flashed in hall and court. Where noble pillars charmed the sight With diamond and lazulite, And others glorious to behold With ivory, crystal, silver, gold. There swelled on high the tambour’s sound, And burnished ore was bright around He led the mournful lady where Resplendent gold adorned the stair, And showed each lattice fair to see With silver work and ivory: Showed his bright chambers, line on line, Adorned with nets of golden twine. Beyond he showed the Maithil dame His gardens bright as lightning’s flame, And many a pool and lake he showed Where blooms of gayest colour glowed. Through all his home from view to view The lady sunk in grief he drew. Then trusting in her heart to wake Desire of all she saw, he spake: “Three hundred million giants, all Obedient to their master’s call, Not counting young and weak and old, Serve me with spirits fierce and bold. A thousand culled from all of these Wait on the lord they long to please. This glorious power, this pomp and sway, Dear lady, at thy feet I lay: Yea, with my life I give the whole, O dearer than my life and soul. A thousand beauties fill my hall: Be thou my wife and rule them all. O hear my supplication! why This reasonable prayer deny? Some pity to thy suitor show, For love’s hot flames within me glow. This isle a hundred leagues in length, Encompassed by the ocean’s strength, Would all the Gods and fiends defy Though led by Him who rules the sky. No God in heaven, no sage on earth, No minstrel of celestial birth, No spirit in the worlds I see A match in power and might for me. What wilt thou do with Ráma, him Whose days are short, whose light is dim, Expelled from home and royal sway, Who treads on foot his weary way? Leave the poor mortal to his fate, And wed thee with a worthier mate. My timid love, enjoy with me The prime of youth before it flee. Do not one hour the hope retain To look on Ráma’s face again. For whom would wildest thought beguile To seek thee in the giants’ isle? Say who is he has power to bind In toils of net the rushing wind. Whose is the mighty hand will tame And hold the glory of the flame? In all the worlds above, below, Not one, O fair of form, I know Who from this isle in fight could rend The lady whom these arms defend. Fair Queen, o’er Lanká’s island reign, Sole mistress of the wide domain. Gods, rovers of the night like me, And all the world thy slaves will be. O’er thy fair brows and queenly head Let consecrating balm be shed, And sorrow banished from thy breast, Enjoy my love and take thy rest. Here never more thy soul shall know The memory of thy former woe, And here shall thou enjoy the meed Deserved by every virtuous deed. Here garlands glow of flowery twine, With gorgeous hues and scent divine. Take gold and gems and rich attire: Enjoy with me thy heart’s desire. There stand, of chariots far the best, The car my brother once possessed. Which, victor in the stricken field, I forced the Lord of Gold to yield. ’Tis wide and high and nobly wrought, Bright as the sun and swift as thought. Therein O Sítá, shalt thou ride Delighted by thy lover’s side. But sorrow mars with lingering trace The splendour of thy lotus face. A cloud of woe is o’er it spread, And all the light of joy is fled.”

  The lady, by her woe distressed, One corner of her raiment pressed To her sad cheek like moonlight clear, And wiped away a falling tear. The rover of the night renewed His eager pleading as he viewed The lady stand like one distraught, Striving to fix her wandering thought:

  “Think not, sweet lady, of the shame Of broken vows, nor fear the blame. The saints approve with favouring eyes This union knit with marriage ties. O beauty, at thy radiant feet I lay my heads, and thus entreat. One word of grace, one look I crave: Have pity on thy prostrate slave. These idle words I speak are vain, Wrung forth by love’s consuming pain, And ne’er of Rávaṇ be it said He wooed a dame with prostrate head.” Thus to the Maithil lady sued The monarch of the giant brood, And “She is now mine own,” he thought, In Death’s dire coils already caught.




Canto LVI. Sítá’s Disdain.


His words the Maithil lady heard Oppressed by woe but undeterred. Fear of the fiend she cast aside, And thus in noble scorn replied: “His word of honour never stained King Daśaratha nobly reigned, The bridge of right, the friend of truth. His eldest son, a noble youth, Is Ráma, virtue’s faithful friend, Whose glories through the worlds extend. Long arms and large full eyes has he, My husband, yea a God to me. With shoulders like the forest king’s, From old Ikshváku’s line he springs. He with his brother Lakshmaṇ’s aid Will smite thee with the vengeful blade. Hadst thou but dared before his eyes To lay thine hand upon the prize, Thou stretched before his feet hadst lain In Janasthán like Khara slain. Thy boasted rovers of the night With hideous shapes and giant might,— Like serpents when the feathered king Swoops down with his tremendous wing,— Will find their useless venom fail When Ráma’s mighty arms assail. The rapid arrows bright with gold, Shot from the bow he loves to hold, Will rend thy frame from flank to flank As Gangá’s waves erode the bank. Though neither God nor fiend have power To slay thee in the battle hour, Yet from his hand shall come thy fate, Struck down before his vengeful hate. That mighty lord will strike and end The days of life thou hast to spend. Thy days are doomed, thy life is sped Like victims to the pillar led. Yea, if the glance of Ráma bright With fury on thy form should light, Thou scorched this day wouldst fall and die Like Káma slain by Rudra’s eye.(506) He who from heaven the moon could throw, Or bid its bright rays cease to glow,— He who could drain the mighty sea Will set his darling Sítá free. Fled is thy life, thy glory, fled Thy strength and power: each sense is dead. Soon Lanká widowed by thy guilt Will see the blood of giants spilt. This wicked deed, O cruel King, No triumph, no delight will bring. Thou with outrageous might and scorn A woman from her lord hast torn. My glorious husband far away, Making heroic strength his stay, Dwells with his brother, void of fear, In Daṇḍak forest lone and drear. No more in force of arms confide: That haughty strength, that power and pride My hero with his arrowy rain From all thy bleeding limbs will drain. When urged by fate’s dire mandate, nigh Comes the fixt hour for men to die. Caught in Death’s toils their eyes are blind, And folly takes each wandering mind. So for the outrage thou hast done The fate is near thou canst not shun,— The fate that on thyself and all Thy giants and thy town shall fall. I spurn thee: can the altar dight With vessels for the sacred rite, O’er which the priest his prayer has said, Be sullied by an outcaste’s tread? So me, the consort dear and true Of him who clings to virtue too, Thy hated touch shall ne’er defile, Base tyrant lord of Lanká’s isle. Can the white swan who floats in pride Through lilies by her consort’s side, Look for one moment, as they pass, On the poor diver in the grass? This senseless body waits thy will, To torture, chain, to wound or kill. I will not, King of giants, strive To keep this fleeting soul alive But never shall they join the name Of Sítá with reproach and shame.”

  Thus as her breast with fury burned Her bitter speech the dame returned. Such words of rage and scorn, the last She uttered, at the fiend she cast. Her taunting speech the giant heard, And every hair with anger stirred. Then thus with fury in his eye He made in threats his fierce reply: “Hear Maithil lady, hear my speech: List to my words and ponder each. If o’er thy head twelve months shall fly And thou thy love wilt still deny, My cooks shall mince thy flesh with steel And serve it for my morning meal.”

  Thus with terrific threats to her Spake Rávaṇ, cruel ravener. Mad with the rage her answer woke He called the fiendish train and spoke: “Take her, ye Rákshas dames, who fright With hideous form and mien the sight, Who make the flesh of men your food,— And let her pride be soon subdued.” He spoke, and at his word the band Of fiendish monsters raised each hand In reverence to the giant king, And pressed round Sítá in a ring. Rávaṇ once more with stern behest To those she-fiends his speech addressed: Shaking the earth beneath his tread, He stamped his furious foot and said: “To the Aśoka garden bear The dame, and guard her safely there Until her stubborn pride be bent By mingled threat and blandishment. See that ye watch her well, and tame, Like some she-elephant, the dame.”

  They led her to that garden where The sweetest flowers perfumed the air, Where bright trees bore each rarest fruit, And birds, enamoured, ne’er were mute. Bowed down with terror and distress, Watched by each cruel giantess,— Like a poor solitary deer When ravening tigresses are near,— The hapless lady lay distraught Like some wild thing but newly caught, And found no solace, no relief From agonizing fear and grief; Not for one moment could forget Each terrifying word and threat, Or the fierce eyes upon her set   By those who watched around. She thought of Ráma far away, She mourned for Lakshmaṇ as she lay In grief and terror and dismay   Half fainting on the ground.




Canto LVII. Sítá Comforted.


Soon as the fiend had set her down Within his home in Lanká’s town Triumph and joy filled Indra’s breast, Whom thus the Eternal Sire addressed:

  “This deed will free the worlds from woe And cause the giants’ overthrow. The fiend has borne to Lanká’s isle The lady of the lovely smile, True consort born to happy fate With features fair and delicate. She looks and longs for Ráma’s face, But sees a crowd of demon race, And guarded by the giant’s train Pines for her lord and weeps in vain. But Lanká founded on a steep Is girdled by the mighty deep, And how will Ráma know his fair And blameless wife is prisoned there? She on her woe will sadly brood And pine away in solitude, And heedless of herself, will cease To live, despairing of release. Yes, pondering on her fate, I see Her gentle life in jeopardy. Go, Indra, swiftly seek the place, And look upon her lovely face. Within the city make thy way: Let heavenly food her spirit stay.”

  Thus Brahma spake: and He who slew The cruel demon Páka, flew Where Lanká’s royal city lay, And Sleep went with him on his way. “Sleep,” cried the heavenly Monarch, “close Each giant’s eye in deep repose.”

  Thus Indra spoke, and Sleep fulfilled With joy his mandate, as he willed, To aid the plan the Gods proposed, The demons’ eyes in sleep she closed. Then Śachí’s lord, the Thousand-eyed, To the Aśoka garden hied. He came and stood where Sítá lay, And gently thus began to say: “Lord of the Gods who hold the sky, Dame of the lovely smile, am I. Weep no more, lady, weep no more; Thy days of woe will soon be o’er. I come, O Janak’s child, to be The helper of thy lord and thee. He through my grace, with hosts to aid, This sea-girt land will soon invade. ’Tis by my art that slumbers close The eyelids of thy giant foes. Now I, with Sleep, this place have sought, Videhan lady, and have brought A gift of heaven’s ambrosial food To stay thee in thy solitude. Receive it from my hand, and taste, O lady of the dainty waist: For countless ages thou shall be From pangs of thirst and hunger free.”

  But doubt within her bosom woke As to the Lord of Gods she spoke: “How may I know for truth that thou Whose form I see before me now Art verily the King adored By heavenly Gods, and Śachí’s lord? With Raghu’s sons I learnt to know The certain signs which Godhead show. These marks before mine eyes display If o’er the Gods thou bear the sway.”

  The heavenly lord of Śachí heard, And did according to her word. Above the ground his feet were raised; With eyelids motionless he gazed. No dust upon his raiment lay, And his bright wreath was fresh and gay. Nor was the lady’s glad heart slow The Monarch of the Gods to know, And while the tears unceasing ran From her sweet eyes she thus began: “My lord has gained a friend in thee, And I this day thy presence see Shown clearly to mine eyes, as when Ráma and Lakshmaṇ, lords of men, Beheld it, and their sire the king, And Janak too from whom I spring. Now I, O Monarch of the Blest, Will eat this food at thy behest, Which thou hast brought me, of thy grace, To aid and strengthen Raghu’s race.”

  She spoke, and by his words relieved, The food from Indra’s hand received, Yet ere she ate the balm he brought, On Lakshmaṇ and her lord she thought. “If my brave lord be still alive, If valiant Lakshmaṇ yet survive, May this my taste of heavenly food Bring health to them and bliss renewed!”     She ate, and that celestial food   Stayed hunger, thirst, and lassitude,     And all her strength restored.   Great joy her hopeful spirit stirred   At the glad tidings newly heard     Of Lakshmaṇ and her lord.   And Indra’s heart was joyful too:   He bade the Maithil dame adieu,     His saving errand done.   With Sleep beside him parting thence   He sought his heavenly residence     To prosper Raghu’s son.




Canto LVIII. The Brothers’ Meeting.


When Ráma’s deadly shaft had struck The giant in the seeming buck, The chieftain turned him from the place His homeward way again to trace. Then as he hastened onward, fain To look upon his spouse again, Behind him from a thicket nigh Rang out a jackal’s piercing cry. Alarmed he heard the startling shriek That raised his hair and dimmed his cheek, And all his heart was filled with doubt As the shrill jackal’s cry rang out: “Alas, some dire disaster seems Portended by the jackal’s screams. O may the Maithil dame be screened From outrage of each hungry fiend! Alas, if Lakshmaṇ chanced to hear That bitter cry of woe and fear What time Márícha, as he died, With voice that mocked my accents cried, Swift to my side the prince would flee And quit the dame to succour me. Too well I see the demon band The slaughter of my love have planned. Me far from home and Sítá’s view The seeming deer Márícha drew. He led me far through brake and dell Till wounded by my shaft he fell, And as he sank rang out his cry, “O save me, Lakshmaṇ, or I die.” May it be well with both who stayed In the great wood with none to aid, For every fiend is now my foe For Janasthán’s great overthrow, And many an omen seen to-day Has filled my heart with sore dismay.”

  Such were the thoughts and sad surmise Of Ráma at the jackal’s cries, And all his heart within him burned As to his cot his steps he turned. He pondered on the deer that led His feet to follow where it fled, And sad with many a bitter thought His home in Janasthán he sought. His soul was dark with woe and fear When flocks of birds and troops of deer Move round him from the left, and raised Discordant voices as they gazed. The omens which the chieftain viewed The terror of his soul renewed, When lo, to meet him Lakshmaṇ sped With brows whence all the light had fled. Near and more near the princes came, Each brother’s heart and look the same; Alike on each sad visage lay The signs of misery and dismay, Then Ráma by his terror moved His brother for his fault reproved In leaving Sítá far from aid In the wild wood where giants strayed. Lakshmaṇ’s left hand he took, and then In gentle tones the prince of men, Though sharp and fierce their tenour ran, Thus to his brother chief began:

  “O Lakshmaṇ, thou art much to blame Leaving alone the Maithil dame, And flying hither to my side: O, may no ill my spouse betide! But ah, I know my wife is dead, And giants on her limbs have fed, So strange, so terrible are all The omens which my heart appal. O Lakshmaṇ, may we yet return The safety of my love to learn. To find the child of Janak still Alive and free from scathe and ill! Each bird with notes of warning screams, Though the hot sun still darts his beams. The moan of deer, the jackal’s yell Of some o’erwhelming misery tell. O mighty brother, still may she, My princess, live from danger free!   That semblance of a golden deer     Allured me far away,   I followed nearer and more near,     And longed to take the prey.   I followed where the quarry fled:     My deadly arrow flew,   And as the dying creature bled,     The giant met my view.   Great fear and pain oppress my heart     That dreads the coming blow,   And through my left eye keenly dart     The throbs that herald woe.   Ah Lakshmaṇ, all these signs dismay,     My soul that sinks with dread,   I know my love is torn away,     Or, haply, she is dead.”




Canto LIX. Ráma’s Return.


When Ráma saw his brother stand With none beside him, all unmanned, Eager he questioned why he came So far without the Maithil dame: “Where is my wife, my darling, she Who to the wild wood followed me? Where hast thou left my lady, where The dame who chose my lot to share? Where is my love who balms my woe As through the forest wilds I go, Unkinged and banished and disgraced,— My darling of the dainty waist? She nerves my spirit for the strife, She, only she gives zest to life, Dear as my breath is she who vies In charms with daughters of the skies. If Janak’s child be mine no more, In splendour fair as virgin ore, The lordship of the skies and earth To me were prize of little worth. Ah, lives she yet, the Maithil dame, Dear as the soul within this frame? O, let not all my toil be vain, The banishment, the woe and pain! O, let not dark Kaikeyí win The guerdon of her treacherous sin, If, Sítá lost, my days I end, And thou without me homeward wend! O, let not good Kauśalyá shed Her bitter tears to mourn me dead, Nor her proud rival’s hest obey, Strong in her son and queenly sway! Back to my cot will I repair If Sítá live to greet me there, But if my wife have perished, I Reft of my love will surely die. O Lakshmaṇ, if I seek my cot, Look for my love and find her not Sweet welcome with her smile to give, I tell thee, I will cease to live. O answer,—let thy words be plain,— Lives Sítá yet, or is she slain? Didst thou thy sacred trust betray Till ravening giants seized the prey? Ah me, so young, so soft and fair, Lapped in all bliss, untried by care, Rent from her own dear husband, how Will she support her misery now? That voice, O Lakshmaṇ smote thine ear, And filled, I ween, thy heart with fear, When on thy name for succour cried The treacherous giant ere he died. That voice too like mine own, I ween, Was heard by the Videhan queen. She bade thee seek my side to aid, And quickly was the hest obeyed, But ah, thy fault I needs must blame, To leave alone the helpless dame, And let the cruel giants sate The fury of their murderous hate. Those blood-devouring demons all Grieve in their souls for Khara’s fall, And Sítá, none to guard her side, Torn by their cruel hands has died. I sink, O tamer of thy foes, Deep in the sea of whelming woes. What can I now? I must endure The mighty grief that mocks at cure.”

  Thus, all his thoughts on Sítá bent, To Janasthán the chieftain went, Hastening on with eager stride, And Lakshmaṇ hurried by his side. With toil and thirst and hunger worn, His breast with doubt and anguish torn,   He sought the well-known spot. Again, again he turned to chide With quivering lips which terror dried:   He looked, and found her not. Within his leafy home he sped, Each pleasant spot he visited   Where oft his darling strayed. “’Tis as I feared,” he cried, and there, Yielding to pangs too great to bear,   He sank by grief dismayed.




Canto LX. Lakshman Reproved.


But Ráma ceased not to upbraid, His brother for untimely aid, And thus, while anguish wrung his breast, The chief with eager question pressed: “Why, Lakshmaṇ, didst thou hurry hence And leave my wife without defence? I left her in the wood with thee, And deemed her safe from jeopardy. When first thy form appeared in view, I marked that Sítá came not too. With woe my troubled soul was rent, Prophetic of the dire event. Thy coming steps afar I spied, I saw no Sítá by thy side, And felt a sudden throbbing dart Through my left eye, and arm, and heart.”

  Lakshmaṇ, with Fortune’s marks impressed, His brother mournfully addressed: “Not by my heart’s free impulse led, Leaving thy wife to thee I sped; But by her keen reproaches sent, O Ráma, to thine aid I went. She heard afar a mournful cry, “O save me, Lakshmaṇ, or I die.” The voice that spoke in moving tone Smote on her ear and seemed thine own. Soon as those accents reached her ear She yielded to her woe and fear, She wept o’ercome by grief, and cried, “Fly, Lakshmaṇ, fly to Ráma’s side.” Though many a time she bade me speed, Her urgent prayer I would not heed. I bade her in thy strength confide, And thus with tender words replied: “No giant roams the forest shade From whom thy lord need shrink dismayed. No human voice, believe me, spoke Those words thy causeless fear that woke. Can he whose might can save in woe The heavenly Gods e’er stoop so low, And with those piteous accents call For succour like a caitiff thrall? And why should wandering giants choose The accents of thy lord to use, In alien tones my help to crave, And cry aloud, O Lakshmaṇ, save? Now let my words thy spirit cheer, Compose thy thoughts and banish fear. In hell, in earth, or in the skies There is not, and there cannot rise A champion whose strong arm can slay Thy Ráma in the battle fray. To heavenly hosts he ne’er would yield Though Indra led them to the field.” To soothe her thus I vainly sought: Her heart with woe was still distraught. While from her eyes the waters ran Her bitter speech she thus began: “Too well I see thy dark intent: Thy lawless thoughts on me are bent. Thou hopest, but thy hope is vain, To win my love, thy brother slain. Not love, but Bharat’s dark decree To share his exile counselled thee, Or hearing now his bitter cry Thou surely to his aid wouldst fly. For love of me, a stealthy foe Thou choosest by his side to go, And now thou longest that my lord Should die, and wilt no help afford.”

  Such were the words the lady said: With angry fire my eyes were red. With pale lips quivering in my rage I hastened from the hermitage.” He ceased; and frenzied by his pain The son of Raghu spoke again: “O brother, for thy fault I grieve, The Maithil dame alone to leave. Thou knowest that my arm is strong To save me from the giant throng, And yet couldst leave the cottage, spurred To folly by her angry word. For this thy deed I praise thee not,— To leave her helpless in the cot, And thus thy sacred charge forsake For the wild words a woman spake. Yea thou art all to blame herein, And very grievous is thy sin. That anger swayed thy faithless breast And made thee false to my behest. An arrow speeding from my bow Has laid the treacherous giant low, Who lured me eager for the chase Far from my hermit dwelling-place. The string with easy hand I drew, The arrow as in pastime flew,   The wounded quarry bled. The borrowed form was cast away, Before mine eye a giant lay   With bright gold braceleted. My arrow smote him in the chest: The giant by the pain distressed   Raised his loud voice on high. Far rang the mournful sound: mine own, It seemed, were accent, voice, and tone, They made thee leave my spouse alone   And to my rescue fly.”




Canto LXI. Ráma’s Lament.


As Ráma sought his leafy cot Through his left eye keen throbbings shot, His wonted strength his frame forsook, And all his body reeled and shook. Still on those dreadful signs he thought,— Sad omens with disaster fraught, And from his troubled heart he cried, “O, may no ill my spouse betide!” Longing to gaze on Sítá’s face He hastened to his dwelling-place, Then sinking neath his misery’s weight, He looked and found it desolate. Tossing his mighty arms on high He sought her with an eager cry, From spot to spot he wildly ran Each corner of his home to scan. He looked, but Sítá was not there; His cot was disolate and bare, Like streamlet in the winter frost, The glory of her lilies lost. With leafy tears the sad trees wept As a wild wind their branches swept. Mourned bird and deer, and every flower Drooped fainting round the lonely bower. The silvan deities had fled The spot where all the light was dead, Where hermit coats of skin displayed, And piles of sacred grass were laid. He saw, and maddened by his pain Cried in lament again, again: “Where is she, dead or torn away, Lost, or some hungry giant’s prey? Or did my darling chance to rove For fruit and blossoms though the grove? Or has she sought the pool or rill, Her pitcher from the wave to fill?” His eager eyes on fire with pain He roamed about with maddened brain. Each grove and glade he searched with care, He sought, but found no Sítá there. He wildly rushed from hill to hill; From tree to tree, from rill to rill, As bitter woe his bosom rent Still Ráma roamed with fond lament: “O sweet Kadamba say has she Who loved thy bloom been seen by thee? If thou have seen her face most fair, Say, gentle tree, I pray thee, where. O Bel tree with thy golden fruit Round as her breast, no more be mute, Where is my radiant darling, gay In silk that mocks thy glossy spray? O Arjun, say, where is she now Who loved to touch thy scented bough? Do not thy graceful friend forget, But tell me, is she living yet? Speak, Basil, thou must surely know, For like her limbs thy branches show,— Most lovely in thy fair array Of twining plant and tender spray. Sweet Tila, fairest of the trees, Melodious with the hum of bees, Where is my darling Sítá, tell,— The dame who loved thy flowers so well? Aśoka, act thy gentle part,— Named Heartsease,(507) give me what thou art, To these sad eyes my darling show And free me from this load of woe. O Palm, in rich ripe fruitage dressed Round as the beauties of her breast, If thou have heart to know and feel, My peerless consort’s fate reveal. Hast thou, Rose-apple, chanced to view My darling bright with golden hue? If thou have seen her quickly speak, Where is the dame I wildly seek? O glorious Cassia, thou art gay With all thy loveliest bloom to-day, Where is my dear who loved to hold In her full lap thy flowery gold?” To many a tree and plant beside, To Jasmin, Mango, Sál, he cried. “Say, hast thou seen, O gentle deer, The fawn-eyed Sítá wandering here? It may be that my love has strayed To sport with fawns beneath the shade, If thou, great elephant, have seen My darling of the lovely mien, Whose rounded limbs are soft and fine As is that lissome trunk of thine, O noblest of wild creatures, show Where is the dame thou needs must know. O tiger, hast thou chanced to see My darling? very fair is she, Cast all thy fear away, declare, Where is my moon-faced darling, where? There, darling of the lotus eye, I see thee, and ’tis vain to fly, Wilt thou not speak, dear love? I see Thy form half hidden by the tree. Stay if thou love me, Sítá, stay In pity cease thy heartless play. Why mock me now? thy gentle breast Was never prone to cruel jest. ’Tis vain behind yon bush to steal: Thy shimmering silks thy path reveal. Fly not, mine eyes pursue thy way; For pity’s sake, dear Sítá, stay. Ah me, ah me, my words are vain; My gentle love is lost or slain. How could her tender bosom spurn Her husband on his home-return? Ah no, my love is surely dead, Fierce giants on her flesh have fed, Rending the soft limbs of their prey When I her lord was far away. That moon-bright face, that polished brow, Red lips, bright teeth—what are they now? Alas, my darling’s shapely neck She loved with chains of gold to deck,— That neck that mocked the sandal scent, The ruthless fiends have grasped and rent. Alas, ’twas vain those arms to raise Soft as the young tree’s tender sprays. Ah, dainty meal for giants’ lips Were arms and quivering finger tips. Ah, she who counted many a friend Was left for fiends to seize and rend, Was left by me without defence From ravening giants’ violence. O Lakshmaṇ of the arm of might, Say, is my darling love in sight? O dearest Sítá. where art thou? Where is my darling consort now?”

  Thus as he cried in wild lament From grove to grove the mourner went, Here for a moment sank to rest, Then started up and onward pressed. Thus roaming on like one distraught Still for his vanished love he sought, He searched in wood and hill and glade, By rock and brook and wild cascade. Through groves with restless step he sped And left no spot unvisited. Through lawns and woods of vast extent Still searching for his love he went   With eager steps and fast. For many a weary hour he toiled, Still in his fond endeavour foiled,   Yet hoping to the last.




Canto LXII. Ráma’s Lament.


When all the toil and search was vain He sought his leafy home again. ’Twas empty still: all scattered lay The seats of grass in disarray. He raised his shapely arms on high And spoke aloud with bitter cry: “Where is the Maithil dame?” he said, “O, whither has my darling fled? Who can have borne away my dame, Or feasted on her tender frame? If, Sítá hidden by some tree, Thou joyest still to mock at me, Cease, cease thy cruel sport, and take Compassion, or my heart will break. Bethink thee, love, the gentle fawns With whom thou playest on the lawns, Impatient for thy coming wait With streaming eyes disconsolate. Reft of my love, I needs must go Hence to the shades weighed down by woe. The king our sire will see me there, And cry, “O perjured Ráma, where, Where is thy faith, that thou canst speed From exile ere the time decreed?”

  Ah Sítá, whither hast thou fled And left me here disquieted, A hapless mourner, reft of hope, Too feeble with my woe to cope? E’en thus indignant Glory flies The wretch who stains his soul with lies. If thou, my love, art lost to view, I in my woe must perish too.”

  Thus Ráma by his grief distraught Wept for the wife he vainly sought, And Lakshmaṇ whose fraternal breast Longed for his weal, the chief addressed Whose soul gave way beneath the pain When all his eager search was vain, Like some great elephant who stands Sinking upon the treacherous sands: “Not yet, O wisest chief, despair; Renew thy toil with utmost care. This noble hill where trees are green Has many a cave and dark ravine. The Maithil lady day by day Delighted in the woods to stray, Deep in the grove she wanders still, Or walks by blossom-covered rill, Or fish-loved river stealing through Tall clusters of the dark bamboo. Or else the dame with arch design To prove thy mood, O Prince, and mine, Far in some sheltering thicket lies To frighten ere she meet our eyes. Then come, renew thy labour, trace The lady to her lurking-place, And search the wood from side to side To know where Sítá loves to bide. Collect thy thoughts, O royal chief, Nor yield to unavailing grief.”

  Thus Lakshmaṇ, by attention stirred, To fresh attempts his brother spurred, And Ráma, as he ceased, began With Lakshmaṇ’s aid each spot to scan. In eager search their way they took Through wood, o’er hill, by pool and brook, They roamed each mount, nor spared to seek On ridge and crag and towering peak. They sought the dame in every spot; But all in vain; they found her not. Above, below, on every side They ranged the hill, and Ráma cried, “O Lakshmaṇ, O my brother still No trace of Sítá on the hill!” Then Lakshmaṇ as he roamed the wood Beside his glorious brother stood, And while fierce grief his bosom burned This answer to the chief returned: “Thou, Ráma, after toil and pain Wilt meet the Maithil dame again, As Vishṇu, Bali’s might subdued, His empire of the earth renewed.”(508)

  Then Ráma cried in mournful tone, His spirit by his woe o’erthrown; “The wood is searched from side to side, No distant spot remains untried, No lilied pool, no streamlet where The lotus buds are fresh and fair. Our eyes have searched the hill with all His caves and every waterfall,— But ah, not yet I find my wife, More precious than the breath of life.”

  As thus he mourned his vanished dame A mighty trembling seized his frame, And by o’erpowering grief assailed, His troubled senses reeled and failed. Too great to bear his misery grew, And many a long hot sigh he drew, Then as he wept and sobbed and sighed, “O Sítá, O my love!” he cried. Then Lakshmaṇ, joining palm to palm, Tried every art his woe to calm. But Ráma in his anguish heard Or heeded not one soothing word, Still for his spouse he mourned, and shrill Rang out his lamentation still.




Canto LXIII. Ráma’s Lament.


Thus for his wife in vain he sought: Then, his sad soul with pain distraught, The hero of the lotus eyes Filled all the air with frantic cries. O’erpowered by love’s strong influence, he His absent wife still seemed to see, And thus with accents weak and faint Renewed with tears his wild complaint:

  “Thou, fairer than their bloom, my spouse, Art hidden by Aśoka boughs. Those blooms have power to banish care, But now they drive me to despair. Thine arms are like the plantain’s stem: Why let the plantain cover them? Thou art not hidden, love; thy feet Betray thee in thy dark retreat. Thou runnest in thy girlish sport To flowery trees, thy dear resort. But cease, O cease, my love, I pray, To vex me with thy cruel play. Such mockery in a holy spot Where hermits dwell beseems thee not. Ah, now I see thy fickle mind To scornful mood too much inclined, Come, large-eyed beauty, I implore; Lone is the cot so dear before.

  No, she is slain by giants; they Have stolen or devoured their prey, Or surely at my mournful cry My darling to her lord would fly. O Lakshmaṇ, see those troops of deer: In each sad eye there gleams a tear. Those looks of woe too clearly say My consort is the giants’ prey. O noblest, fairest of the fair, Where art thou, best of women, where? This day will dark Kaikeyí find Fresh triumph for her evil mind, When I, who with my Sítá came Return alone, without my dame. But ne’er can I return to see Those chambers where my queen should be And hear the scornful people speak Of Ráma as a coward weak. For mine will be the coward’s shame Who let the foeman steal his dame. How can I seek my home, or brook Upon Videha’s king to look? How listen, when he bids me tell, My wanderings o’er, that all is well? He, when I meet his eager view, Will mark that Sítá comes not too, And when he hears the mournful tale His wildered sense will reel and fail. “O Daśaratha” will he cry, “Blest in thy mansion in the sky!” Ne’er to that town my steps shall bend, That town which Bharat’s arms defend, For e’en the blessed homes above Would seem a waste without my love. Leave me, my brother, here, I pray; To fair Ayodhyá bend thy way. Without my love I cannot bear To live one hour in blank despair. Round Bharat’s neck thy fond arms twine, And greet him with these words of mine: “Dear brother, still the power retain, And o’er the land as monarch reign.” With salutation next incline Before thy mother, his, and mine. Still, brother, to my words attend, And with all care each dame befriend. To my dear mother’s ear relate My mournful tale and Sítá’s fate.”

  Thus Ráma gave his sorrow vent, And from a heart which anguish rent, Mourned for his wife in loud lament,—   Her of the glorious hair, From Lakshmaṇ’s cheek the colour fled, And o’er his heart came sudden dread, Sick, faint, and sore disquieted   By woe too great to bear.




Canto LXIV. Ráma’s Lament.


Reft of his love, the royal chief, Weighed down beneath his whelming grief, Desponding made his brother share His grievous burden of despair. Over his sinking bosom rolled The flood of sorrow uncontrolled.

  And as he wept and sighed, In mournful accents faint and slow With words congenial to his woe,

  To Lakshmaṇ thus he cried: “Brother, I ween, beneath the sun, Of all mankind there lives not one So full of sin, whose hand has done   Such cursed deeds as mine. For my sad heart with misery bleeds, As, guerdon of those evil deeds, Still greater woe to woe succeeds   In never-ending line. A life of sin I freely chose, And from my past transgression flows A ceaseless flood of bitter woes   My folly to repay. The fruit of sin has ripened fast, Through many a sorrow have I passed, And now the crowning grief at last   Falls on my head to-day. From all my faithful friends I fled, My sire is numbered with the dead, My royal rank is forfeited,   My mother far away. These woes on which I sadly think Fill, till it raves above the brink, The stream of grief in which I sink,—   The flood which naught can stay. Ne’er, brother, ne’er have I complained; Though long by toil and trouble pained, Without a murmur I sustained   The woes of woodland life. But fiercer than the flames that rise When crackling wood the food supplies,— Flashing a glow through evening skies,—   This sorrow for my wife. Some cruel fiend has seized the prey And torn my trembling love away, While, as he bore her through the skies, She shrieked aloud with frantic cries, In tones of fear which, wild and shrill, Retained their native sweetness still. Ah me, that breast so soft and sweet, For sandal’s precious perfume meet, Now all detained with dust and gore, Shall meet my fond caress no more. That face, whose lips with tones so clear Made pleasant music, sweet to hear,— With soft locks plaited o’er the brow,— Some giant’s hand is on it now. It smiles not, as the dear light fails When Ráhu’s jaw the moon assails. Ah, my true love! that shapely neck She loved with fairest chains to deck, The cruel demons rend, and drain The lifeblood from each mangled vein. Ah, when the savage monsters came And dragged away the helpless dame, The lady of the long soft eye Called like a lamb with piteous cry. Beneath this rock, O Lakshmaṇ, see, My peerless consort sat with me, And gently talked to thee the while, Her sweet lips opening with a smile. Here is that fairest stream which she Loved ever, bright Godávarí. Ne’er can the dame have passed this way: So far alone she would not stray, Nor has my darling, lotus-eyed, Sought lilies by the river’s side, For without me she ne’er would go To streamlets where the wild flowers grow, Tell me not, brother, she has strayed To the dark forest’s distant shade Where blooming boughs are gay and sweet, And bright birds love the cool retreat. Alone my love would never dare,— My timid love,—to wander there.

  O Lord of Day whose eye sees all We act and plan, on thee I call: For naught is hidden from thy sight,— Great witness thou of wrong and right. Where is she, lost or torn away? Dispel my torturing doubt and say. And O thou Wind who blowest free, The worlds have naught concealed from thee. List to my prayer, reveal one trace Of her, the glory of her race. Say, is she stolen hence, or dead, Or do her feet the forest tread?”

  Thus with disordered senses, faint With woe he poured his sad complaint, And then, a better way to teach, Wise Lakshmaṇ spoke in seemly speech: “Up, brother dear, thy grief subdue, With heart and soul thy search renew. When woes oppress and dangers threat Brave effort ne’er was fruitless yet.”

  He spoke, but Ráma gave no heed To valiant Lakshmaṇ’s prudent rede. With double force the flood of pain Rushed o’er his yielding soul again.




Canto LXV. Ráma’s Wrath.


With piteous voice, by woe subdued, Thus Raghu’s son his speech renewed:

  “Thy steps, my brother, quickly turn To bright Godávarí and learn If Sítá to the stream have hied To cull the lilies on its side.”

  Obedient to the words he said, His brother to the river sped. The shelving banks he searched in vain, And then to Ráma turned again.

  “I searched, but found her not,” he cried; “I called aloud, but none replied. Where can the Maithil lady stray, Whose sight would chase our cares away? I know not where, her steps untraced, Roams Sítá of the dainty waist.”

  When Ráma heard the words he spoke Again he sank beneath the stroke, And with a bosom anguish-fraught Himself the lovely river sought. There standing on the shelving side, “O Sítá, where art thou?” he cried. No spirit voice an answer gave, No murmur from the trembling wave Of sweet Godávarí declared The outrage which the fiend had dared. “O speak!” the pitying spirits cried, But yet the stream their prayer denied, Nor dared she, coldly mute, relate To the sad chief his darling’s fate Of Rávaṇ’s awful form she thought, And the dire deed his arm had wrought, And still withheld by fear dismayed, The tale for which the mourner prayed. When hope was none, his heart to cheer, That the bright stream his cry would hear While sorrow for his darling tore His longing soul he spake once more: “Though I have sought with tears and sighs Godárvarí no word replies, O say, what answer can I frame To Janak, father of my dame? Or how before her mother stand Leading no Sítá by the hand? Where is my loyal love who went Forth with her lord to banishment? Her faith to me she nobly held Though from my realm and home expelled,— A hermit, nursed on woodland fare,— She followed still and soothed my care. Of all my friends am I bereft, Nor is my faithful consort left. How slowly will the long nights creep While comfortless I wake and weep! O, if my wife may yet be found, With humble love I’ll wander round This Janasthán, Praśravaṇ’s hill, Mandákiní’s delightful rill. See how the deer with gentle eyes Look on my face and sympathize. I mark their soft expression: each Would soothe me, if it could, with speech.”

  A while the anxious throng he eyed. And “Where is Sítá, where?” he cried. Thus while hot tears his utterance broke The mourning son of Raghu spoke. The deer in pity for his woes Obeyed the summons and arose. Upon his right thy stood, and raised Their sad eyes up to heaven and gazed Each to that quarter bent her look Which Rávaṇ with his captive took. Then Raghu’s son again they viewed, And toward that point their way pursued. Then Lakshmaṇ watched their looks intent As moaning on their way they went, And marked each sign which struck his sense With mute expressive influence, Then as again his sorrow woke Thus to his brother chief he spoke: “Those deer thy eager question heard And rose at once by pity stirred: See, in thy search their aid they lend, See, to the south their looks they bend. Arise, dear brother, let us go The way their eager glances show, If haply sign or trace descried Our footsteps in the search may guide.”

  The son of Raghu gave assent, And quickly to the south they went; With eager eyes the earth he scanned, And Lakshmaṇ followed close at hand. As each to other spake his thought, And round with anxious glances sought, Scattered before them in the way, Blooms of a fallen garland lay. When Ráma saw that flowery rain He spoke once more with bitterest pain: “O Lakshmaṇ every flower that lies Here on the ground I recognize. I culled them in the grove, and there My darling twined them in her hair. The sun, the earth, the genial breeze Have spared these flowers my soul to please.”

  Then to that woody hill he prayed, Whence flashed afar each wild cascade: “O best of mountains, hast thou seen A dame of perfect form and mien In some sweet spot with trees o’ergrown,— My darling whom I left alone?” Then as a lion threats a deer He thundered with a voice of fear: “Reveal her, mountain, to my view With golden limbs and golden hue. Where is my darling Sítá? speak Before I rend thee peak from peak.”

  The mountain seemed her track to show, But told not all he sought to know. Then Daśaratha’s son renewed His summons as the mount he viewed: “Soon as my flaming arrows fly, Consumed to ashes shall thou lie Without a herb or bud or tree, And birds no more shall dwell in thee. And if this stream my prayer deny, My wrath this day her flood shall dry, Because she lends no aid to trace My darling of the lotus face.”

  Thus Ráma spake as though his ire Would scorch them with his glance of fire; Then searching farther on the ground The footprint of a fiend he found, And small light traces here and there, Where Sítá in her great despair, Shrieking for Ráma’s help, had fled Before the giant’s mighty tread. His careful eye each trace surveyed Which Sítá and the fiend had made,— The quivers and the broken bow And ruined chariot of the foe,— And told, distraught by fear and grief, His tidings to his brother chief: “O Lakshmaṇ, here,” he cried “behold My Sítá’s earrings dropped with gold. Here lie her garlands torn and rent, Here lies each glittering ornament. O look, the ground on every side With blood-like drops of gold is dyed. The fiends who wear each strange disguise Have seized, I ween, the helpless prize. My lady, by their hands o’erpowered, Is slaughtered, mangled, and devoured. Methinks two fearful giants came And waged fierce battle for the dame. Whose, Lakshmaṇ, was this mighty bow With pearls and gems in glittering row? Cast to the ground the fragments lie, And still their glory charms the eye. A bow so mighty sure was planned For heavenly God or giant’s hand. Whose was this coat of golden mail Which, though its lustre now is pale, Shone like the sun of morning, bright With studs of glittering lazulite? Whose, Lakshmaṇ, was this bloom-wreathed shade With all its hundred ribs displayed? This screen, most meet for royal brow, With broken staff lies useless now. And these tall asses, goblin-faced, With plates of golden harness graced, Whose hideous forms are stained with gore Who is the lord whose yoke they bore? Whose was this pierced and broken car That shoots a flame-like blaze afar? Whose these spent shafts at random spread, Each fearful with its iron head,— With golden mountings fair to see, Long as a chariot’s axle-tree? These quivers see, which, rent in twain, Their sheaves of arrows still contain. Whose was this driver? Dead and cold, His hands the whip and reins still hold. See, Lakshmaṇ, here the foot I trace Of man, nay, one of giant race. The hatred that I nursed of old Grows mightier now a hundred fold Against these giants, fierce of heart, Who change their forms by magic art. Slain, eaten by the giant press, Or stolen is the votaress, Nor could her virtue bring defence To Sítá seized and hurried hence. O, if my love be slain or lost All hope of bliss for me is crossed. The power of all the worlds were vain To bring one joy to soothe my pain. The spirits with their blinded eyes Would look in wonder, and despise The Lord who made the worlds, the great Creator when compassionate. And so, I ween, the Immortals turn Cold eyes upon me now, and spurn The weakling prompt at pity’s call, Devoted to the good of all. But from this day behold me changed, From every gentle grace estranged. Now be it mine all life to slay, And sweep these cursed fiends away. As the great sun leaps up the sky, And the cold moonbeams fade and die, So vengeance rises in my breast, One passion conquering all the rest. Gandharvas in their radiant place, The Yakshas, and the giant race, Kinnars and men shall look in vain For joy they ne’er shall see again. The anguish of my great despair, O Lakshmaṇ, fills the heaven and air; And I in wrath all life will slay Within the triple world to-day. Unless the Gods in heaven who dwell Restore my Sítá safe and well, I armed with all the fires of Fate, The triple world will devastate. The troubled stars from heaven shall fall, The moon be wrapped in gloomy pall, The fire be quenched, the wind be stilled, The radiant sun grow dark and chilled; Crushed every mountain’s towering pride, And every lake and river dried, Dead every creeper, plant, and tree, And lost for aye the mighty sea. Thou shalt the world this day behold In wild disorder uncontrolled, With dying life which naught defends From the fierce storm my bowstring sends. My shafts this day, for Sítá’s sake, The life of every fiend shall take. The Gods this day shall see the force That wings my arrows on their course, And mark how far that course is held, By my unsparing wrath impelled. No God, not one of Daitya strain, Goblin or Rákshas shall remain. My wrath shall end the worlds, and all Demons and Gods therewith shall fall. Each world which Gods, the Dánav race, And giants make their dwelling place, Shall fall beneath my arrows sent In fury when my bow is bent. The arrows loosened from my string Confusion on the worlds shall bring. For she is lost or breathes no more, Nor will the Gods my love restore. Hence all on earth with life and breath This day I dedicate to death. All, till my darling they reveal, The fury of my shafts shall feel.”

  Thus as he spake by rage impelled, Red grew his eyes, his fierce lips swelled. His bark coat round his form he drew And coiled his hermit braids anew, Like Rudra when he yearned to slay The demon Tripur(509) in the fray. So looked the hero brave and wise, The fury flashing from his eyes. Then Ráma, conqueror of the foe, From Lakshmaṇ’s hand received his bow, Strained the great string, and laid thereon A deadly dart that flashed and shone, And spake these words as fierce in ire As He who ends the worlds with fire:

  “As age and time and death and fate All life with checkless power await, So Lakshmaṇ in my wrath to-day My vengeful might shall brook no stay, Unless this day I see my dame In whose sweet form is naught to blame,— Yea, as before, my love behold Fair with bright teeth and perfect mould, This world shall feel a deadly blow Destroyed with ruthless overthrow, And serpent lords and Gods of air, Gandharvas, men, the doom shall share.”




Canto LXVI. Lakshman’s Speech.


He stood incensed with eyes of flame, Still mourning for his ravished dame, Determined, like the fire of Fate, To leave the wide world desolate. His ready bow the hero eyed, And as again, again he sighed, The triple world would fain consume Like Hara(510) in the day of doom. Then Lakshmaṇ moved with sorrow viewed His brother in unwonted mood, And reverent palm to palm applied, Thus spoke with lips which terror dried “Thy heart was ever soft and kind, To every creature’s good inclined. Cast not thy tender mood away, Nor yield to anger’s mastering sway. The moon for gentle grace is known, The sun has splendour all his own, The restless wind is free and fast, And earth in patience unsurpassed. So glory with her noble fruit Is thine eternal attribute. O, let not, for the sin of one, The triple world be all undone. I know not whose this car that lies In fragments here before our eyes, Nor who the chiefs who met and fought, Nor what the prize the foemen sought; Who marked the ground with hoof and wheel, Or whose the hand that plied the steel Which left this spot, the battle o’er, Thus sadly dyed with drops of gore. Searching with utmost care I view The signs of one and not of two. Where’er I turn mine eyes I trace No mighty host about the place. Then mete not out for one offence This all-involving recompense. For kings should use the sword they bear, But mild in time should learn to spare, Thou, ever moved by misery’s call, Wast the great hope and stay of all. Throughout this world who would not blame This outrage on thy ravished dame? Gandharvas, Dánavs, Gods, the trees, The rocks, the rivers, and the seas, Can ne’er in aught thy soul offend, As one whom holiest rites befriend. But him who dared to steal the dame Pursue, O King, with ceaseless aim, With me, the hermits’ holy band, And thy great bow to arm thy hand By every mighty flood we’ll seek, Each wood, each hill from base to peak. To the fair homes of Gods we’ll fly, And bright Gandharvas in the sky, Until we reach, where’er he be, The wretch who stole thy spouse from thee. Then if the Gods will not restore Thy Sítá when the search is o’er, Then, royal lord of Kośal’s land, No longer hold thy vengeful hand. If meekness, prayer, and right be weak To bring thee back the dame we seek, Up, brother, with a deadly shower Of gold-bright shafts thy foes o’erpower, Fierce as the flashing levin sent From King Mahendra’s firmament.




Canto LXVII. Ráma Appeased.


As Ráma, pierced by sorrow’s sting, Lamented like a helpless thing, And by his mighty woe distraught Was lost in maze of troubled thought, Sumitrá’s son with loving care Consoled him in his wild despair, And while his feet he gently pressed With words like these the chief addressed: “For sternest vow and noblest deed Was Daśaratha blessed with seed. Thee for his son the king obtained, Like Amrit by the Gods regained. Thy gentle graces won his heart, And all too weak to live apart The monarch died, as Bharat told, And lives on high mid Gods enrolled. If thou, O Ráma, wilt not bear This grief which fills thee with despair, How shall a weaker man e’er hope, Infirm and mean, with woe to cope? Take heart, I pray thee, noblest chief: What man who breathes is free from grief? Misfortunes come and burn like flame, Then fly as quickly as they came. Yayáti son of Nahush reigned With Indra on the throne he gained. But falling for a light offence He mourned a while the consequence. Vaśishṭha, reverend saint and sage, Priest of our sire from youth to age, Begot a hundred sons, but they Were smitten in a single day.(511) And she, the queen whom all revere, The mother whom we hold so dear, The earth herself not seldom feels Fierce fever when she shakes and reels. And those twin lights, the world’s great eyes, On which the universe relies,— Does not eclipse at times assail Their brilliance till their fires grow pale? The mighty Powers, the Immortal Blest Bend to a law which none contest. No God, no bodied life is free From conquering Fate’s supreme decree. E’en Śakra’s self must reap the meed Of virtue and of sinful deed. And O great lord of men, wilt thou Helpless beneath thy misery bow? No, if thy dame be lost or dead, O hero, still be comforted, Nor yield for ever to thy woe O’ermastered like the mean and low. Thy peers, with keen far-reaching eyes, Spend not their hours in ceaseless sighs; In dire distress, in whelming ill Their manly looks are hopeful still. To this, great chief, thy reason bend, And earnestly the truth perpend. By reason’s aid the wisest learn The good and evil to discern. With sin and goodness scarcely known Faint light by chequered lives is shown; Without some clear undoubted deed We mark not how the fruits succeed. In time of old, O thou most brave, To me thy lips such counsel gave. Vṛihaspati(512) can scarcely find New wisdom to instruct thy mind. For thine is wit and genius high Meet for the children of the sky. I rouse that heart benumbed by pain And call to vigorous life again. Be manly godlike vigour shown; Put forth that noblest strength, thine own. Strive, best of old Ikshváku’s strain, Strive till the conquered foe be slain. Where is the profit or the joy If thy fierce rage the worlds destroy? Search till thou find the guilty foe, Then let thy hand no mercy show.”




Canto LXVIII. Jatáyus.


Thus faithful Lakshmaṇ strove to cheer The prince with counsel wise and clear. Who, prompt to seize the pith of all, Let not that wisdom idly fall. With vigorous effort he restrained The passion in his breast that reigned, And leaning on his bow for rest His brother Lakshmaṇ thus addressed: “How shall we labour now, reflect; Whither again our search direct? Brother, what plan canst thou devise To bring her to these longing eyes?”

  To him by toil and sorrow tried The prudent Lakshmaṇ thus replied: “Come, though our labour yet be vain, And search through Janasthán again,— A realm where giant foes abound, And trees and creepers hide the ground. For there are caverns deep and dread, By deer and wild birds tenanted, And hills with many a dark abyss, Grotto and rock and precipice. There bright Gandharvas love to dwell, And Kinnars in each bosky dell. With me thy eager search to aid Be every hill and cave surveyed. Great chiefs like thee, the best of men, Endowed with sense and piercing ken, Though tried by trouble never fail, Like rooted hills that mock the gale.”

  Then Ráma, pierced by anger’s sting, Laid a keen arrow on his string, And by the faithful Lakshmaṇ’s side Roamed through the forest far and wide. Jaṭáyus there with blood-drops dyed, Lying upon the ground he spied, Huge as a mountain’s shattered crest, Mid all the birds of air the best. In wrath the mighty bird he eyed, And thus the chief to Lakshmaṇ cried:

  “Ah me, these signs the truth betray; My darling was the vulture’s prey. Some demon in the bird’s disguise Roams through the wood that round us lies.