[ATH-iliad  —  part 2 of 5, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

Thebes. Henceforth, however, I must be your host in       middle Argos, and you mine in Lycia, if I should ever go there;       let us avoid one another’s spears even during a general       engagement; there are many noble Trojans and allies whom I can       kill, if I overtake them and heaven delivers them into my hand;       so again with yourself, there are many Achaeans whose lives you       may take if you can; we two, then, will exchange armour, that all       present may know of the old ties that subsist between us.”

      With these words they sprang from their chariots, grasped one       another’s hands, and plighted friendship. But the son of Saturn       made Glaucus take leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden       armour for bronze, the worth of a hundred head of cattle for the       worth of nine.

      Now when Hector reached the Scaean gates and the oak tree, the       wives and daughters of the Trojans came running towards him to       ask after their sons, brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told       them to set about praying to the gods, and many were made       sorrowful as they heard him.

      Presently he reached the splendid palace of King Priam, adorned       with colonnades of hewn stone. In it there were fifty       bedchambers—all of hewn stone—built near one another, where the       sons of Priam slept, each with his wedded wife. Opposite these,       on the other side the courtyard, there were twelve upper rooms       also of hewn stone for Priam’s daughters, built near one another,       where his sons-in-law slept with their wives. When Hector got       there, his fond mother came up to him with Laodice the fairest of       her daughters. She took his hand within her own and said, “My       son, why have you left the battle to come hither? Are the       Achaeans, woe betide them, pressing you hard about the city that       you have thought fit to come and uplift your hands to Jove from       the citadel? Wait till I can bring you wine that you may make       offering to Jove and to the other immortals, and may then drink       and be refreshed. Wine gives a man fresh strength when he is       wearied, as you now are with fighting on behalf of your kinsmen.”

      And Hector answered, “Honoured mother, bring no wine, lest you       unman me and I forget my strength. I dare not make a       drink-offering to Jove with unwashed hands; one who is       bespattered with blood and filth may not pray to the son of       Saturn. Get the matrons together, and go with offerings to the       temple of Minerva driver of the spoil; there, upon the knees of       Minerva, lay the largest and fairest robe you have in your       house—the one you set most store by; promise, moreover, to       sacrifice twelve yearling heifers that have never yet felt the       goad, in the temple of the goddess if she will take pity on the       town, with the wives and little ones of the Trojans, and keep the       son of Tydeus from off the goodly city of Ilius, for he fights       with fury, and fills men’s souls with panic. Go, then, to the       temple of Minerva, while I seek Paris and exhort him, if he will       hear my words. Would that the earth might open her jaws and       swallow him, for Jove bred him to be the bane of the Trojans, and       of Priam and Priam’s sons. Could I but see him go down into the       house of Hades, my heart would forget its heaviness.”

      His mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who       gathered the matrons throughout the city. She then went down into       her fragrant store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept,       the work of Sidonian women, whom Alexandrus had brought over from       Sidon when he sailed the seas upon that voyage during which he       carried off Helen. Hecuba took out the largest robe, and the one       that was most beautifully enriched with embroidery, as an       offering to Minerva: it glittered like a star, and lay at the       very bottom of the chest. With this she went on her way and many       matrons with her.

      When they reached the temple of Minerva, lovely Theano, daughter       of Cisseus and wife of Antenor, opened the doors, for the Trojans       had made her priestess of Minerva. The women lifted up their       hands to the goddess with a loud cry, and Theano took the robe to       lay it upon the knees of Minerva, praying the while to the       daughter of great Jove. “Holy Minerva,” she cried, “protectress       of our city, mighty goddess, break the spear of Diomed and lay       him low before the Scaean gates. Do this, and we will sacrifice       twelve heifers that have never yet known the goad, in your       temple, if you will have pity upon the town, with the wives and       little ones of the Trojans.” Thus she prayed, but Pallas Minerva       granted not her prayer.

      While they were thus praying to the daughter of great Jove,       Hector went to the fair house of Alexandrus, which he had built       for him by the foremost builders in the land. They had built him       his house, storehouse, and courtyard near those of Priam and       Hector on the acropolis. Here Hector entered, with a spear eleven       cubits long in his hand; the bronze point gleamed in front of       him, and was fastened to the shaft of the spear by a ring of       gold. He found Alexandrus within the house, busied about his       armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling his curved bow;       there, too, sat Argive Helen with her women, setting them their       several tasks; and as Hector saw him he rebuked him with words of       scorn. “Sir,” said he, “you do ill to nurse this rancour; the       people perish fighting round this our town; you would yourself       chide one whom you saw shirking his part in the combat. Up then,       or ere long the city will be in a blaze.”

      And Alexandrus answered, “Hector, your rebuke is just; listen       therefore, and believe me when I tell you that I am not here so       much through rancour or ill-will towards the Trojans, as from a       desire to indulge my grief. My wife was even now gently urging me       to battle, and I hold it better that I should go, for victory is       ever fickle. Wait, then, while I put on my armour, or go first       and I will follow. I shall be sure to overtake you.”

      Hector made no answer, but Helen tried to soothe him. “Brother,”       said she, “to my abhorred and sinful self, would that a whirlwind       had caught me up on the day my mother brought me forth, and had       borne me to some mountain or to the waves of the roaring sea that       should have swept me away ere this mischief had come about. But,       since the gods have devised these evils, would, at any rate, that       I had been wife to a better man—to one who could smart under       dishonour and men’s evil speeches. This fellow was never yet to       be depended upon, nor never will be, and he will surely reap what       he has sown. Still, brother, come in and rest upon this seat, for       it is you who bear the brunt of that toil that has been caused by       my hateful self and by the sin of Alexandrus—both of whom Jove       has doomed to be a theme of song among those that shall be born       hereafter.”

      And Hector answered, “Bid me not be seated, Helen, for all the       goodwill you bear me. I cannot stay. I am in haste to help the       Trojans, who miss me greatly when I am not among them; but urge       your husband, and of his own self also let him make haste to       overtake me before I am out of the city. I must go home to see my       household, my wife and my little son, for I know not whether I       shall ever again return to them, or whether the gods will cause       me to fall by the hands of the Achaeans.”

      Then Hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. He did       not find Andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and       one of her maids, weeping bitterly. Seeing, then, that she was       not within, he stood on the threshold of the women’s rooms and       said, “Women, tell me, and tell me true, where did Andromache go       when she left the house? Was it to my sisters, or to my brothers’       wives? or is she at the temple of Minerva where the other women       are propitiating the awful goddess?”

      His good housekeeper answered, “Hector, since you bid me tell you       truly, she did not go to your sisters nor to your brothers’       wives, nor yet to the temple of Minerva, where the other women       are propitiating the awful goddess, but she is on the high wall       of Ilius, for she had heard the Trojans were being hard pressed,       and that the Achaeans were in great force: she went to the wall       in frenzied haste, and the nurse went with her carrying the       child.”

      Hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and       went down the streets by the same way that he had come. When he       had gone through the city and had reached the Scaean gates       through which he would go out on to the plain, his wife came       running towards him, Andromache, daughter of great Eetion who       ruled in Thebe under the wooded slopes of Mt. Placus, and was       king of the Cilicians. His daughter had married Hector, and now       came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little child in her       bosom—a mere babe. Hector’s darling son, and lovely as a star.       Hector had named him Scamandrius, but the people called him       Astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of Ilius.       Hector smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak,       and Andromache stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her       own. “Dear husband,” said she, “your valour will bring you to       destruction; think on your infant son, and on my hapless self who       ere long shall be your widow—for the Achaeans will set upon you       in a body and kill you. It would be better for me, should I lose       you, to lie dead and buried, for I shall have nothing left to       comfort me when you are gone, save only sorrow. I have neither       father nor mother now. Achilles slew my father when he sacked       Thebe the goodly city of the Cilicians. He slew him, but did not       for very shame despoil him; when he had burned him in his       wondrous armour, he raised a barrow over his ashes and the       mountain nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, planted a grove       of elms about his tomb. I had seven brothers in my father’s       house, but on the same day they all went within the house of       Hades. Achilles killed them as they were with their sheep and       cattle. My mother—her who had been queen of all the land under       Mt. Placus—he brought hither with the spoil, and freed her for a       great sum, but the archer-queen Diana took her in the house of       your father. Nay—Hector—you who to me are father, mother,       brother, and dear husband—have mercy upon me; stay here upon this       wall; make not your child fatherless, and your wife a widow; as       for the host, place them near the fig-tree, where the city can be       best scaled, and the wall is weakest. Thrice have the bravest of       them come thither and assailed it, under the two Ajaxes,       Idomeneus, the sons of Atreus, and the brave son of Tydeus,       either of their own bidding, or because some soothsayer had told       them.”

      And Hector answered, “Wife, I too have thought upon all this, but       with what face should I look upon the Trojans, men or women, if I       shirked battle like a coward? I cannot do so: I know nothing save       to fight bravely in the forefront of the Trojan host and win       renown alike for my father and myself. Well do I know that the       day will surely come when mighty Ilius shall be destroyed with       Priam and Priam’s people, but I grieve for none of these—not even       for Hecuba, nor King Priam, nor for my brothers many and brave       who may fall in the dust before their foes—for none of these do I       grieve as for yourself when the day shall come on which some one       of the Achaeans shall rob you for ever of your freedom, and bear       you weeping away. It may be that you will have to ply the loom in       Argos at the bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from the       springs Messeis or Hypereia, treated brutally by some cruel       task-master; then will one say who sees you weeping, ‘She was       wife to Hector, the bravest warrior among the Trojans during the       war before Ilius.’ On this your tears will break forth anew for       him who would have put away the day of captivity from you. May I       lie dead under the barrow that is heaped over my body ere I hear       your cry as they carry you into bondage.”

      He stretched his arms towards his child, but the boy cried and       nestled in his nurse’s bosom, scared at the sight of his father’s       armour, and at the horse-hair plume that nodded fiercely from his       helmet. His father and mother laughed to see him, but Hector took       the helmet from his head and laid it all gleaming upon the       ground. Then he took his darling child, kissed him, and dandled       him in his arms, praying over him the while to Jove and to all       the gods. “Jove,” he cried, “grant that this my child may be even       as myself, chief among the Trojans; let him be not less excellent       in strength, and let him rule Ilius with his might. Then may one       say of him as he comes from battle, ‘The son is far better than       the father.’ May he bring back the blood-stained spoils of him       whom he has laid low, and let his mother’s heart be glad.”

      With this he laid the child again in the arms of his wife, who       took him to her own soft bosom, smiling through her tears. As her       husband watched her his heart yearned towards her and he caressed       her fondly, saying, “My own wife, do not take these things too       bitterly to heart. No one can hurry me down to Hades before my       time, but if a man’s hour is come, be he brave or be he coward,       there is no escape for him when he has once been born. Go, then,       within the house, and busy yourself with your daily duties, your       loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for war is       man’s matter, and mine above all others of them that have been       born in Ilius.”

      He took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back       again to her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back       towards him. When she reached her home she found her maidens       within, and bade them all join in her lament; so they mourned       Hector in his own house though he was yet alive, for they deemed       that they should never see him return safe from battle, and from       the furious hands of the Achaeans.

      Paris did not remain long in his house. He donned his goodly       armour overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast       as his feet could take him. As a horse, stabled and fed, breaks       loose and gallops gloriously over the plain to the place where he       is wont to bathe in the fair-flowing river—he holds his head       high, and his mane streams upon his shoulders as he exults in his       strength and flies like the wind to the haunts and feeding ground       of the mares—even so went forth Paris from high Pergamus,       gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and he laughed aloud as he       sped swiftly on his way. Forthwith he came upon his brother       Hector, who was then turning away from the place where he had       held converse with his wife, and he was himself the first to       speak. “Sir,” said he, “I fear that I have kept you waiting when       you are in haste, and have not come as quickly as you bade me.”

      “My good brother,” answered Hector, “you fight bravely, and no       man with any justice can make light of your doings in battle. But       you are careless and wilfully remiss. It grieves me to the heart       to hear the ill that the Trojans speak about you, for they have       suffered much on your account. Let us be going, and we will make       things right hereafter, should Jove vouchsafe us to set the cup       of our deliverance before ever-living gods of heaven in our own       homes, when we have chased the Achaeans from Troy.”




BOOK VII.


      Hector and Ajax fight—Hector is getting worsted when night comes       on and parts them—They exchange presents—The burial of the dead,       and the building of a wall round their ships by the Achaeans—The       Achaeans buy their wine of Agamemnon and Menelaus.

      With these words Hector passed through the gates, and his brother       Alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. As when heaven       sends a breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain,       and have laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil,       even so welcome was the sight of these two heroes to the Trojans.

      Thereon Alexandrus killed Menesthius the son of Areithous; he       lived in Arne, and was son of Areithous the Mace-man, and of       Phylomedusa. Hector threw a spear at Eioneus and struck him dead       with a wound in the neck under the bronze rim of his helmet.       Glaucus, moreover, son of Hippolochus, captain of the Lycians, in       hard hand-to-hand fight smote Iphinous son of Dexius on the       shoulder, as he was springing on to his chariot behind his fleet       mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and there was no life       left in him.

      When, therefore, Minerva saw these men making havoc of the       Argives, she darted down to Ilius from the summits of Olympus,       and Apollo, who was looking on from Pergamus, went out to meet       her; for he wanted the Trojans to be victorious. The pair met by       the oak tree, and King Apollo son of Jove was first to speak.       “What would you have,” said he, “daughter of great Jove, that       your proud spirit has sent you hither from Olympus? Have you no       pity upon the Trojans, and would you incline the scales of       victory in favour of the Danaans? Let me persuade you—for it will       be better thus—stay the combat for to-day, but let them renew the       fight hereafter till they compass the doom of Ilius, since you       goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city.”

      And Minerva answered, “So be it, Far-Darter; it was in this mind       that I came down from Olympus to the Trojans and Achaeans. Tell       me, then, how do you propose to end this present fighting?”

      Apollo, son of Jove, replied, “Let us incite great Hector to       challenge some one of the Danaans in single combat; on this the       Achaeans will be shamed into finding a man who will fight him.”

      Minerva assented, and Helenus son of Priam divined the counsel of       the gods; he therefore went up to Hector and said, “Hector son of       Priam, peer of gods in counsel, I am your brother, let me then       persuade you. Bid the other Trojans and Achaeans all of them take       their seats, and challenge the best man among the Achaeans to       meet you in single combat. I have heard the voice of the       ever-living gods, and the hour of your doom is not yet come.”

      Hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the       Trojans, grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and       they all sat down. Agamemnon also bade the Achaeans be seated.       But Minerva and Apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on       father Jove’s high oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks       sat close ranged together, bristling with shield and helmet and       spear. As when the rising west wind furs the face of the sea and       the waters grow dark beneath it, so sat the companies of Trojans       and Achaeans upon the plain. And Hector spoke thus:—

      “Hear me, Trojans and Achaeans, that I may speak even as I am       minded; Jove on his high throne has brought our oaths and       covenants to nothing, and foreshadows ill for both of us, till       you either take the towers of Troy, or are yourselves vanquished       at your ships. The princes of the Achaeans are here present in       the midst of you; let him, then, that will fight me stand forward       as your champion against Hector. Thus I say, and may Jove be       witness between us. If your champion slay me, let him strip me of       my armour and take it to your ships, but let him send my body       home that the Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire       when I am dead. In like manner, if Apollo vouchsafe me glory and       I slay your champion, I will strip him of his armour and take it       to the city of Ilius, where I will hang it in the temple of       Apollo, but I will give up his body, that the Achaeans may bury       him at their ships, and then build him a mound by the wide waters       of the Hellespont. Then will one say hereafter as he sails his       ship over the sea, ‘This is the monument of one who died long       since a champion who was slain by mighty Hector.’ Thus will one       say, and my fame shall not be lost.”

      Thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to       decline the challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last       Menelaus rose and rebuked them, for he was angry. “Alas,” he       cried, “vain braggarts, women forsooth not men, double-dyed       indeed will be the stain upon us if no man of the Danaans will       now face Hector. May you be turned every man of you into earth       and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in your places. I       will myself go out against this man, but the upshot of the fight       will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods.”

      With these words he put on his armour; and then, O Menelaus, your       life would have come to an end at the hands of hands of Hector,       for he was far better the man, had not the princes of the       Achaeans sprung upon you and checked you. King Agamemnon caught       him by the right hand and said, “Menelaus, you are mad; a truce       to this folly. Be patient in spite of passion, do not think of       fighting a man so much stronger than yourself as Hector son of       Priam, who is feared by many another as well as you. Even       Achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from       meeting him in battle. Sit down your own people, and the Achaeans       will send some other champion to fight Hector; fearless and fond       of battle though he be, I ween his knees will bend gladly under       him if he comes out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight.”

      With these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother,       whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his       shoulders. Then Nestor rose and spoke, “Of a truth,” said he,       “the Achaean land is fallen upon evil times. The old knight       Peleus, counsellor and orator among the Myrmidons, loved when I       was in his house to question me concerning the race and lineage       of all the Argives. How would it not grieve him could he hear of       them as now quailing before Hector? Many a time would he lift his       hands in prayer that his soul might leave his body and go down       within the house of Hades. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and       Apollo, that I were still young and strong as when the Pylians       and Arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river Celadon       under the walls of Pheia, and round about the waters of the river       Iardanus. The godlike hero Ereuthalion stood forward as their       champion, with the armour of King Areithous upon his       shoulders—Areithous whom men and women had surnamed ‘the       Mace-man,’ because he fought neither with bow nor spear, but       broke the battalions of the foe with his iron mace. Lycurgus       killed him, not in fair fight, but by entrapping him in a narrow       way where his mace served him in no stead; for Lycurgus was too       quick for him and speared him through the middle, so he fell to       earth on his back. Lycurgus then spoiled him of the armour which       Mars had given him, and bore it in battle thenceforward; but when       he grew old and stayed at home, he gave it to his faithful squire       Ereuthalion, who in this same armour challenged the foremost men       among us. The others quaked and quailed, but my high spirit bade       me fight him though none other would venture; I was the youngest       man of them all; but when I fought him Minerva vouchsafed me       victory. He was the biggest and strongest man that ever I killed,       and covered much ground as he lay sprawling upon the earth. Would       that I were still young and strong as I then was, for the son of       Priam would then soon find one who would face him. But you,       foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of you any       stomach for fighting Hector.”

      Thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started       to their feet. Foremost of all uprose King Agamemnon, and after       him brave Diomed the son of Tydeus. Next were the two Ajaxes, men       clothed in valour as with a garment, and then Idomeneus, and       Meriones his brother in arms. After these Eurypylus son of       Euaemon, Thoas the son of Andraemon, and Ulysses also rose. Then       Nestor knight of Gerene again spoke, saying: “Cast lots among you       to see who shall be chosen. If he come alive out of this fight he       will have done good service alike to his own soul and to the       Achaeans.”

      Thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had       thrown it into the helmet of Agamemnon son of Atreus, the people       lifted their hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as       he looked into the vault of heaven, “Father Jove, grant that the       lot fall on Ajax, or on the son of Tydeus, or upon the king of       rich Mycene himself.”

      As they were speaking, Nestor knight of Gerene shook the helmet,       and from it there fell the very lot which they wanted—the lot of       Ajax. The herald bore it about and showed it to all the       chieftains of the Achaeans, going from left to right; but they       none of them owned it. When, however, in due course he reached       the man who had written upon it and had put it into the helmet,       brave Ajax held out his hand, and the herald gave him the lot.       When Ajax saw his mark he knew it and was glad; he threw it to       the ground and said, “My friends, the lot is mine, and I rejoice,       for I shall vanquish Hector. I will put on my armour; meanwhile,       pray to King Jove in silence among yourselves that the Trojans       may not hear you—or aloud if you will, for we fear no man. None       shall overcome me, neither by force nor cunning, for I was born       and bred in Salamis, and can hold my own in all things.”

      With this they fell praying to King Jove the son of Saturn, and       thus would one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven,       “Father Jove that rulest from Ida, most glorious in power,       vouchsafe victory to Ajax, and let him win great glory: but if       you wish well to Hector also and would protect him, grant to each       of them equal fame and prowess.”

      Thus they prayed, and Ajax armed himself in his suit of gleaming       bronze. When he was in full array he sprang forward as monstrous       Mars when he takes part among men whom Jove has set fighting with       one another—even so did huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans,       spring forward with a grim smile on his face as he brandished his       long spear and strode onward. The Argives were elated as they       beheld him, but the Trojans trembled in every limb, and the heart       even of Hector beat quickly, but he could not now retreat and       withdraw into the ranks behind him, for he had been the       challenger. Ajax came up bearing his shield in front of him like       a wall—a shield of bronze with seven folds of ox-hide—the work of       Tychius, who lived in Hyle and was by far the best worker in       leather. He had made it with the hides of seven full-fed bulls,       and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. Holding this       shield before him, Ajax son of Telamon came close up to Hector,       and menaced him saying, “Hector, you shall now learn, man to man,       what kind of champions the Danaans have among them even besides       lion-hearted Achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. He now abides       at the ships in anger with Agamemnon shepherd of his people, but       there are many of us who are well able to face you; therefore       begin the fight.”

      And Hector answered, “Noble Ajax, son of Telamon, captain of the       host, treat me not as though I were some puny boy or woman that       cannot fight. I have been long used to the blood and butcheries       of battle. I am quick to turn my leathern shield either to right       or left, for this I deem the main thing in battle. I can charge       among the chariots and horsemen, and in hand to hand fighting can       delight the heart of Mars; howbeit I would not take such a man as       you are off his guard—but I will smite you openly if I can.”

      He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it from him. It       struck the sevenfold shield in its outermost layer—the eighth,       which was of bronze—and went through six of the layers but in the       seventh hide it stayed. Then Ajax threw in his turn, and struck       the round shield of the son of Priam. The terrible spear went       through his gleaming shield, and pressed onward through his       cuirass of cunning workmanship; it pierced the shirt against his       side, but he swerved and thus saved his life. They then each of       them drew out the spear from his shield, and fell on one another       like savage lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance:       the son of Priam struck the middle of Ajax’s shield, but the       bronze did not break, and the point of his dart was turned. Ajax       then sprang forward and pierced the shield of Hector; the spear       went through it and staggered him as he was springing forward to       attack; it gashed his neck and the blood came pouring from the       wound, but even so Hector did not cease fighting; he gave ground,       and with his brawny hand seized a stone, rugged and huge, that       was lying upon the plain; with this he struck the shield of Ajax       on the boss that was in its middle, so that the bronze rang       again. But Ajax in turn caught up a far larger stone, swung it       aloft, and hurled it with prodigious force. This millstone of a       rock broke Hector’s shield inwards and threw him down on his back       with the shield crushing him under it, but Apollo raised him at       once. Thereon they would have hacked at one another in close       combat with their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and       men, come forward, one from the Trojans and the other from the       Achaeans—Talthybius and Idaeus both of them honourable men; these       parted them with their staves, and the good herald Idaeus said,       “My sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both       are dear to Jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the       behests of night may not be well gainsaid.”

      Ajax son of Telamon answered, “Idaeus, bid Hector say so, for it       was he that challenged our princes. Let him speak first and I       will accept his saying.”

      Then Hector said, “Ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and       strength, and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all       others of the Achaeans. Let us for this day cease fighting;       hereafter we will fight anew till heaven decide between us, and       give victory to one or to the other; night is now falling, and       the behests of night may not be well gainsaid. Gladden, then, the       hearts of the Achaeans at your ships, and more especially those       of your own followers and clansmen, while I, in the great city of       King Priam, bring comfort to the Trojans and their women, who vie       with one another in their prayers on my behalf. Let us, moreover,       exchange presents that it may be said among the Achaeans and       Trojans, ‘They fought with might and main, but were reconciled       and parted in friendship.’”

      On this he gave Ajax a silver-studded sword with its sheath and       leathern baldric, and in return Ajax gave him a girdle dyed with       purple. Thus they parted, the one going to the host of the       Achaeans, and the other to that of the Trojans, who rejoiced when       they saw their hero come to them safe and unharmed from the       strong hands of mighty Ajax. They led him, therefore, to the city       as one that had been saved beyond their hopes. On the other side       the Achaeans brought Ajax elated with victory to Agamemnon.

      When they reached the quarters of the son of Atreus, Agamemnon       sacrificed for them a five-year-old bull in honour of Jove the       son of Saturn. They flayed the carcass, made it ready, and       divided it into joints; these they cut carefully up into smaller       pieces, putting them on the spits, roasting them sufficiently,       and then drawing them off. When they had done all this and had       prepared the feast, they ate it, and every man had his full and       equal share, so that all were satisfied, and King Agamemnon gave       Ajax some slices cut lengthways down the loin, as a mark of       special honour. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,       old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest began to speak; with all       sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:—

      “Son of Atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the       Achaeans are now dead, whose blood Mars has shed by the banks of       the Scamander, and their souls have gone down to the house of       Hades, it will be well when morning comes that we should cease       fighting; we will then wheel our dead together with oxen and       mules and burn them not far from the ships, that when we sail       hence we may take the bones of our comrades home to their       children. Hard by the funeral pyre we will build a barrow that       shall be raised from the plain for all in common; near this let       us set about building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our       ships, and let it have well-made gates that there may be a way       through them for our chariots. Close outside we will dig a deep       trench all round it to keep off both horse and foot, that the       Trojan chieftains may not bear hard upon us.”

      Thus he spoke, and the princes shouted in applause. Meanwhile       the Trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the       acropolis by the gates of King Priam’s palace; and wise Antenor       spoke. “Hear me,” he said, “Trojans, Dardanians, and allies, that       I may speak even as I am minded. Let us give up Argive Helen and       her wealth to the sons of Atreus, for we are now fighting in       violation of our solemn covenants, and shall not prosper till we       have done as I say.”

      He then sat down and Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen rose to       speak. “Antenor,” said he, “your words are not to my liking; you       can find a better saying than this if you will; if, however, you       have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of       your reason. I will speak plainly, and hereby notify to the       Trojans that I will not give up the woman; but the wealth that I       brought home with her from Argos I will restore, and will add yet       further of my own.”

      On this, when Paris had spoken and taken his seat, Priam of the       race of Dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all       sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: “Hear me, Trojans,       Dardanians, and allies, that I may speak even as I am minded. Get       your suppers now as hitherto throughout the city, but keep your       watches and be wakeful. At daybreak let Idaeus go to the ships,       and tell Agamemnon and Menelaus sons of Atreus the saying of       Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has come about; and let him       also be instant with them that they now cease fighting till we       burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide       between us and give victory to one or to the other.”

      Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They took       supper in their companies and at daybreak Idaeus went his way to       the ships. He found the Danaans, servants of Mars, in council at       the stern of Agamemnon’s ship, and took his place in the midst of       them. “Son of Atreus,” he said, “and princes of the Achaean host,       Priam and the other noble Trojans have sent me to tell you the       saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has come about, if       so be that you may find it acceptable. All the treasure he took       with him in his ships to Troy—would that he had sooner       perished—he will restore, and will add yet further of his own,       but he will not give up the wedded wife of Menelaus, though the       Trojans would have him do so. Priam bade me inquire further if       you will cease fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will       fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give victory to one       or to the other.”

      They all held their peace, but presently Diomed of the loud       war-cry spoke, saying, “Let there be no taking, neither treasure,       nor yet Helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the       Trojans is at hand.”

      The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words that       Diomed had spoken, and thereon King Agamemnon said to Idaeus,       “Idaeus, you have heard the answer the Achaeans make you and I       with them. But as concerning the dead, I give you leave to burn       them, for when men are once dead there should be no grudging them       the rites of fire. Let Jove the mighty husband of Juno be witness       to this covenant.”

      As he spoke he upheld his sceptre in the sight of all the gods,       and Idaeus went back to the strong city of Ilius. The Trojans and       Dardanians were gathered in council waiting his return; when he       came, he stood in their midst and delivered his message. As soon       as they heard it they set about their twofold labour, some to       gather the corpses, and others to bring in wood. The Argives on       their part also hastened from their ships, some to gather the       corpses, and others to bring in wood.

      The sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh risen into       the vault of heaven from the slow still currents of deep Oceanus,       when the two armies met. They could hardly recognise their dead,       but they washed the clotted gore from off them, shed tears over       them, and lifted them upon their waggons. Priam had forbidden the       Trojans to wail aloud, so they heaped their dead sadly and       silently upon the pyre, and having burned them went back to the       city of Ilius. The Achaeans in like manner heaped their dead       sadly and silently on the pyre, and having burned them went back       to their ships.

      Now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn, chosen bands of the       Achaeans were gathered round the pyre and built one barrow that       was raised in common for all, and hard by this they built a high       wall to shelter themselves and their ships; they gave it strong       gates that there might be a way through them for their chariots,       and close outside it they dug a trench deep and wide, and they       planted it within with stakes.

      Thus did the Achaeans toil, and the gods, seated by the side of       Jove the lord of lightning, marvelled at their great work; but       Neptune, lord of the earthquake, spoke, saying, “Father Jove,       what mortal in the whole world will again take the gods into his       counsel? See you not how the Achaeans have built a wall about       their ships and driven a trench all round it, without offering       hecatombs to the gods? The fame of this wall will reach as far as       dawn itself, and men will no longer think anything of the one       which Phoebus Apollo and myself built with so much labour for       Laomedon.”

      Jove was displeased and answered, “What, O shaker of the earth,       are you talking about? A god less powerful than yourself might be       alarmed at what they are doing, but your fame reaches as far as       dawn itself. Surely when the Achaeans have gone home with their       ships, you can shatter their wall and fling it into the sea; you       can cover the beach with sand again, and the great wall of the       Achaeans will then be utterly effaced.”

      Thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the Achaeans       was completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got       their supper. Many ships had come with wine from Lemnos, sent by       Eueneus the son of Jason, born to him by Hypsipyle. The son of       Jason freighted them with ten thousand measures of wine, which he       sent specially to the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus.       From this supply the Achaeans bought their wine, some with       bronze, some with iron, some with hides, some with whole heifers,       and some again with captives. They spread a goodly banquet and       feasted the whole night through, as also did the Trojans and       their allies in the city. But all the time Jove boded them ill       and roared with his portentous thunder. Pale fear got hold upon       them, and they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground,       nor did any dare drink till he had made offerings to the most       mighty son of Saturn. Then they laid themselves down to rest and       enjoyed the boon of sleep.




BOOK VIII.


      Jove forbids the gods to interfere further—There is an even fight       till midday, but then Jove inclines the scales of victory in       favour of the Trojans, who eventually chase the Achaeans within       their wall—Juno and Minerva set out to help the Trojans: Jove       sends Iris to turn them back, but later on he promises Juno that       she shall have her way in the end—Hector’s triumph is stayed by       nightfall—The Trojans bivouac on the plain.

      Now when Morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to       suffuse light over the earth, Jove called the gods in council on       the topmost crest of serrated Olympus. Then he spoke and all the       other gods gave ear. “Hear me,” said he, “gods and goddesses,       that I may speak even as I am minded. Let none of you neither       goddess nor god try to cross me, but obey me every one of you       that I may bring this matter to an end. If I see anyone acting       apart and helping either Trojans or Danaans, he shall be beaten       inordinately ere he come back again to Olympus; or I will hurl       him down into dark Tartarus far into the deepest pit under the       earth, where the gates are iron and the floor bronze, as far       beneath Hades as heaven is high above the earth, that you may       learn how much the mightiest I am among you. Try me and find out       for yourselves. Hangs me a golden chain from heaven, and lay hold       of it all of you, gods and goddesses together—tug as you will,       you will not drag Jove the supreme counsellor from heaven to       earth; but were I to pull at it myself I should draw you up with       earth and sea into the bargain, then would I bind the chain about       some pinnacle of Olympus and leave you all dangling in the mid       firmament. So far am I above all others either of gods or men.”

      They were frightened and all of them of held their peace, for he       had spoken masterfully; but at last Minerva answered, “Father,       son of Saturn, king of kings, we all know that your might is not       to be gainsaid, but we are also sorry for the Danaan warriors,       who are perishing and coming to a bad end. We will, however,       since you so bid us, refrain from actual fighting, but we will       make serviceable suggestions to the Argives that they may not all       of them perish in your displeasure.”

      Jove smiled at her and answered, “Take heart, my child,       Trito-born; I am not really in earnest, and I wish to be kind to       you.”

      With this he yoked his fleet horses, with hoofs of bronze and       manes of glittering gold. He girded himself also with gold about       the body, seized his gold whip and took his seat in his chariot.       Thereon he lashed his horses and they flew forward nothing loth       midway twixt earth and starry heaven. After a while he reached       many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, and Gargarus, where       are his grove and fragrant altar. There the father of gods and       men stayed his horses, took them from the chariot, and hid them       in a thick cloud; then he took his seat all glorious upon the       topmost crests, looking down upon the city of Troy and the ships       of the Achaeans.

      The Achaeans took their morning meal hastily at the ships, and       afterwards put on their armour. The Trojans on the other hand       likewise armed themselves throughout the city, fewer in numbers       but nevertheless eager perforce to do battle for their wives and       children. All the gates were flung wide open, and horse and foot       sallied forth with the tramp as of a great multitude.

      When they were got together in one place, shield clashed with       shield, and spear with spear, in the conflict of mail-clad men.       Mighty was the din as the bossed shields pressed hard on one       another—death—cry and shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and       the earth ran red with blood.

      Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning their       weapons beat against one another, and the people fell, but when       the sun had reached mid-heaven, the sire of all balanced his       golden scales, and put two fates of death within them, one for       the Trojans and the other for the Achaeans. He took the balance       by the middle, and when he lifted it up the day of the Achaeans       sank; the death-fraught scale of the Achaeans settled down upon       the ground, while that of the Trojans rose heavenwards. Then he       thundered aloud from Ida, and sent the glare of his lightning       upon the Achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear fell upon them       and they were sore afraid.

      Idomeneus dared not stay nor yet Agamemnon, nor did the two       Ajaxes, servants of Mars, hold their ground. Nestor knight of       Gerene alone stood firm, bulwark of the Achaeans, not of his own       will, but one of his horses was disabled. Alexandrus husband of       lovely Helen had hit it with an arrow just on the top of its head       where the mane begins to grow away from the skull, a very deadly       place. The horse bounded in his anguish as the arrow pierced his       brain, and his struggles threw others into confusion. The old man       instantly began cutting the traces with his sword, but Hector’s       fleet horses bore down upon him through the rout with their bold       charioteer, even Hector himself, and the old man would have       perished there and then had not Diomed been quick to mark, and       with a loud cry called Ulysses to help him.

      “Ulysses,” he cried, “noble son of Laertes where are you flying       to, with your back turned like a coward? See that you are not       struck with a spear between the shoulders. Stay here and help me       to defend Nestor from this man’s furious onset.”

      Ulysses would not give ear, but sped onward to the ships of the       Achaeans, and the son of Tydeus flinging himself alone into the       thick of the fight took his stand before the horses of the son of       Neleus. “Sir,” said he, “these young warriors are pressing you       hard, your force is spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire       is naught, and your horses are slow to move. Mount my chariot and       see what the horses of Tros can do—how cleverly they can scud       hither and thither over the plain either in flight or in pursuit.       I took them from the hero Aeneas. Let our squires attend to your       own steeds, but let us drive mine straight at the Trojans, that       Hector may learn how furiously I too can wield my spear.”

      Nestor knight of Gerene hearkened to his words. Thereon the       doughty squires, Sthenelus and kind-hearted Eurymedon, saw to       Nestor’s horses, while the two both mounted Diomed’s chariot.       Nestor took the reins in his hands and lashed the horses on; they       were soon close up with Hector, and the son of Tydeus aimed a       spear at him as he was charging full speed towards them. He       missed him, but struck his charioteer and squire Eniopeus son of       noble Thebaeus in the breast by the nipple while the reins were       in his hands, so that he died there and then, and the horses       swerved as he fell headlong from the chariot. Hector was greatly       grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but let him lie for all       his sorrow, while he went in quest of another driver; nor did his       steeds have to go long without one, for he presently found brave       Archeptolemus the son of Iphitus, and made him get up behind the       horses, giving the reins into his hand.

      All had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have       been penned up in Ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and       men been quick to mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderbolt       which fell just in front of Diomed’s horses with a flare of       burning brimstone. The horses were frightened and tried to back       beneath the car, while the reins dropped from Nestor’s hands.       Then he was afraid and said to Diomed, “Son of Tydeus, turn your       horses in flight; see you not that the hand of Jove is against       you? To-day he vouchsafes victory to Hector; to-morrow, if it so       please him, he will again grant it to ourselves; no man, however       brave, may thwart the purpose of Jove, for he is far stronger       than any.”

      Diomed answered, “All that you have said is true; there is a       grief however which pierces me to the very heart, for Hector will       talk among the Trojans and say, ‘The son of Tydeus fled before me       to the ships.’ This is the vaunt he will make, and may earth then       swallow me.”

      “Son of Tydeus,” replied Nestor, “what mean you? Though Hector       say that you are a coward the Trojans and Dardanians will not       believe him, nor yet the wives of the mighty warriors whom you       have laid low.”

      So saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the       battle, and with a cry that rent the air the Trojans and Hector       rained their darts after them. Hector shouted to him and said,       “Son of Tydeus, the Danaans have done you honour hitherto as       regards your place at table, the meals they give you, and the       filling of your cup with wine. Henceforth they will despise you,       for you are become no better than a woman. Be off, girl and       coward that you are, you shall not scale our walls through any       flinching upon my part; neither shall you carry off our wives in       your ships, for I shall kill you with my own hand.”

      The son of Tydeus was in two minds whether or no to turn his       horses round again and fight him. Thrice did he doubt, and thrice       did Jove thunder from the heights of Ida in token to the Trojans       that he would turn the battle in their favour. Hector then       shouted to them and said, “Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians,       lovers of close fighting, be men, my friends, and fight with       might and with main; I see that Jove is minded to vouchsafe       victory and great glory to myself, while he will deal destruction       upon the Danaans. Fools, for having thought of building this weak       and worthless wall. It shall not stay my fury; my horses will       spring lightly over their trench, and when I am at their ships       forget not to bring me fire that I may burn them, while I       slaughter the Argives who will be all dazed and bewildered by the       smoke.”

      Then he cried to his horses, “Xanthus and Podargus, and you       Aethon and goodly Lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all       the honey-sweet corn with which Andromache daughter of great       Eetion has fed you, and for she has mixed wine and water for you       to drink whenever you would, before doing so even for me who am       her own husband. Haste in pursuit, that we may take the shield of       Nestor, the fame of which ascends to heaven, for it is of solid       gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may strip from the shoulders       of Diomed the cuirass which Vulcan made him. Could we take these       two things, the Achaeans would set sail in their ships this       self-same night.”

      Thus did he vaunt, but Queen Juno made high Olympus quake as she       shook with rage upon her throne. Then said she to the mighty god       of Neptune, “What now, wide ruling lord of the earthquake? Can       you find no compassion in your heart for the dying Danaans, who       bring you many a welcome offering to Helice and to Aegae? Wish       them well then. If all of us who are with the Danaans were to       drive the Trojans back and keep Jove from helping them, he would       have to sit there sulking alone on Ida.”

      King Neptune was greatly troubled and answered, “Juno, rash of       tongue, what are you talking about? We other gods must not set       ourselves against Jove, for he is far stronger than we are.”

      Thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the       ditch, from the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses       and warriors, who were pent up there by Hector son of Priam, now       that the hand of Jove was with him. He would even have set fire       to the ships and burned them, had not Queen Juno put it into the       mind of Agamemnon, to bestir himself and to encourage the       Achaeans. To this end he went round the ships and tents carrying       a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge black hull       of Ulysses’ ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from this       place that his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand       towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other       towards those of Achilles—for these two heroes, well assured of       their own strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the       two ends of the line. From this spot then, with a voice that       could be heard afar, he shouted to the Danaans, saying, “Argives,       shame on you cowardly creatures, brave in semblance only; where       are now our vaunts that we should prove victorious—the vaunts we       made so vaingloriously in Lemnos, when we ate the flesh of horned       cattle and filled our mixing-bowls to the brim? You vowed that       you would each of you stand against a hundred or two hundred men,       and now you prove no match even for one—for Hector, who will be       ere long setting our ships in a blaze. Father Jove, did you ever       so ruin a great king and rob him so utterly of his greatness?       Yet, when to my sorrow I was coming hither, I never let my ship       pass your altars without offering the fat and thigh-bones of       heifers upon every one of them, so eager was I to sack the city       of Troy. Vouchsafe me then this prayer—suffer us to escape at any       rate with our lives, and let not the Achaeans be so utterly       vanquished by the Trojans.”

      Thus did he pray, and father Jove pitying his tears vouchsafed       him that his people should live, not die; forthwith he sent them       an eagle, most unfailingly portentous of all birds, with a young       fawn in its talons; the eagle dropped the fawn by the altar on       which the Achaeans sacrificed to Jove the lord of omens; when,       therefore, the people saw that the bird had come from Jove, they       sprang more fiercely upon the Trojans and fought more boldly.

      There was no man of all the many Danaans who could then boast       that he had driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to       fight sooner than the son of Tydeus; long before any one else       could do so he slew an armed warrior of the Trojans, Agelaus the       son of Phradmon. He had turned his horses in flight, but the       spear struck him in the back midway between his shoulders and       went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round       him as he fell forward from his chariot.

      After him came Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus, the two       Ajaxes clothed in valour as with a garment, Idomeneus and his       companion in arms Meriones, peer of murderous Mars, and Eurypylus       the brave son of Euaemon. Ninth came Teucer with his bow, and       took his place under cover of the shield of Ajax son of Telamon.       When Ajax lifted his shield Teucer would peer round, and when he       had hit any one in the throng, the man would fall dead; then       Teucer would hie back to Ajax as a child to its mother, and again       duck down under his shield.

      Which of the Trojans did brave Teucer first kill? Orsilochus, and       then Ormenus and Ophelestes, Daetor, Chromius, and godlike       Lycophontes, Amopaon son of Polyaemon, and Melanippus. All these       in turn did he lay low upon the earth, and King Agamemnon was       glad when he saw him making havoc of the Trojans with his mighty       bow. He went up to him and said, “Teucer, man after my own heart,       son of Telamon, captain among the host, shoot on, and be at once       the saving of the Danaans and the glory of your father Telamon,       who brought you up and took care of you in his own house when you       were a child, bastard though you were. Cover him with glory       though he is far off; I will promise and I will assuredly       perform; if aegis-bearing Jove and Minerva grant me to sack the       city of Ilius, you shall have the next best meed of honour after       my own—a tripod, or two horses with their chariot, or a woman who       shall go up into your bed.”

      And Teucer answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, you need not urge       me; from the moment we began to drive them back to Ilius, I have       never ceased so far as in me lies to look out for men whom I can       shoot and kill; I have shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them       have been buried in the flesh of warlike youths, but this mad dog       I cannot hit.”

      As he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at Hector, for he was       bent on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow       hit Priam’s brave son Gorgythion in the breast. His mother, fair       Castianeira, lovely as a goddess, had been married from Aesyme,       and now he bowed his head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it       is weighed down by showers in spring—even thus heavy bowed his       head beneath the weight of his helmet.

      Again he aimed at Hector, for he was longing to hit him, and       again his arrow missed, for Apollo turned it aside; but he hit       Hector’s brave charioteer Archeptolemus in the breast, by the       nipple, as he was driving furiously into the fight. The horses       swerved aside as he fell headlong from the chariot, and there was       no life left in him. Hector was greatly grieved at the loss of       his charioteer, but for all his sorrow he let him lie where he       fell, and bade his brother Cebriones, who was hard by, take the       reins. Cebriones did as he had said. Hector thereon with a loud       cry sprang from his chariot to the ground, and seizing a great       stone made straight for Teucer with intent to kill him. Teucer       had just taken an arrow from his quiver and had laid it upon the       bowstring, but Hector struck him with the jagged stone as he was       taking aim and drawing the string to his shoulder; he hit him       just where the collar-bone divides the neck from the chest, a       very deadly place, and broke the sinew of his arm so that his       wrist was less, and the bow dropped from his hand as he fell       forward on his knees. Ajax saw that his brother had fallen, and       running towards him bestrode him and sheltered him with his       shield. Meanwhile his two trusty squires, Mecisteus son of       Echius, and Alastor, came up and bore him to the ships groaning       in his great pain.

      Jove now again put heart into the Trojans, and they drove the       Achaeans to their deep trench with Hector in all his glory at       their head. As a hound grips a wild boar or lion in flank or       buttock when he gives him chase, and watches warily for his       wheeling, even so did Hector follow close upon the Achaeans, ever       killing the hindmost as they rushed panic-stricken onwards. When       they had fled through the set stakes and trench and many Achaeans       had been laid low at the hands of the Trojans, they halted at       their ships, calling upon one another and praying every man       instantly as they lifted up their hands to the gods; but Hector       wheeled his horses this way and that, his eyes glaring like those       of Gorgo or murderous Mars.

      Juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to       Minerva, “Alas, child of aegis-bearing Jove, shall you and I take       no more thought for the dying Danaans, though it be the last time       we ever do so? See how they perish and come to a bad end before       the onset of but a single man. Hector the son of Priam rages with       intolerable fury, and has already done great mischief.”

      Minerva answered, “Would, indeed, this fellow might die in his       own land, and fall by the hands of the Achaeans; but my father       Jove is mad with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and       unjust. He forgets how often I saved his son when he was worn out       by the labours Eurystheus had laid on him. He would weep till his       cry came up to heaven, and then Jove would send me down to help       him; if I had had the sense to foresee all this, when Eurystheus       sent him to the house of Hades, to fetch the hell-hound from       Erebus, he would never have come back alive out of the deep       waters of the river Styx. And now Jove hates me, while he lets       Thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and took hold of       his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to Achilles. I       shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his       grey-eyed darling. Get our horses ready, while I go within the       house of aegis-bearing Jove and put on my armour; we shall then       find out whether Priam’s son Hector will be glad to meet us in       the highways of battle, or whether the Trojans will glut hounds       and vultures with the fat of their flesh as they be dead by the       ships of the Achaeans.”

      Thus did she speak and white-armed Juno, daughter of great       Saturn, obeyed her words; she set about harnessing her       gold-bedizened steeds, while Minerva daughter of aegis-bearing       Jove flung her richly vesture, made with her own hands, on to the       threshold of her father, and donned the shirt of Jove, arming       herself for battle. Then she stepped into her flaming chariot,       and grasped the spear so stout and sturdy and strong with which       she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno       lashed her horses, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew       open of their own accord—gates over which the Hours preside, in       whose hands are heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense       cloud that hides them or to close it. Through these the goddesses       drove their obedient steeds.

      But father Jove when he saw them from Ida was very angry, and       sent winged Iris with a message to them. “Go,” said he, “fleet       Iris, turn them back, and see that they do not come near me, for       if we come to fighting there will be mischief. This is what I       say, and this is what I mean to do. I will lame their horses for       them; I will hurl them from their chariot, and will break it in       pieces. It will take them all ten years to heal the wounds my       lightning shall inflict upon them; my grey-eyed daughter will       then learn what quarrelling with her father means. I am less       surprised and angry with Juno, for whatever I say she always       contradicts me.”

      With this Iris went her way, fleet as the wind, from the heights       of Ida to the lofty summits of Olympus. She met the goddesses at       the outer gates of its many valleys and gave them her message.       “What,” said she, “are you about? Are you mad? The son of Saturn       forbids going. This is what he says, and this is what he means to       do, he will lame your horses for you, he will hurl you from your       chariot, and will break it in pieces. It will take you all ten       years to heal the wounds his lightning will inflict upon you,       that you may learn, grey-eyed goddess, what quarrelling with your       father means. He is less hurt and angry with Juno, for whatever       he says she always contradicts him but you, bold hussy, will you       really dare to raise your huge spear in defiance of Jove?”

      With this she left them, and Juno said to Minerva, “Of a truth,       child of aegis-bearing Jove, I am not for fighting men’s battles       further in defiance of Jove. Let them live or die as luck will       have it, and let Jove mete out his judgements upon the Trojans       and Danaans according to his own pleasure.”

      She turned her steeds; the Hours presently unyoked them, made       them fast to their ambrosial mangers, and leaned the chariot       against the end wall of the courtyard. The two goddesses then sat       down upon their golden thrones, amid the company of the other       gods; but they were very angry.

      Presently father Jove drove his chariot to Olympus, and entered       the assembly of gods. The mighty lord of the earthquake unyoked       his horses for him, set the car upon its stand, and threw a cloth       over it. Jove then sat down upon his golden throne and Olympus       reeled beneath him. Minerva and Juno sat alone, apart from Jove,       and neither spoke nor asked him questions, but Jove knew what       they meant, and said, “Minerva and Juno, why are you so angry?       Are you fatigued with killing so many of your dear friends the       Trojans? Be this as it may, such is the might of my hands that       all the gods in Olympus cannot turn me; you were both of you       trembling all over ere ever you saw the fight and its terrible       doings. I tell you therefore-and it would have surely been—I       should have struck you with lightning, and your chariots would       never have brought you back again to Olympus.”

      Minerva and Juno groaned in spirit as they sat side by side and       brooded mischief for the Trojans. Minerva sat silent without a       word, for she was in a furious passion and bitterly incensed       against her father; but Juno could not contain herself and said,       “What, dread son of Saturn, are you talking about? We know how       great your power is, nevertheless we have compassion upon the       Danaan warriors who are perishing and coming to a bad end. We       will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from actual fighting,       but we will make serviceable suggestions to the Argives, that       they may not all of them perish in your displeasure.”

      And Jove answered, “To-morrow morning, Juno, if you choose to do       so, you will see the son of Saturn destroying large numbers of       the Argives, for fierce Hector shall not cease fighting till he       has roused the son of Peleus when they are fighting in dire       straits at their ships’ sterns about the body of Patroclus. Like       it or no, this is how it is decreed; for aught I care, you may go       to the lowest depths beneath earth and sea, where Iapetus and       Saturn dwell in lone Tartarus with neither ray of light nor       breath of wind to cheer them. You may go on and on till you get       there, and I shall not care one whit for your displeasure; you       are the greatest vixen living.”

      Juno made him no answer. The sun’s glorious orb now sank into       Oceanus and drew down night over the land. Sorry indeed were the       Trojans when light failed them, but welcome and thrice prayed for       did darkness fall upon the Achaeans.

      Then Hector led the Trojans back from the ships, and held a       council on the open space near the river, where there was a spot       clear of corpses. They left their chariots and sat down on the       ground to hear the speech he made them. He grasped a spear eleven       cubits long, the bronze point of which gleamed in front of it,       while the ring round the spear-head was of gold. Spear in hand he       spoke. “Hear me,” said he, “Trojans, Dardanians, and allies. I       deemed but now that I should destroy the ships and all the       Achaeans with them ere I went back to Ilius, but darkness came on       too soon. It was this alone that saved them and their ships upon       the sea-shore. Now, therefore, let us obey the behests of night,       and prepare our suppers. Take your horses out of their chariots       and give them their feeds of corn; then make speed to bring sheep       and cattle from the city; bring wine also and corn for your       horses and gather much wood, that from dark till dawn we may burn       watchfires whose flare may reach to heaven. For the Achaeans may       try to fly beyond the sea by night, and they must not embark       scatheless and unmolested; many a man among them must take a dart       with him to nurse at home, hit with spear or arrow as he is       leaping on board his ship, that others may fear to bring war and       weeping upon the Trojans. Moreover let the heralds tell it about       the city that the growing youths and grey-bearded men are to camp       upon its heaven-built walls. Let the women each of them light a       great fire in her house, and let watch be safely kept lest the       town be entered by surprise while the host is outside. See to it,       brave Trojans, as I have said, and let this suffice for the       moment; at daybreak I will instruct you further. I pray in hope       to Jove and to the gods that we may then drive those fate-sped       hounds from our land, for ’tis the fates that have borne them and       their ships hither. This night, therefore, let us keep watch, but       with early morning let us put on our armour and rouse fierce war       at the ships of the Achaeans; I shall then know whether brave       Diomed the son of Tydeus will drive me back from the ships to the       wall, or whether I shall myself slay him and carry off his       blood-stained spoils. To-morrow let him show his mettle, abide my       spear if he dare. I ween that at break of day, he shall be among       the first to fall and many another of his comrades round him.       Would that I were as sure of being immortal and never growing       old, and of being worshipped like Minerva and Apollo, as I am       that this day will bring evil to the Argives.”

      Thus spoke Hector and the Trojans shouted applause. They took       their sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast       each by his own chariot. They made haste to bring sheep and       cattle from the city, they brought wine also and corn from their       houses and gathered much wood. They then offered unblemished       hecatombs to the immortals, and the wind carried the sweet savour       of sacrifice to heaven—but the blessed gods partook not thereof,       for they bitterly hated Ilius with Priam and Priam’s people. Thus       high in hope they sat through the livelong night by the highways       of war, and many a watchfire did they kindle. As when the stars       shine clear, and the moon is bright—there is not a breath of air,       not a peak nor glade nor jutting headland but it stands out in       the ineffable radiance that breaks from the serene of heaven; the       stars can all of them be told and the heart of the shepherd is       glad—even thus shone the watchfires of the Trojans before Ilius       midway between the ships and the river Xanthus. A thousand       camp-fires gleamed upon the plain, and in the glow of each there       sat fifty men, while the horses, champing oats and corn beside       their chariots, waited till dawn should come.




BOOK IX.


      The Embassy to Achilles.

      Thus did the Trojans watch. But Panic, comrade of blood-stained       Rout, had taken fast hold of the Achaeans, and their princes were       all of them in despair. As when the two winds that blow from       Thrace—the north and the northwest—spring up of a sudden and       rouse the fury of the main—in a moment the dark waves uprear       their heads and scatter their sea-wrack in all directions—even       thus troubled were the hearts of the Achaeans.

      The son of Atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a       council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made       haste also himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in       their assembly. Agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream       or cataract on the side of some sheer cliff; and thus, with many       a heavy sigh he spoke to the Achaeans. “My friends,” said he,       “princes and councillors of the Argives, the hand of heaven has       been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove gave me his solemn promise       that I should sack the city of Troy before returning, but he has       played me false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to       Argos with the loss of much people. Such is the will of Jove, who       has laid many a proud city in the dust as he will yet lay others,       for his power is above all. Now, therefore, let us all do as I       say and sail back to our own country, for we shall not take       Troy.”

      Thus he spoke, and the sons of the Achaeans for a long while sat       sorrowful there, but they all held their peace, till at last       Diomed of the loud battle-cry made answer saying, “Son of Atreus,       I will chide your folly, as is my right in council. Be not then       aggrieved that I should do so. In the first place you attacked me       before all the Danaans and said that I was a coward and no       soldier. The Argives young and old know that you did so. But the       son of scheming Saturn endowed you by halves only. He gave you       honour as the chief ruler over us, but valour, which is the       highest both right and might he did not give you. Sir, think you       that the sons of the Achaeans are indeed as unwarlike and       cowardly as you say they are? If your own mind is set upon going       home—go—the way is open to you; the many ships that followed you       from Mycene stand ranged upon the sea-shore; but the rest of us       stay here till we have sacked Troy. Nay though these too should       turn homeward with their ships, Sthenelus and myself will still       fight on till we reach the goal of Ilius, for heaven was with us       when we came.”

      The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words of Diomed,       and presently Nestor rose to speak. “Son of Tydeus,” said he, “in       war your prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all       who are of your own years; no one of the Achaeans can make light       of what you say nor gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the       end of the whole matter. You are still young—you might be the       youngest of my own children—still you have spoken wisely and have       counselled the chief of the Achaeans not without discretion;       nevertheless I am older than you and I will tell you everything;       therefore let no man, not even King Agamemnon, disregard my       saying, for he that foments civil discord is a clanless,       hearthless outlaw.

      “Now, however, let us obey the behests of night and get our       suppers, but let the sentinels every man of them camp by the       trench that is without the wall. I am giving these instructions       to the young men; when they have been attended to, do you, son of       Atreus, give your orders, for you are the most royal among us       all. Prepare a feast for your councillors; it is right and       reasonable that you should do so; there is abundance of wine in       your tents, which the ships of the Achaeans bring from Thrace       daily. You have everything at your disposal wherewith to       entertain guests, and you have many subjects. When many are got       together, you can be guided by him whose counsel is wisest—and       sorely do we need shrewd and prudent counsel, for the foe has lit       his watchfires hard by our ships. Who can be other than dismayed?       This night will either be the ruin of our host, or save it.”

      Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The       sentinels went out in their armour under command of Nestor’s son       Thrasymedes, a captain of the host, and of the bold warriors       Ascalaphus and Ialmenus: there were also Meriones, Aphareus and       Deipyrus, and the son of Creion, noble Lycomedes. There were       seven captains of the sentinels, and with each there went a       hundred youths armed with long spears: they took their places       midway between the trench and the wall, and when they had done so       they lit their fires and got every man his supper.

      The son of Atreus then bade many councillors of the Achaeans to       his quarters and prepared a great feast in their honour. They       laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as       soon as they had enough to eat and drink, old Nestor, whose       counsel was ever truest, was the first to lay his mind before       them. He, therefore, with all sincerity and goodwill addressed       them thus.

      “With yourself, most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon,       will I both begin my speech and end it, for you are king over       much people. Jove, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the       sceptre and to uphold righteousness, that you may take thought       for your people under you; therefore it behooves you above all       others both to speak and to give ear, and to out the counsel of       another who shall have been minded to speak wisely. All turns on       you and on your commands, therefore I will say what I think will       be best. No man will be of a truer mind than that which has been       mine from the hour when you, sir, angered Achilles by taking the       girl Briseis from his tent against my judgment. I urged you not       to do so, but you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a       hero whom heaven itself had honoured—for you still hold the prize       that had been awarded to him. Now, however, let us think how we       may appease him, both with presents and fair speeches that may       conciliate him.”

      And King Agamemnon answered, “Sir, you have reproved my folly       justly. I was wrong. I own it. One whom heaven befriends is in       himself a host, and Jove has shown that he befriends this man by       destroying much people of the Achaeans. I was blinded with       passion and yielded to my worser mind; therefore I will make       amends, and will give him great gifts by way of atonement. I will       tell them in the presence of you all. I will give him seven       tripods that have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of       gold. I will give him twenty iron cauldrons and twelve strong       horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich, indeed,       both in land and gold is he that has as many prizes as my horses       have won me. I will give him seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians,       whom I chose for myself when he took Lesbos—all of surpassing       beauty. I will give him these, and with them her whom I erewhile       took from him, the daughter of Briseus; and I swear a great oath       that I never went up into her couch, nor have been with her after       the manner of men and women.

      “All these things will I give him now, and if hereafter the gods       vouchsafe me to sack the city of Priam, let him come when we       Achaeans are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and       bronze to his liking; furthermore let him take twenty Trojan       women, the loveliest after Helen herself. Then, when we reach       Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, he shall be my son-in-law       and I will show him like honour with my own dear son Orestes, who       is being nurtured in all abundance. I have three daughters,       Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa, let him take the one of       his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of       Peleus; I will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his       daughter, and will give him seven well-established cities,       Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire, where there is grass; holy Pherae and       the rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes       of Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos.       The men that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will       honour him with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to       his comfortable ordinances. All this will I do if he will now       forgo his anger. Let him then yield; it is only Hades who is       utterly ruthless and unyielding—and hence he is of all gods the       one most hateful to mankind. Moreover I am older and more royal       than himself. Therefore, let him now obey me.”

      Then Nestor answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men,       Agamemnon. The gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then       send chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of Achilles son of       Peleus without delay. Let those go whom I shall name. Let       Phoenix, dear to Jove, lead the way; let Ajax and Ulysses follow,       and let the heralds Odius and Eurybates go with them. Now bring       water for our hands, and bid all keep silence while we pray to       Jove the son of Saturn, if so be that he may have mercy upon us.”

      Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. Men-servants       poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the       mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after       giving every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made       their offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the       envoys set out from the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus; and       Nestor, looking first to one and then to another, but most       especially at Ulysses, was instant with them that they should       prevail with the noble son of Peleus.

      They went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed       earnestly to earth-encircling Neptune that the high spirit of the       son of Aeacus might incline favourably towards them. When they       reached the ships and tents of the Myrmidons, they found Achilles       playing on a lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its       cross-bar was of silver. It was part of the spoils which he had       taken when he sacked the city of Eetion, and he was now diverting       himself with it and singing the feats of heroes. He was alone       with Patroclus, who sat opposite to him and said nothing, waiting       till he should cease singing. Ulysses and Ajax now came       in—Ulysses leading the way—and stood before him. Achilles sprang       from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and Patroclus,       when he saw the strangers, rose also. Achilles then greeted them       saying, “All hail and welcome—you must come upon some great       matter, you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the       Achaeans.”

      With this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered       with purple rugs; then he said to Patroclus who was close by him,       “Son of Menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less       water with the wine, and give every man his cup, for these are       very dear friends, who are now under my roof.”

      Patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block       in front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the       loin also of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. Automedon held       the meat while Achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and       put them on spits while the son of Menoetius made the fire burn       high. When the flame had died down, he spread the embers, laid       the spits on top of them, lifting them up and setting them upon       the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them with salt. When the meat       was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed bread round the       table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt them their portions.       Then Achilles took his seat facing Ulysses against the opposite       wall, and bade his comrade Patroclus offer sacrifice to the gods;       so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands       upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they had       had enough to eat and drink, Ajax made a sign to Phoenix, and       when he saw this, Ulysses filled his cup with wine and pledged       Achilles.

      “Hail,” said he, “Achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer,       neither in the tent of Agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been       plenty to eat and drink, but our thought turns upon no such       matter. Sir, we are in the face of great disaster, and without       your help know not whether we shall save our fleet or lose it.       The Trojans and their allies have camped hard by our ships and by       the wall; they have lit watchfires throughout their host and deem       that nothing can now prevent them from falling on our fleet.       Jove, moreover, has sent his lightnings on their right; Hector,       in all his glory, rages like a maniac; confident that Jove is       with him he fears neither god nor man, but is gone raving mad,       and prays for the approach of day. He vows that he will hew the       high sterns of our ships in pieces, set fire to their hulls, and       make havoc of the Achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in       smoke; I much fear that heaven will make good his boasting, and       it will prove our lot to perish at Troy far from our home in       Argos. Up, then, and late though it be, save the sons of the       Achaeans who faint before the fury of the Trojans. You will       repent bitterly hereafter if you do not, for when the harm is       done there will be no curing it; consider ere it be too late, and       save the Danaans from destruction.

      “My good friend, when your father Peleus sent you from Phthia to       Agamemnon, did he not charge you saying, ‘Son, Minerva and Juno       will make you strong if they choose, but check your high temper,       for the better part is in goodwill. Eschew vain quarrelling, and       the Achaeans old and young will respect you more for doing so.’       These were his words, but you have forgotten them. Even now,       however, be appeased, and put away your anger from you. Agamemnon       will make you great amends if you will forgive him; listen, and I       will tell you what he has said in his tent that he will give you.       He will give you seven tripods that have never yet been on the       fire, and ten talents of gold; twenty iron cauldrons, and twelve       strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich       indeed both in land and gold is he who has as many prizes as       these horses have won for Agamemnon. Moreover he will give you       seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom he chose for himself,       when you took Lesbos—all of surpassing beauty. He will give you       these, and with them her whom he erewhile took from you, the       daughter of Briseus, and he will swear a great oath, he has never       gone up into her couch nor been with her after the manner of men       and women. All these things will he give you now down, and if       hereafter the gods vouchsafe him to sack the city of Priam, you       can come when we Achaeans are dividing the spoil, and load your       ship with gold and bronze to your liking. You can take twenty       Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen herself. Then, when we       reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his       son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear       son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. Agamemnon       has three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa; you       may take the one of your choice, freely and without gifts of       wooing, to the house of Peleus; he will add such dower to boot as       no man ever yet gave his daughter, and will give you seven       well-established cities, Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire where there       is grass; holy Pherae and the rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also,       and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the       borders of sandy Pylos. The men that dwell there are rich in       cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though were       a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. All this       will he do if you will now forgo your anger. Moreover, though you       hate both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the       rest of the Achaeans who are being harassed in all their host;       they will honour you as a god, and you will earn great glory at       their hands. You might even kill Hector; he will come within your       reach, for he is infatuated, and declares that not a Danaan whom       the ships have brought can hold his own against him.”

      Achilles answered, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, I should give       you formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there       be no more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come.       Him do I hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while       he hides another in his heart; therefore I will say what I mean.       I will be appeased neither by Agamemnon son of Atreus nor by any       other of the Danaans, for I see that I have no thanks for all my       fighting. He that fights fares no better than he that does not;       coward and hero are held in equal honour, and death deals like       measure to him who works and him who is idle. I have taken       nothing by all my hardships—with my life ever in my hand; as a       bird when she has found a morsel takes it to her nestlings, and       herself fares hardly, even so many a long night have I been       wakeful, and many a bloody battle have I waged by day against       those who were fighting for their women. With my ships I have       taken twelve cities, and eleven round about Troy have I stormed       with my men by land; I took great store of wealth from every one       of them, but I gave all up to Agamemnon son of Atreus. He stayed       where he was by his ships, yet of what came to him he gave       little, and kept much himself.

      “Nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the       chieftains and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of       the Achaeans did he take the woman in whom I delighted—let him       keep her and sleep with her. Why, pray, must the Argives needs       fight the Trojans? What made the son of Atreus gather the host       and bring them? Was it not for the sake of Helen? Are the sons of       Atreus the only men in the world who love their wives? Any man of       common right feeling will love and cherish her who is his own, as       I this woman, with my whole heart, though she was but a fruitling       of my spear. Agamemnon has taken her from me; he has played me       false; I know him; let him tempt me no further, for he shall not       move me. Let him look to you, Ulysses, and to the other princes       to save his ships from burning. He has done much without me       already. He has built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and wide       all round it, and he has planted it within with stakes; but even       so he stays not the murderous might of Hector. So long as I       fought the Achaeans Hector suffered not the battle range far from       the city walls; he would come to the Scaean gates and to the oak       tree, but no further. Once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he       escape my onset: now, however, since I am in no mood to fight       him, I will to-morrow offer sacrifice to Jove and to all the       gods; I will draw my ships into the water and then victual them       duly; to-morrow morning, if you care to look, you will see my       ships on the Hellespont, and my men rowing out to sea with might       and main. If great Neptune vouchsafes me a fair passage, in three       days I shall be in Phthia. I have much there that I left behind       me when I came here to my sorrow, and I shall bring back still       further store of gold, of red copper, of fair women, and of iron,       my share of the spoils that we have taken; but one prize, he who       gave has insolently taken away. Tell him all as I now bid you,       and tell him in public that the Achaeans may hate him and beware       of him should he think that he can yet dupe others for his       effrontery never fails him.

      “As for me, hound that he is, he dares not look me in the face. I       will take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in       common with him. He has wronged me and deceived me enough, he       shall not cozen me further; let him go his own way, for Jove has       robbed him of his reason. I loathe his presents, and for himself       care not one straw. He may offer me ten or even twenty times what       he has now done, nay—not though it be all that he has in the       world, both now or ever shall have; he may promise me the wealth       of Orchomenus or of Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in       the whole world, for it has a hundred gates through each of which       two hundred men may drive at once with their chariots and horses;       he may offer me gifts as the sands of the sea or the dust of the       plain in multitude, but even so he shall not move me till I have       been revenged in full for the bitter wrong he has done me. I will       not marry his daughter; she may be fair as Venus, and skilful as       Minerva, but I will have none of her: let another take her, who       may be a good match for her and who rules a larger kingdom. If       the gods spare me to return home, Peleus will find me a wife;       there are Achaean women in Hellas and Phthia, daughters of kings       that have cities under them; of these I can take whom I will and       marry her. Many a time was I minded when at home in Phthia to woo       and wed a woman who would make me a suitable wife, and to enjoy       the riches of my old father Peleus. My life is more to me than       all the wealth of Ilius while it was yet at peace before the       Achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on the       stone floor of Apollo’s temple beneath the cliffs of Pytho.       Cattle and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man buy both       tripods and horses if he wants them, but when his life has once       left him it can neither be bought nor harried back again.

      “My mother Thetis tells me that there are two ways in which I may       meet my end. If I stay here and fight, I shall not return alive       but my name will live for ever: whereas if I go home my name will       die, but it will be long ere death shall take me. To the rest of       you, then, I say, ‘Go home, for you will not take Ilius.’ Jove       has held his hand over her to protect her, and her people have       taken heart. Go, therefore, as in duty bound, and tell the       princes of the Achaeans the message that I have sent them; tell       them to find some other plan for the saving of their ships and       people, for so long as my displeasure lasts the one that they       have now hit upon may not be. As for Phoenix, let him sleep here       that he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. But I will       not take him by force.”

      They all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which       he had denied them, till presently the old knight Phoenix in his       great fear for the ships of the Achaeans, burst into tears and       said, “Noble Achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in       the fierceness of your anger will do nothing to save the ships       from burning, how, my son, can I remain here without you? Your       father Peleus bade me go with you when he sent you as a mere lad       from Phthia to Agamemnon. You knew nothing neither of war nor of       the arts whereby men make their mark in council, and he sent me       with you to train you in all excellence of speech and action.       Therefore, my son, I will not stay here without you—no, not       though heaven itself vouchsafe to strip my years from off me, and       make me young as I was when I first left Hellas the land of fair       women. I was then flying the anger of father Amyntor, son of       Ormenus, who was furious with me in the matter of his concubine,       of whom he was enamoured to the wronging of his wife my mother.       My mother, therefore, prayed me without ceasing to lie with the       woman myself, that so she hate my father, and in the course of       time I yielded. But my father soon came to know, and cursed me       bitterly, calling the dread Erinyes to witness. He prayed that no       son of mine might ever sit upon knees—and the gods, Jove of the       world below and awful Proserpine, fulfilled his curse. I took       counsel to kill him, but some god stayed my rashness and bade me       think on men’s evil tongues and how I should be branded as the       murderer of my father; nevertheless I could not bear to stay in       my father’s house with him so bitter against me. My cousins and       clansmen came about me, and pressed me sorely to remain; many a       sheep and many an ox did they slaughter, and many a fat hog did       they set down to roast before the fire; many a jar, too, did they       broach of my father’s wine. Nine whole nights did they set a       guard over me taking it in turns to watch, and they kept a fire       always burning, both in the cloister of the outer court and in       the inner court at the doors of the room wherein I lay; but when       the darkness of the tenth night came, I broke through the closed       doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the outer court after       passing quickly and unperceived through the men on guard and the       women servants. I then fled through Hellas till I came to fertile       Phthia, mother of sheep, and to King Peleus, who made me welcome       and treated me as a father treats an only son who will be heir to       all his wealth. He made me rich and set me over much people,       establishing me on the borders of Phthia where I was chief ruler       over the Dolopians.

      “It was I, Achilles, who had the making of you; I loved you with       all my heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had       gone out elsewhere, till I had first set you upon my knees, cut       up the dainty morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup       to your lips. Many a time have you slobbered your wine in baby       helplessness over my shirt; I had infinite trouble with you, but       I knew that heaven had vouchsafed me no offspring of my own, and       I made a son of you, Achilles, that in my hour of need you might       protect me. Now, therefore, I say battle with your pride and beat       it; cherish not your anger for ever; the might and majesty of       heaven are more than ours, but even heaven may be appeased; and       if a man has sinned he prays the gods, and reconciles them to       himself by his piteous cries and by frankincense, with       drink-offerings and the savour of burnt sacrifice. For prayers       are as daughters to great Jove; halt, wrinkled, with eyes       askance, they follow in the footsteps of sin, who, being fierce       and fleet of foot, leaves them far behind him, and ever baneful       to mankind outstrips them even to the ends of the world; but       nevertheless the prayers come hobbling and healing after. If a       man has pity upon these daughters of Jove when they draw near       him, they will bless him and hear him too when he is praying; but       if he deny them and will not listen to them, they go to Jove the       son of Saturn and pray that he may presently fall into sin—to his       ruing bitterly hereafter. Therefore, Achilles, give these       daughters of Jove due reverence, and bow before them as all good       men will bow. Were not the son of Atreus offering you gifts and       promising others later—if he were still furious and implacable—I       am not he that would bid you throw off your anger and help the       Achaeans, no matter how great their need; but he is giving much       now, and more hereafter; he has sent his captains to urge his       suit, and has chosen those who of all the Argives are most       acceptable to you; make not then their words and their coming to       be of none effect. Your anger has been righteous so far. We have       heard in song how heroes of old time quarrelled when they were       roused to fury, but still they could be won by gifts, and fair       words could soothe them.

      “I have an old story in my mind—a very old one—but you are all       friends and I will tell it. The Curetes and the Aetolians were       fighting and killing one another round Calydon—the Aetolians       defending the city and the Curetes trying to destroy it. For       Diana of the golden throne was angry and did them hurt because       Oeneus had not offered her his harvest first-fruits. The other       gods had all been feasted with hecatombs, but to the daughter of       great Jove alone he had made no sacrifice. He had forgotten her,       or somehow or other it had escaped him, and this was a grievous       sin. Thereon the archer goddess in her displeasure sent a       prodigious creature against him—a savage wild boar with great       white tusks that did much harm to his orchard lands, uprooting       apple-trees in full bloom and throwing them to the ground. But       Meleager son of Oeneus got huntsmen and hounds from many cities       and killed it—for it was so monstrous that not a few were needed,       and many a man did it stretch upon his funeral pyre. On this the       goddess set the Curetes and the Aetolians fighting furiously       about the head and skin of the boar.

      “So long as Meleager was in the field things went badly with the       Curetes, and for all their numbers they could not hold their       ground under the city walls; but in the course of time Meleager       was angered as even a wise man will sometimes be. He was incensed       with his mother Althaea, and therefore stayed at home with his       wedded wife fair Cleopatra, who was daughter of Marpessa daughter       of Euenus, and of Ides the man then living. He it was who took       his bow and faced King Apollo himself for fair Marpessa’s sake;       her father and mother then named her Alcyone, because her mother       had mourned with the plaintive strains of the halcyon-bird when       Phoebus Apollo had carried her off. Meleager, then, stayed at       home with Cleopatra, nursing the anger which he felt by reason of       his mother’s curses. His mother, grieving for the death of her       brother, prayed the gods, and beat the earth with her hands,       calling upon Hades and on awful Proserpine; she went down upon       her knees and her bosom was wet with tears as she prayed that       they would kill her son—and Erinys that walks in darkness and       knows no ruth heard her from Erebus.

      “Then was heard the din of battle about the gates of Calydon, and       the dull thump of the battering against their walls. Thereon the       elders of the Aetolians besought Meleager; they sent the chiefest       of their priests, and begged him to come out and help them,       promising him a great reward. They bade him choose fifty       plough-gates, the most fertile in the plain of Calydon, the       one-half vineyard and the other open plough-land. The old warrior       Oeneus implored him, standing at the threshold of his room and       beating the doors in supplication. His sisters and his mother       herself besought him sore, but he the more refused them; those of       his comrades who were nearest and dearest to him also prayed him,       but they could not move him till the foe was battering at the       very doors of his chamber, and the Curetes had scaled the walls       and were setting fire to the city. Then at last his sorrowing       wife detailed the horrors that befall those whose city is taken;       she reminded him how the men are slain, and the city is given       over to the flames, while the women and children are carried into       captivity; when he heard all this, his heart was touched, and he       donned his armour to go forth. Thus of his own inward motion he       saved the city of the Aetolians; but they now gave him nothing of       those rich rewards that they had offered earlier, and though he       saved the city he took nothing by it. Be not then, my son, thus       minded; let not heaven lure you into any such course. When the       ships are burning it will be a harder matter to save them. Take       the gifts, and go, for the Achaeans will then honour you as a       god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat the       battle back, but you will not be held in like honour.”

      And Achilles answered, “Phoenix, old friend and father, I have no       need of such honour. I have honour from Jove himself, which will       abide with me at my ships while I have breath in my body, and my       limbs are strong. I say further—and lay my saying to your       heart—vex me no more with this weeping and lamentation, all in       the cause of the son of Atreus. Love him so well, and you may       lose the love I bear you. You ought to help me rather in       troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as I am, and       share like honour with myself; the others shall take my answer;       stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak       we will consider whether to remain or go.”

      On this he nodded quietly to Patroclus as a sign that he was to       prepare a bed for Phoenix, and that the others should take their       leave. Ajax son of Telamon then said, “Ulysses, noble son of       Laertes, let us be gone, for I see that our journey is vain. We       must now take our answer, unwelcome though it be, to the Danaans       who are waiting to receive it. Achilles is savage and       remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for the love his       comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. He is       implacable—and yet if a man’s brother or son has been slain he       will accept a fine by way of amends from him that killed him, and       the wrong-doer having paid in full remains in peace among his own       people; but as for you, Achilles, the gods have put a wicked       unforgiving spirit in your heart, and this, all about one single       girl, whereas we now offer you the seven best we have, and much       else into the bargain. Be then of a more gracious mind, respect       the hospitality of your own roof. We are with you as messengers       from the host of the Danaans, and would fain be held nearest and       dearest to yourself of all the Achaeans.”

      “Ajax,” replied Achilles, “noble son of Telamon, you have spoken       much to my liking, but my blood boils when I think it all over,       and remember how the son of Atreus treated me with contumely as       though I were some vile tramp, and that too in the presence of       the Argives. Go, then, and deliver your message; say that I will       have no concern with fighting till Hector, son of noble Priam,       reaches the tents of the Myrmidons in his murderous course, and       flings fire upon their ships. For all his lust of battle, I take       it he will be held in check when he is at my own tent and ship.”

      On this they took every man his double cup, made their       drink-offerings, and went back to the ships, Ulysses leading the       way. But Patroclus told his men and the maid-servants to make       ready a comfortable bed for Phoenix; they therefore did so with       sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of fine linen. The old man then       laid himself down and waited till morning came. But Achilles       slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter of Phorbas       lovely Diomede, whom he had carried off from Lesbos. Patroclus       lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair Iphis whom       Achilles had given him when he took Scyros the city of Enyeus.

      When the envoys reached the tents of the son of Atreus, the       Achaeans rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to       question them. King Agamemnon was the first to do so. “Tell me,       Ulysses,” said he, “will he save the ships from burning, or did       he refuse, and is he still furious?”

      Ulysses answered, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men,       Agamemnon, Achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely       angry than ever, and spurns both you and your gifts. He bids you       take counsel with the Achaeans to save the ships and host as you       best may; as for himself, he said that at daybreak he should draw       his ships into the water. He said further that he should advise       every one to sail home likewise, for that you will not reach the       goal of Ilius. ‘Jove,’ he said, ‘has laid his hand over the city       to protect it, and the people have taken heart.’ This is what he       said, and the others who were with me can tell you the same       story—Ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be       trusted. The old man Phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so       Achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the       morning if he so would; but he will not take him by force.”

      They all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and       dejected, by reason of the sternness with which Achilles had       refused them, till presently Diomed said, “Most noble son of       Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the       son of Peleus nor offered him gifts. He is proud enough as it is,       and you have encouraged him in his pride still further. Let him       stay or go as he will. He will fight later when he is in the       humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. Now, therefore,       let us all do as I say; we have eaten and drunk our fill, let us       then take our rest, for in rest there is both strength and stay.       But when fair rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out       your host and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging them       on, and yourself fighting among the foremost.”

      Thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. They       then made their drink-offerings and went every man to his own       tent, where they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.




BOOK X.


      Ulysses and Diomed go out as spies, and meet Dolon, who gives       them information: they then kill him, and profiting by what he       had told them, kill Rhesus king of the Thracians and take his       horses.

      Now the other princes of the Achaeans slept soundly the whole       night through, but Agamemnon son of Atreus was troubled, so that       he could get no rest. As when fair Juno’s lord flashes his       lightning in token of great rain or hail or snow when the       snow-flakes whiten the ground, or again as a sign that he will       open the wide jaws of hungry war, even so did Agamemnon heave       many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled within him. When he       looked upon the plain of Troy he marvelled at the many watchfires       burning in front of Ilius, and at the sound of pipes and flutes       and of the hum of men, but when presently he turned towards the       ships and hosts of the Achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls       before Jove on high, and groaned aloud for the very disquietness       of his soul. In the end he deemed it best to go at once to Nestor       son of Neleus, and see if between them they could find any way of       the Achaeans from destruction. He therefore rose, put on his       shirt, bound his sandals about his comely feet, flung the skin of       a huge tawny lion over his shoulders—a skin that reached his       feet—and took his spear in his hand.

      Neither could Menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the       Argives who for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to       fight the Trojans. He covered his broad back with the skin of a       spotted panther, put a casque of bronze upon his head, and took       his spear in his brawny hand. Then he went to rouse his brother,       who was by far the most powerful of the Achaeans, and was       honoured by the people as though he were a god. He found him by       the stern of his ship already putting his goodly array about his       shoulders, and right glad was he that his brother had come.

      Menelaus spoke first. “Why,” said he, “my dear brother, are you       thus arming? Are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit       the Trojans? I greatly fear that no one will do you this service,       and spy upon the enemy alone in the dead of night. It will be a       deed of great daring.”

      And King Agamemnon answered, “Menelaus, we both of us need shrewd       counsel to save the Argives and our ships, for Jove has changed       his mind, and inclines towards Hector’s sacrifices rather than       ours. I never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought       such ruin in one day as Hector has now wrought against the sons       of the Achaeans—and that too of his own unaided self, for he is       son neither to god nor goddess. The Argives will rue it long and       deeply. Run, therefore, with all speed by the line of the ships,       and call Ajax and Idomeneus. Meanwhile I will go to Nestor, and       bid him rise and go about among the companies of our sentinels to       give them their instructions; they will listen to him sooner than       to any man, for his own son, and Meriones brother in arms to       Idomeneus, are captains over them. It was to them more       particularly that we gave this charge.”

      Menelaus replied, “How do I take your meaning? Am I to stay with       them and wait your coming, or shall I return here as soon as I       have given your orders?” “Wait,” answered King Agamemnon, “for       there are so many paths about the camp that we might miss one       another. Call every man on your way, and bid him be stirring;       name him by his lineage and by his father’s name, give each all       titular observance, and stand not too much upon your own dignity;       we must take our full share of toil, for at our birth Jove laid       this heavy burden upon us.”

      With these instructions he sent his brother on his way, and went       on to Nestor shepherd of his people. He found him sleeping in his       tent hard by his own ship; his goodly armour lay beside him—his       shield, his two spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the       gleaming girdle with which the old man girded himself when he       armed to lead his people into battle—for his age stayed him not.       He raised himself on his elbow and looked up at Agamemnon. “Who       is it,” said he, “that goes thus about the host and the ships       alone and in the dead of night, when men are sleeping? Are you       looking for one of your mules or for some comrade? Do not stand       there and say nothing, but speak. What is your business?”

      And Agamemnon answered, “Nestor, son of Neleus, honour to the       Achaean name, it is I, Agamemnon son of Atreus, on whom Jove has       laid labour and sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and       my limbs carry me. I am thus abroad because sleep sits not upon       my eyelids, but my heart is big with war and with the jeopardy of       the Achaeans. I am in great fear for the Danaans. I am at sea,       and without sure counsel; my heart beats as though it would leap       out of my body, and my limbs fail me. If then you can do       anything—for you too cannot sleep—let us go the round of the       watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to       the neglect of their duty. The enemy is encamped hard and we know       not but he may attack us by night.”

      Nestor replied, “Most noble son of Atreus, king of men,       Agamemnon, Jove will not do all for Hector that Hector thinks he       will; he will have troubles yet in plenty if Achilles will lay       aside his anger. I will go with you, and we will rouse others,       either the son of Tydeus, or Ulysses, or fleet Ajax and the       valiant son of Phyleus. Some one had also better go and call Ajax       and King Idomeneus, for their ships are not near at hand but the       farthest of all. I cannot however refrain from blaming Menelaus,       much as I love him and respect him—and I will say so plainly,       even at the risk of offending you—for sleeping and leaving all       this trouble to yourself. He ought to be going about imploring       aid from all the princes of the Achaeans, for we are in extreme       danger.”

      And Agamemnon answered, “Sir, you may sometimes blame him justly,       for he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself—not indeed       from sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and       expects me to take the lead. On this occasion, however, he was       awake before I was, and came to me of his own accord. I have       already sent him to call the very men whom you have named. And       now let us be going. We shall find them with the watch outside       the gates, for it was there I said that we would meet them.”

      “In that case,” answered Nestor, “the Argives will not blame him       nor disobey his orders when he urges them to fight or gives them       instructions.”

      With this he put on his shirt, and bound his sandals about his       comely feet. He buckled on his purple coat, of two thicknesses,       large, and of a rough shaggy texture, grasped his redoubtable       bronze-shod spear, and wended his way along the line of the       Achaean ships. First he called loudly to Ulysses peer of gods in       counsel and woke him, for he was soon roused by the sound of the       battle-cry. He came outside his tent and said, “Why do you go       thus alone about the host, and along the line of the ships in the       stillness of the night? What is it that you find so urgent?” And       Nestor knight of Gerene answered, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes,       take it not amiss, for the Achaeans are in great straits. Come       with me and let us wake some other, who may advise well with us       whether we shall fight or fly.”

      On this Ulysses went at once into his tent, put his shield about       his shoulders and came out with them. First they went to Diomed       son of Tydeus, and found him outside his tent clad in his armour       with his comrades sleeping round him and using their shields as       pillows; as for their spears, they stood upright on the spikes of       their butts that were driven into the ground, and the burnished       bronze flashed afar like the lightning of father Jove. The hero       was sleeping upon the skin of an ox, with a piece of fine carpet       under his head; Nestor went up to him and stirred him with his       heel to rouse him, upbraiding him and urging him to bestir       himself. “Wake up,” he exclaimed, “son of Tydeus. How can you       sleep on in this way? Can you not see that the Trojans are       encamped on the brow of the plain hard by our ships, with but a       little space between us and them?”

      On these words Diomed leaped up instantly and said, “Old man,       your heart is of iron; you rest not one moment from your labours.       Are there no younger men among the Achaeans who could go about to       rouse the princes? There is no tiring you.”

      And Nestor knight of Gerene made answer, “My son, all that you       have said is true. I have good sons, and also much people who       might call the chieftains, but the Achaeans are in the gravest       danger; life and death are balanced as it were on the edge of a       razor. Go then, for you are younger than I, and of your courtesy       rouse Ajax and the fleet son of Phyleus.”

      Diomed threw the skin of a great tawny lion about his shoulders—a       skin that reached his feet—and grasped his spear. When he had       roused the heroes, he brought them back with him; they then went       the round of those who were on guard, and found the captains not       sleeping at their posts but wakeful and sitting with their arms       about them. As sheep dogs that watch their flocks when they are       yarded, and hear a wild beast coming through the mountain forest       towards them—forthwith there is a hue and cry of dogs and men,       and slumber is broken—even so was sleep chased from the eyes of       the Achaeans as they kept the watches of the wicked night, for       they turned constantly towards the plain whenever they heard any       stir among the Trojans. The old man was glad and bade them be of       good cheer. “Watch on, my children,” said he, “and let not sleep       get hold upon you, lest our enemies triumph over us.”

      With this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of       the Achaeans who had been called to the council. Meriones and the       brave son of Nestor went also, for the princes bade them. When       they were beyond the trench that was dug round the wall they held       their meeting on the open ground where there was a space clear of       corpses, for it was here that when night fell Hector had turned       back from his onslaught on the Argives. They sat down, therefore,       and held debate with one another.

      Nestor spoke first. “My friends,” said he, “is there any man bold       enough to venture among the Trojans, and cut off some straggler,       or bring us news of what the enemy mean to do whether they will       stay here by the ships away from the city, or whether, now that       they have worsted the Achaeans, they will retire within their       walls. If he could learn all this and come back safely here, his       fame would be high as heaven in the mouths of all men, and he       would be rewarded richly; for the chiefs from all our ships would       each of them give him a black ewe with her lamb—which is a       present of surpassing value—and he would be asked as a guest to       all feasts and clan-gatherings.”

      They all held their peace, but Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke       saying, “Nestor, gladly will I visit the host of the Trojans over       against us, but if another will go with me I shall do so in       greater confidence and comfort. When two men are together, one of       them may see some opportunity which the other has not caught       sight of; if a man is alone he is less full of resource, and his       wit is weaker.”

      On this several offered to go with Diomed. The two Ajaxes,       servants of Mars, Meriones, and the son of Nestor all wanted to       go, so did Menelaus son of Atreus; Ulysses also wished to go       among the host of the Trojans, for he was ever full of daring,       and thereon Agamemnon king of men spoke thus: “Diomed,” said he,       “son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, choose your comrade for       yourself—take the best man of those that have offered, for many       would now go with you. Do not through delicacy reject the better       man, and take the worst out of respect for his lineage, because       he is of more royal blood.”

      He said this because he feared for Menelaus. Diomed answered, “If       you bid me take the man of my own choice, how in that case can I       fail to think of Ulysses, than whom there is no man more eager to       face all kinds of danger—and Pallas Minerva loves him well? If he       were to go with me we should pass safely through fire itself, for       he is quick to see and understand.”

      “Son of Tydeus,” replied Ulysses, “say neither good nor ill about       me, for you are among Argives who know me well. Let us be going,       for the night wanes and dawn is at hand. The stars have gone       forward, two-thirds of the night are already spent, and the third       is alone left us.”

      They then put on their armour. Brave Thrasymedes provided the son       of Tydeus with a sword and a shield (for he had left his own at       his ship) and on his head he set a helmet of bull’s hide without       either peak or crest; it is called a skull-cap and is a common       headgear. Meriones found a bow and quiver for Ulysses, and on his       head he set a leathern helmet that was lined with a strong       plaiting of leathern thongs, while on the outside it was thickly       studded with boar’s teeth, well and skilfully set into it; next       the head there was an inner lining of felt. This helmet had been       stolen by Autolycus out of Eleon when he broke into the house of       Amyntor son of Ormenus. He gave it to Amphidamas of Cythera to       take to Scandea, and Amphidamas gave it as a guest-gift to Molus,       who gave it to his son Meriones; and now it was set upon the head       of Ulysses.

      When the pair had armed, they set out, and left the other       chieftains behind them. Pallas Minerva sent them a heron by the       wayside upon their right hands; they could not see it for the       darkness, but they heard its cry. Ulysses was glad when he heard       it and prayed to Minerva: “Hear me,” he cried, “daughter of       aegis-bearing Jove, you who spy out all my ways and who are with       me in all my hardships; befriend me in this mine hour, and grant       that we may return to the ships covered with glory after having       achieved some mighty exploit that shall bring sorrow to the       Trojans.”

      Then Diomed of the loud war-cry also prayed: “Hear me too,” said       he, “daughter of Jove, unweariable; be with me even as you were       with my noble father Tydeus when he went to Thebes as envoy sent       by the Achaeans. He left the Achaeans by the banks of the river       Aesopus, and went to the city bearing a message of peace to the       Cadmeians; on his return thence, with your help, goddess, he did       great deeds of daring, for you were his ready helper. Even so       guide me and guard me now, and in return I will offer you in       sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and       never yet brought by man under the yoke. I will gild her horns       and will offer her up to you in sacrifice.”

      Thus they prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard their prayer. When       they had done praying to the daughter of great Jove, they went       their way like two lions prowling by night amid the armour and       blood-stained bodies of them that had fallen.

      Neither again did Hector let the Trojans sleep; for he too called       the princes and councillors of the Trojans that he might set his       counsel before them. “Is there one,” said he, “who for a great       reward will do me the service of which I will tell you? He shall       be well paid if he will. I will give him a chariot and a couple       of horses, the fleetest that can be found at the ships of the       Achaeans, if he will dare this thing; and he will win infinite       honour to boot; he must go to the ships and find out whether they       are still guarded as heretofore, or whether now that we have       beaten them the Achaeans design to fly, and through sheer       exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches.”

      They all held their peace; but there was among the Trojans a       certain man named Dolon, son of Eumedes, the famous herald—a man       rich in gold and bronze. He was ill-favoured, but a good runner,       and was an only son among five sisters. He it was that now       addressed the Trojans. “I, Hector,” said he, “Will to the ships       and will exploit them. But first hold up your sceptre and swear       that you will give me the chariot, bedight with bronze, and the       horses that now carry the noble son of Peleus. I will make you a       good scout, and will not fail you. I will go through the host       from one end to the other till I come to the ship of Agamemnon,       where I take it the princes of the Achaeans are now consulting       whether they shall fight or fly.”

      When he had done speaking Hector held up his sceptre, and swore       him his oath saying, “May Jove the thundering husband of Juno       bear witness that no other Trojan but yourself shall mount those       steeds, and that you shall have your will with them for ever.”

      The oath he swore was bootless, but it made Dolon more keen on       going. He hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he       wore the skin of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of       ferret skin. Then he took a pointed javelin, and left the camp       for the ships, but he was not to return with any news for Hector.       When he had left the horses and the troops behind him, he made       all speed on his way, but Ulysses perceived his coming and said       to Diomed, “Diomed, here is some one from the camp; I am not sure       whether he is a spy, or whether it is some thief who would       plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we       can then spring upon him and take him. If, however, he is too       quick for us, go after him with your spear and hem him in towards       the ships away from the Trojan camp, to prevent his getting back       to the town.”

      With this they turned out of their way and lay down among the       corpses. Dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when       he had got about as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed       furrow exceeds one that has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can       plow fallow land quicker than oxen) they ran after him, and when       he heard their footsteps he stood still, for he made sure they       were friends from the Trojan camp come by Hector’s orders to bid       him return; when, however, they were only a spear’s cast, or       less, away from him, he saw that they were enemies and ran as       fast as his legs could take him. The others gave chase at once,       and as a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after a doe       or hare that runs screaming in front of them, even so did the son       of Tydeus and Ulysses pursue Dolon and cut him off from his own       people. But when he had fled so far towards the ships that he       would soon have fallen in with the outposts, Minerva infused       fresh strength into the son of Tydeus for fear some other of the       Achaeans might have the glory of being first to hit him, and he       might himself be only second; he therefore sprang forward with       his spear and said, “Stand, or I shall throw my spear, and in       that case I shall soon make an end of you.”

      He threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purpose. The dart       flew over the man’s right shoulder, and then stuck in the ground.       He stood stock still, trembling and in great fear; his teeth       chattered, and he turned pale with fear. The two came breathless       up to him and seized his hands, whereon he began to weep and       said, “Take me alive; I will ransom myself; we have great store       of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this my father will       satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he hear of my being       alive at the ships of the Achaeans.”

      “Fear not,” replied Ulysses, “let no thought of death be in your       mind; but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about       alone in the dead of night away from your camp and towards the       ships, while other men are sleeping? Is it to plunder the bodies       of the slain, or did Hector send you to spy out what was going on       at the ships? Or did you come here of your own mere notion?”

      Dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: “Hector, with       his vain flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement.       He said he would give me the horses of the noble son of Peleus       and his bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the       darkness of the flying night, get close to the enemy, and find       out whether the ships are still guarded as heretofore, or       whether, now that we have beaten them, the Achaeans design to       fly, and through sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their       watches.”

      Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “You had indeed set your       heart upon a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of       Aeacus are hardly to be kept in hand or driven by any other       mortal man than Achilles himself, whose mother was an immortal.       But tell me, and tell me true, where did you leave Hector when       you started? Where lies his armour and his horses? How, too, are       the watches and sleeping-ground of the Trojans ordered? What are       their plans? Will they stay here by the ships and away from the       city, or now that they have worsted the Achaeans, will they       retire within their walls?”

      And Dolon answered, “I will tell you truly all. Hector and the       other councillors are now holding conference by the monument of       great Ilus, away from the general tumult; as for the guards about       which you ask me, there is no chosen watch to keep guard over the       host. The Trojans have their watchfires, for they are bound to       have them; they, therefore, are awake and keep each other to       their duty as sentinels; but the allies who have come from other       places are asleep and leave it to the Trojans to keep guard, for       their wives and children are not here.”

      Ulysses then said, “Now tell me; are they sleeping among the       Trojan troops, or do they lie apart? Explain this that I may       understand it.”

      “I will tell you truly all,” replied Dolon. “To the seaward lie       the Carians, the Paeonian bowmen, the Leleges, the Cauconians,       and the noble Pelasgi. The Lycians and proud Mysians, with the       Phrygians and Meonians, have their place on the side towards       Thymbra; but why ask about all this? If you want to find your way       into the host of the Trojans, there are the Thracians, who have       lately come here and lie apart from the others at the far end of       the camp; and they have Rhesus son of Eioneus for their king. His       horses are the finest and strongest that I have ever seen, they       are whiter than snow and fleeter than any wind that blows. His       chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he has brought his       marvellous golden armour, of the rarest workmanship—too splendid       for any mortal man to carry, and meet only for the gods. Now,       therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely here, until       you come back and have proved my words whether they be false or       true.”

      Diomed looked sternly at him and answered, “Think not, Dolon, for       all the good information you have given us, that you shall escape       now you are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you       will come some second time to the ships of the Achaeans either as       a spy or as an open enemy, but if I kill you and an end of you,       you will give no more trouble.”

      On this Dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him       further, but Diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his       sword and cut through both sinews so that his head fell rolling       in the dust while he was yet speaking. They took the ferret skin       cap from his head, and also the wolf-skin, the bow, and his long       spear. Ulysses hung them up aloft in honour of Minerva the       goddess of plunder, and prayed saying, “Accept these, goddess,       for we give them to you in preference to all the gods in Olympus:       therefore speed us still further towards the horses and       sleeping-ground of the Thracians.”

      With these words he took the spoils and set them upon a tamarisk       tree, and they marked the place by pulling up reeds and gathering       boughs of tamarisk that they might not miss it as they came back       through the flying hours of darkness. The two then went onwards       amid the fallen armour and the blood, and came presently to the       company of Thracian soldiers, who were sleeping, tired out with       their day’s toil; their goodly armour was lying on the ground       beside them all orderly in three rows, and each man had his yoke       of horses beside him. Rhesus was sleeping in the middle, and hard       by him his horses were made fast to the topmost rim of his       chariot. Ulysses from some way off saw him and said, “This,       Diomed, is the man, and these are the horses about which Dolon       whom we killed told us. Do your very utmost; dally not about your       armour, but loose the horses at once—or else kill the men       yourself, while I see to the horses.”

      Thereon Minerva put courage into the heart of Diomed, and he       smote them right and left. They made a hideous groaning as they       were being hacked about, and the earth was red with their blood.       As a lion springs furiously upon a flock of sheep or goats when       he finds them without their shepherd, so did the son of Tydeus       set upon the Thracian soldiers till he had killed twelve. As he       killed them Ulysses came and drew them aside by their feet one by       one, that the horses might go forward freely without being       frightened as they passed over the dead bodies, for they were not       yet used to them. When the son of Tydeus came to the king, he       killed him too (which made thirteen), as he was breathing hard,       for by the counsel of Minerva an evil dream, the seed of Oeneus,       hovered that night over his head. Meanwhile Ulysses untied the       horses, made them fast one to another and drove them off,       striking them with his bow, for he had forgotten to take the whip       from the chariot. Then he whistled as a sign to Diomed.

      But Diomed stayed where he was, thinking what other daring deed       he might accomplish. He was doubting whether to take the chariot       in which the king’s armour was lying, and draw it out by the       pole, or to lift the armour out and carry it off; or whether       again, he should not kill some more Thracians. While he was thus       hesitating Minerva came up to him and said, “Get back, Diomed, to       the ships or you may be driven thither, should some other god       rouse the Trojans.”

      Diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the       horses. Ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to       the ships of the Achaeans.

      But Apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw Minerva with the       son of Tydeus. He was angry with her, and coming to the host of       the Trojans he roused Hippocoon, a counsellor of the Thracians       and a noble kinsman of Rhesus. He started up out of his sleep and       saw that the horses were no longer in their place, and that the       men were gasping in their death-agony; on this he groaned aloud,       and called upon his friend by name. Then the whole Trojan camp       was in an uproar as the people kept hurrying together, and they       marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who had now got away towards       the ships.

      When they reached the place where they had killed Hector’s scout,       Ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of Tydeus, leaping to the       ground, placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of Ulysses       and remounted: then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew       forward nothing loth towards the ships as though of their own       free will. Nestor was first to hear the tramp of their feet. “My       friends,” said he, “princes and counsellors of the Argives, shall       I guess right or wrong?—but I must say what I think: there is a       sound in my ears as of the tramp of horses. I hope it may be       Diomed and Ulysses driving in horses from the Trojans, but I much       fear that the bravest of the Argives may have come to some harm       at their hands.”

      He had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and       dismounted, whereon the others shook hands right gladly with them       and congratulated them. Nestor knight of Gerene was first to       question them. “Tell me,” said he, “renowned Ulysses, how did you       two come by these horses? Did you steal in among the Trojan       forces, or did some god meet you and give them to you? They are       like sunbeams. I am well conversant with the Trojans, for old       warrior though I am I never hold back by the ships, but I never       yet saw or heard of such horses as these are. Surely some god       must have met you and given them to you, for you are both of you       dear to Jove, and to Jove’s daughter Minerva.”

      And Ulysses answered, “Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the       Achaean name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better       horses than these, for the gods are far mightier than we are.       These horses, however, about which you ask me, are freshly come       from Thrace. Diomed killed their king with the twelve bravest of       his companions. Hard by the ships we took a thirteenth man—a       scout whom Hector and the other Trojans had sent as a spy upon       our ships.”

      He laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while       the other Achaeans followed him gladly. When they reached the       strongly built quarters of the son of Tydeus, they tied the       horses with thongs of leather to the manger, where the steeds of       Diomed stood eating their sweet corn, but Ulysses hung the       blood-stained spoils of Dolon at the stern of his ship, that they       might prepare a sacred offering to Minerva. As for themselves,       they went into the sea and washed the sweat from their bodies,       and from their necks and thighs. When the sea-water had taken all       the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they went into       the baths and washed themselves. After they had so done and had       anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing       from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to       Minerva.




BOOK XI.


      In the forenoon the fight is equal, but Agamemnon turns the       fortune of the day towards the Achaeans until he gets wounded and       leaves the field—Hector then drives everything before him till he       is wounded by Diomed—Paris wounds Diomed—Ulysses, Nestor, and       Idomeneus perform prodigies of valour—Machaon is wounded—Nestor       drives him off in his chariot—Achilles sees the pair driving       towards the camp and sends Patroclus to ask who it is that is       wounded—This is the beginning of evil for Patroclus—Nestor makes       a long speech.

      And now as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus, harbinger of       light alike to mortals and immortals, Jove sent fierce Discord       with the ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the Achaeans.       She took her stand by the huge black hull of Ulysses’ ship which       was middlemost of all, so that her voice might carry farthest on       either side, on the one hand towards the tents of Ajax son of       Telamon, and on the other towards those of Achilles—for these two       heroes, well assured of their own strength, had valorously drawn       up their ships at the two ends of the line. There she took her       stand, and raised a cry both loud and shrill that filled the       Achaeans with courage, giving them heart to fight resolutely and       with all their might, so that they had rather stay there and do       battle than go home in their ships.

      The son of Atreus shouted aloud and bade the Argives gird       themselves for battle while he put on his armour. First he girded       his goodly greaves about his legs, making them fast with       ankle-clasps of silver; and about his chest he set the       breastplate which Cinyras had once given him as a guest-gift. It       had been noised abroad as far as Cyprus that the Achaeans were       about to sail for Troy, and therefore he gave it to the king. It       had ten courses of dark cyanus, twelve of gold, and ten of tin.       There were serpents of cyanus that reared themselves up towards       the neck, three upon either side, like the rainbows which the son       of Saturn has set in heaven as a sign to mortal men. About his       shoulders he threw his sword, studded with bosses of gold; and       the scabbard was of silver with a chain of gold wherewith to hang       it. He took moreover the richly-dight shield that covered his       body when he was in battle—fair to see, with ten circles of       bronze running all round it. On the body of the shield there were       twenty bosses of white tin, with another of dark cyanus in the       middle: this last was made to show a Gorgon’s head, fierce and       grim, with Rout and Panic on either side. The band for the arm to       go through was of silver, on which there was a writhing snake of       cyanus with three heads that sprang from a single neck, and went       in and out among one another. On his head Agamemnon set a helmet,       with a peak before and behind, and four plumes of horse-hair that       nodded menacingly above it; then he grasped two redoubtable       bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his armour shot from him as       a flame into the firmament, while Juno and Minerva thundered in       honour of the king of rich Mycene.

      Every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold       them in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on       foot clad in full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into       the dawning. The chiefs were armed and at the trench before the       horses got there, but these came up presently. The son of Saturn       sent a portent of evil sound about their host, and the dew fell       red with blood, for he was about to send many a brave man       hurrying down to Hades.

      The Trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the       plain, were gathered round great Hector, noble Polydamas, Aeneas       who was honoured by the Trojans like an immortal, and the three       sons of Antenor, Polybus, Agenor, and young Acamas beauteous as a       god. Hector’s round shield showed in the front rank, and as some       baneful star that shines for a moment through a rent in the       clouds and is again hidden beneath them; even so was Hector now       seen in the front ranks and now again in the hindermost, and his       bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of aegis-bearing Jove.

      And now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon       a rich man’s land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even       so did the Trojans and Achaeans fall upon one another; they were       in no mood for yielding but fought like wolves, and neither side       got the better of the other. Discord was glad as she beheld them,       for she was the only god that went among them; the others were       not there, but stayed quietly each in his own home among the       dells and valleys of Olympus. All of them blamed the son of       Saturn for wanting to give victory to the Trojans, but father       Jove heeded them not: he held aloof from all, and sat apart in       his all-glorious majesty, looking down upon the city of the       Trojans, the ships of the Achaeans, the gleam of bronze, and       alike upon the slayers and on the slain.

      Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning, their       darts rained thick on one another and the people perished, but as       the hour drew nigh when a woodman working in some mountain forest       will get his midday meal—for he has felled till his hands are       weary; he is tired out, and must now have food—then the Danaans       with a cry that rang through all their ranks, broke the       battalions of the enemy. Agamemnon led them on, and slew first       Bienor, a leader of his people, and afterwards his comrade and       charioteer Oileus, who sprang from his chariot and was coming       full towards him; but Agamemnon struck him on the forehead with       his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against the weapon,       which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were       battered in and he was killed in full fight.

      Agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with       their breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. He then went       on to kill Isus and Antiphus two sons of Priam, the one a       bastard, the other born in wedlock; they were in the same       chariot—the bastard driving, while noble Antiphus fought beside       him. Achilles had once taken both of them prisoners in the glades       of Ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as they were       shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now, however,       Agamemnon son of Atreus smote Isus in the chest above the nipple       with his spear, while he struck Antiphus hard by the ear and       threw him from his chariot. Forthwith he stripped their goodly       armour from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen       them at ships when Achilles brought them in from Ida. As a lion       fastens on the fawns of a hind and crushes them in his great       jaws, robbing them of their tender life while he on his way back       to his lair—the hind can do nothing for them even though she be       close by, for she is in an agony of fear, and flies through the       thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost speed before the mighty       monster—so, no man of the Trojans could help Isus and Antiphus,       for they were themselves flying in panic before the Argives.

      Then King Agamemnon took the two sons of Antimachus, Pisander and       brave Hippolochus. It was Antimachus who had been foremost in       preventing Helen’s being restored to Menelaus, for he was largely       bribed by Alexandrus; and now Agamemnon took his two sons, both       in the same chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand—for       they had lost hold of the reins and the horses were mad with       fear. The son of Atreus sprang upon them like a lion, and the       pair besought him from their chariot. “Take us alive,” they       cried, “son of Atreus, and you shall receive a great ransom for       us. Our father Antimachus has great store of gold, bronze, and       wrought iron, and from this he will satisfy you with a very large       ransom should he hear of our being alive at the ships of the       Achaeans.”

      With such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but       they heard no pitiful answer in return. “If,” said Agamemnon,       “you are sons of Antimachus, who once at a council of Trojans       proposed that Menelaus and Ulysses, who had come to you as       envoys, should be killed and not suffered to return, you shall       now pay for the foul iniquity of your father.”

      As he spoke he felled Pisander from his chariot to the earth,       smiting him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face       uppermost upon the ground. Hippolochus fled, but him too did       Agamemnon smite; he cut off his hands and his head—which he sent       rolling in among the crowd as though it were a ball. There he let       them both lie, and wherever the ranks were thickest thither he       flew, while the other Achaeans followed. Foot soldiers drove the       foot soldiers of the foe in rout before them, and slew them;       horsemen did the like by horsemen, and the thundering tramp of       the horses raised a cloud of dust from off the plain. King       Agamemnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering on the       Achaeans. As when some mighty forest is all ablaze—the eddying       gusts whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and       are consumed before the blast of the flame—even so fell the heads       of the flying Trojans before Agamemnon son of Atreus, and many a       noble pair of steeds drew an empty chariot along the highways of       war, for lack of drivers who were lying on the plain, more useful       now to vultures than to their wives.

      Jove drew Hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage       and din of battle; but the son of Atreus sped onwards, calling       out lustily to the Danaans. They flew on by the tomb of old Ilus,       son of Dardanus, in the middle of the plain, and past the place       of the wild fig-tree making always for the city—the son of Atreus       still shouting, and with hands all bedrabbled in gore; but when       they had reached the Scaean gates and the oak tree, there they       halted and waited for the others to come up. Meanwhile the       Trojans kept on flying over the middle of the plain like a herd       of cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked them in the       dead of night—he springs on one of them, seizes her neck in the       grip of his strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges       himself upon her entrails—even so did King Agamemnon son of       Atreus pursue the foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they       fled pell-mell before him. Many a man was flung headlong from his       chariot by the hand of the son of Atreus, for he wielded his       spear with fury.

      But when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city,       the father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his       seat, thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained Ida.       He then told Iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him.       “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, and speak thus to Hector—say that so       long as he sees Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the       Trojan ranks, he is to keep aloof and bid the others bear the       brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon is wounded either by       spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then will I vouchsafe       him strength to slay till he reach the ships and night falls at       the going down of the sun.”

      Iris hearkened and obeyed. Down she went to strong Ilius from the       crests of Ida, and found Hector son of Priam standing by his       chariot and horses. Then she said, “Hector son of Priam, peer of       gods in counsel, father Jove has sent me to bear you this       message—so long as you see Agamemnon heading his men and making       havoc of the Trojan ranks, you are to keep aloof and bid the       others bear the brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon is       wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then       will Jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you reach the       ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun.”

      When she had thus spoken Iris left him, and Hector sprang full       armed from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he       went about everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to       fight, and stirring the dread strife of battle. The Trojans then       wheeled round, and again met the Achaeans, while the Argives on       their part strengthened their battalions. The battle was now in       array and they stood face to face with one another, Agamemnon       ever pressing forward in his eagerness to be ahead of all others.

      Tell me now ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who,       whether of the Trojans or of their allies, was first to face       Agamemnon? It was Iphidamas son of Antenor, a man both brave and       of great stature, who was brought up in fertile Thrace, the       mother of sheep. Cisses, his mother’s father, brought him up in       his own house when he was a child—Cisses, father to fair Theano.       When he reached manhood, Cisses would have kept him there, and       was for giving him his daughter in marriage, but as soon as he       had married he set out to fight the Achaeans with twelve ships       that followed him: these he had left at Percote and had come on       by land to Ilius. He it was that now met Agamemnon son of Atreus.       When they were close up with one another, the son of Atreus       missed his aim, and Iphidamas hit him on the girdle below the       cuirass and then flung himself upon him, trusting to his strength       of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor nearly so, for       the point of the spear struck against the silver and was turned       aside as though it had been lead: King Agamemnon caught it from       his hand, and drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he       then drew his sword, and killed Iphidamas by striking him on the       neck. So there the poor fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were       of bronze, killed in the defence of his fellow-citizens, far from       his wedded wife, of whom he had had no joy though he had given       much for her: he had given a hundred head of cattle down, and had       promised later on to give a thousand sheep and goats mixed, from       the countless flocks of which he was possessed. Agamemnon son of       Atreus then despoiled him, and carried off his armour into the       host of the Achaeans.

      When noble Coon, Antenor’s eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were       his eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. Unseen by Agamemnon       he got beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle       of his arm below the elbow, the point of the spear going right       through the arm. Agamemnon was convulsed with pain, but still not       even for this did he leave off struggling and fighting, but       grasped his spear that flew as fleet as the wind, and sprang upon       Coon who was trying to drag off the body of his brother—his       father’s son—by the foot, and was crying for help to all the       bravest of his comrades; but Agamemnon struck him with a       bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging the dead body       through the press of men under cover of his shield: he then cut       off his head, standing over the body of Iphidamas. Thus did the       sons of Antenor meet their fate at the hands of the son of       Atreus, and go down into the house of Hades.

      As long as the blood still welled warm from his wound Agamemnon       went about attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword       and with great handfuls of stone, but when the blood had ceased       to flow and the wound grew dry, the pain became great. As the       sharp pangs which the Eilithuiae, goddesses of childbirth,       daughters of Juno and dispensers of cruel pain, send upon a woman       when she is in labour—even so sharp were the pangs of the son of       Atreus. He sprang on to his chariot, and bade his charioteer       drive to the ships, for he was in great agony. With a loud clear       voice he shouted to the Danaans, “My friends, princes and       counsellors of the Argives, defend the ships yourselves, for Jove       has not suffered me to fight the whole day through against the       Trojans.”

      With this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and       they flew forward nothing loth. Their chests were white with foam       and their bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of       the battle.

      When Hector saw Agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the       Trojans and Lycians saying, “Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanian       warriors, be men, my friends, and acquit yourselves in battle       bravely; their best man has left them, and Jove has vouchsafed me       a great triumph; charge the foe with your chariots that you may       win still greater glory.”

      With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a       huntsman hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so       did Hector, peer of Mars, hound the proud Trojans on against the       Achaeans. Full of hope he plunged in among the foremost, and fell       on the fight like some fierce tempest that swoops down upon the       sea, and lashes its deep blue waters into fury.

      What, then is the full tale of those whom Hector son of Priam       killed in the hour of triumph which Jove then vouchsafed him?       First Asaeus, Autonous, and Opites; Dolops son of Clytius,       Opheltius and Agelaus; Aesymnus, Orus and Hipponous steadfast in       battle; these chieftains of the Achaeans did Hector slay, and       then he fell upon the rank and file. As when the west wind       hustles the clouds of the white south and beats them down with       the fierceness of its fury—the waves of the sea roll high, and       the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the wandering wind—even       so thick were the heads of them that fell by the hand of Hector.

      All had then been lost and no help for it, and the Achaeans would       have fled pell-mell to their ships, had not Ulysses cried out to       Diomed, “Son of Tydeus, what has happened to us that we thus       forget our prowess? Come, my good fellow, stand by my side and       help me, we shall be shamed for ever if Hector takes the ships.”

      And Diomed answered, “Come what may, I will stand firm; but we       shall have scant joy of it, for Jove is minded to give victory to       the Trojans rather than to us.”

      With these words he struck Thymbraeus from his chariot to the       ground, smiting him in the left breast with his spear, while       Ulysses killed Molion who was his squire. These they let lie, now       that they had stopped their fighting; the two heroes then went on       playing havoc with the foe, like two wild boars that turn in fury       and rend the hounds that hunt them. Thus did they turn upon the       Trojans and slay them, and the Achaeans were thankful to have       breathing time in their flight from Hector.

      They then took two princes with their chariot, the two sons of       Merops of Percote, who excelled all others in the arts of       divination. He had forbidden his sons to go to the war, but they       would not obey him, for fate lured them to their fall. Diomed son       of Tydeus slew them both and stripped them of their armour, while       Ulysses killed Hippodamus and Hypeirochus.

      And now the son of Saturn as he looked down from Ida ordained       that neither side should have the advantage, and they kept on       killing one another. The son of Tydeus speared Agastrophus son of       Paeon in the hip-joint with his spear. His chariot was not at       hand for him to fly with, so blindly confident had he been. His       squire was in charge of it at some distance and he was fighting       on foot among the foremost until he lost his life. Hector soon       marked the havoc Diomed and Ulysses were making, and bore down       upon them with a loud cry, followed by the Trojan ranks; brave       Diomed was dismayed when he saw them, and said to Ulysses who was       beside him, “Great Hector is bearing down upon us and we shall be       undone; let us stand firm and wait his onset.”

      He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss       his mark. He had aimed at Hector’s head near the top of his       helmet, but bronze was turned by bronze, and Hector was       untouched, for the spear was stayed by the visored helm made with       three plates of metal, which Phoebus Apollo had given him. Hector       sprang back with a great bound under cover of the ranks; he fell       on his knees and propped himself with his brawny hand leaning on       the ground, for darkness had fallen on his eyes. The son of       Tydeus having thrown his spear dashed in among the foremost       fighters, to the place where he had seen it strike the ground;       meanwhile Hector recovered himself and springing back into his       chariot mingled with the crowd, by which means he saved his life.       But Diomed made at him with his spear and said, “Dog, you have       again got away though death was close on your heels. Phoebus       Apollo, to whom I ween you pray ere you go into battle, has again       saved you, nevertheless I will meet you and make an end of you       hereafter, if there is any god who will stand by me too and be my       helper. For the present I must pursue those I can lay hands on.”

      As he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of Paeon,       but Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen aimed an arrow at him,       leaning against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to       Ilus son of Dardanus, a ruler in days of old. Diomed had taken       the cuirass from off the breast of Agastrophus, his heavy helmet       also, and the shield from off his shoulders, when Paris drew his       bow and let fly an arrow that sped not from his hand in vain, but       pierced the flat of Diomed’s right foot, going right through it       and fixing itself in the ground. Thereon Paris with a hearty       laugh sprang forward from his hiding-place, and taunted him       saying, “You are wounded—my arrow has not been shot in vain;       would that it had hit you in the belly and killed you, for thus       the Trojans, who fear you as goats fear a lion, would have had a       truce from evil.”

      Diomed all undaunted answered, “Archer, you who without your bow       are nothing, slanderer and seducer, if you were to be tried in       single combat fighting in full armour, your bow and your arrows       would serve you in little stead. Vain is your boast in that you       have scratched the sole of my foot. I care no more than if a girl       or some silly boy had hit me. A worthless coward can inflict but       a light wound; when I wound a man though I but graze his skin it       is another matter, for my weapon will lay him low. His wife will       tear her cheeks for grief and his children will be fatherless:       there will he rot, reddening the earth with his blood, and       vultures, not women, will gather round him.”

      Thus he spoke, but Ulysses came up and stood over him. Under this       cover he sat down to draw the arrow from his foot, and sharp was       the pain he suffered as he did so. Then he sprang on to his       chariot and bade the charioteer drive him to the ships, for he       was sick at heart.

      Ulysses was now alone; not one of the Argives stood by him, for       they were all panic-stricken. “Alas,” said he to himself in his       dismay, “what will become of me? It is ill if I turn and fly       before these odds, but it will be worse if I am left alone and       taken prisoner, for the son of Saturn has struck the rest of the       Danaans with panic. But why talk to myself in this way? Well do I       know that though cowards quit the field, a hero, whether he wound       or be wounded, must stand firm and hold his own.”

      While he was thus in two minds, the ranks of the Trojans advanced       and hemmed him in, and bitterly did they come to rue it. As       hounds and lusty youths set upon a wild boar that sallies from       his lair whetting his white tusks—they attack him from every side       and can hear the gnashing of his jaws, but for all his fierceness       they still hold their ground—even so furiously did the Trojans       attack Ulysses. First he sprang spear in hand upon Deiopites and       wounded him on the shoulder with a downward blow; then he killed       Thoon and Ennomus. After these he struck Chersidamas in the loins       under his shield as he had just sprung down from his chariot; so       he fell in the dust and clutched the earth in the hollow of his       hand. These he let lie, and went on to wound Charops son of       Hippasus own brother to noble Socus. Socus, hero that he was,       made all speed to help him, and when he was close to Ulysses he       said, “Far-famed Ulysses, insatiable of craft and toil, this day       you shall either boast of having killed both the sons of Hippasus       and stripped them of their armour, or you shall fall before my       spear.”

      With these words he struck the shield of Ulysses. The spear went       through the shield and passed on through his richly wrought       cuirass, tearing the flesh from his side, but Pallas Minerva did       not suffer it to pierce the entrails of the hero. Ulysses knew       that his hour was not yet come, but he gave ground and said to       Socus, “Wretch, you shall now surely die. You have stayed me from       fighting further with the Trojans, but you shall now fall by my       spear, yielding glory to myself, and your soul to Hades of the       noble steeds.”

      Socus had turned in flight, but as he did so, the spear struck       him in the back midway between the shoulders, and went right       through his chest. He fell heavily to the ground and Ulysses       vaunted over him saying, “O Socus, son of Hippasus tamer of       horses, death has been too quick for you and you have not escaped       him: poor wretch, not even in death shall your father and mother       close your eyes, but the ravening vultures shall enshroud you       with the flapping of their dark wings and devour you. Whereas       even though I fall the Achaeans will give me my due rites of       burial.”

      So saying he drew Socus’s heavy spear out of his flesh and from       his shield, and the blood welled forth when the spear was       withdrawn so that he was much dismayed. When the Trojans saw that       Ulysses was bleeding they raised a great shout and came on in a       body towards him; he therefore gave ground, and called his       comrades to come and help him. Thrice did he cry as loudly as man       can cry, and thrice did brave Menelaus hear him; he turned,       therefore, to Ajax who was close beside him and said, “Ajax,       noble son of Telamon, captain of your people, the cry of Ulysses       rings in my ears, as though the Trojans had cut him off and were       worsting him while he is single-handed. Let us make our way       through the throng; it will be well that we defend him; I fear he       may come to harm for all his valour if he be left without       support, and the Danaans would miss him sorely.”

      He led the way and mighty Ajax went with him. The Trojans had       gathered round Ulysses like ravenous mountain jackals round the       carcase of some horned stag that has been hit with an arrow—the       stag has fled at full speed so long as his blood was warm and his       strength has lasted, but when the arrow has overcome him, the       savage jackals devour him in the shady glades of the forest. Then       heaven sends a fierce lion thither, whereon the jackals fly in       terror and the lion robs them of their prey—even so did Trojans       many and brave gather round crafty Ulysses, but the hero stood at       bay and kept them off with his spear. Ajax then came up with his       shield before him like a wall, and stood hard by, whereon the       Trojans fled in all directions. Menelaus took Ulysses by the       hand, and led him out of the press while his squire brought up       his chariot, but Ajax rushed furiously on the Trojans and killed       Doryclus, a bastard son of Priam; then he wounded Pandocus,       Lysandrus, Pyrasus, and Pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes       rushing in full flood from the mountains on to the plain, big       with the rain of heaven—many a dry oak and many a pine does it       engulf, and much mud does it bring down and cast into the       sea—even so did brave Ajax chase the foe furiously over the       plain, slaying both men and horses.

      Hector did not yet know what Ajax was doing, for he was fighting       on the extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river       Scamander, where the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest       round Nestor and brave Idomeneus. Among these Hector was making       great slaughter with his spear and furious driving, and was       destroying the ranks that were opposed to him; still the Achaeans       would have given no ground, had not Alexandrus husband of lovely       Helen stayed the prowess of Machaon, shepherd of his people, by       wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed arrow.       The Achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned       against them the Trojans might take him prisoner, and Idomeneus       said to Nestor, “Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean       name, mount your chariot at once; take Machaon with you and drive       your horses to the ships as fast as you can. A physician is worth       more than several other men put together, for he can cut out       arrows and spread healing herbs.”

      Nestor knight of Gerene did as Idomeneus had counselled; he at       once mounted his chariot, and Machaon son of the famed physician       Aesculapius, went with him. He lashed his horses and they flew       onward nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own       free will.

      Then Cebriones seeing the Trojans in confusion said to Hector       from his place beside him, “Hector, here are we two fighting on       the extreme wing of the battle, while the other Trojans are in       pell-mell rout, they and their horses. Ajax son of Telamon is       driving them before him; I know him by the breadth of his shield:       let us turn our chariot and horses thither, where horse and foot       are fighting most desperately, and where the cry of battle is       loudest.”

      With this he lashed his goodly steeds, and when they felt the       whip they drew the chariot full speed among the Achaeans and       Trojans, over the bodies and shields of those that had fallen:       the axle was bespattered with blood, and the rail round the car       was covered with splashes both from the horses’ hoofs and from       the tyres of the wheels. Hector tore his way through and flung       himself into the thick of the fight, and his presence threw the       Danaans into confusion, for his spear was not long idle;       nevertheless though he went among the ranks with sword and spear,       and throwing great stones, he avoided Ajax son of Telamon, for       Jove would have been angry with him if he had fought a better man       than himself.

      Then father Jove from his high throne struck fear into the heart       of Ajax, so that he stood there dazed and threw his shield behind       him—looking fearfully at the throng of his foes as though he were       some wild beast, and turning hither and thither but crouching       slowly backwards. As peasants with their hounds chase a lion from       their stockyard, and watch by night to prevent his carrying off       the pick of their herd—he makes his greedy spring, but in vain,       for the darts from many a strong hand fall thick around him, with       burning brands that scare him for all his fury, and when morning       comes he slinks foiled and angry away—even so did Ajax, sorely       against his will, retreat angrily before the Trojans, fearing for       the ships of the Achaeans. Or as some lazy ass that has had many       a cudgel broken about his back, when he into a field begins       eating the corn—boys beat him but he is too many for them, and       though they lay about with their sticks they cannot hurt him;       still when he has had his fill they at last drive him from the       field—even so did the Trojans and their allies pursue great Ajax,       ever smiting the middle of his shield with their darts. Now and       again he would turn and show fight, keeping back the battalions       of the Trojans, and then he would again retreat; but he prevented       any of them from making his way to the ships. Single-handed he       stood midway between the Trojans and Achaeans: the spears that       sped from their hands stuck some of them in his mighty shield,       while many, though thirsting for his blood, fell to the ground       ere they could reach him to the wounding of his fair flesh.

      Now when Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon saw that Ajax was       being overpowered by the rain of arrows, he went up to him and       hurled his spear. He struck Apisaon son of Phausius in the liver       below the midriff, and laid him low. Eurypylus sprang upon him,       and stripped the armour from his shoulders; but when Alexandrus       saw him, he aimed an arrow at him which struck him in the right       thigh; the arrow broke, but the point that was left in the wound       dragged on the thigh; he drew back, therefore, under cover of his       comrades to save his life, shouting as he did so to the Danaans,       “My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, rally to the       defence of Ajax who is being overpowered, and I doubt whether he       will come out of the fight alive. Hither, then, to the rescue of       great Ajax son of Telamon.”

      Even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came       near, and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from       their shoulders so as to give him cover. Ajax then made towards       them, and turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached       his men.

      Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the       mares of Neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing Nestor       out of the fight, and with him Machaon shepherd of his people.       Achilles saw and took note, for he was standing on the stern of       his ship watching the hard stress and struggle of the fight. He       called from the ship to his comrade Patroclus, who heard him in       the tent and came out looking like Mars himself—here indeed was       the beginning of the ill that presently befell him. “Why,” said       he, “Achilles, do you call me? What do you want with me?” And       Achilles answered, “Noble son of Menoetius, man after my own       heart, I take it that I shall now have the Achaeans praying at my       knees, for they are in great straits; go, Patroclus, and ask       Nestor who it is that he is bearing away wounded from the field;       from his back I should say it was Machaon son of Aesculapius, but       I could not see his face for the horses went by me at full       speed.”

      Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off       running by the ships and tents of the Achaeans.

      When Nestor and Machaon had reached the tents of the son of       Neleus, they dismounted, and an esquire, Eurymedon, took the       horses from the chariot. The pair then stood in the breeze by the       seaside to dry the sweat from their shirts, and when they had so       done they came inside and took their seats. Fair Hecamede, whom       Nestor had had awarded to him from Tenedos when Achilles took it,       mixed them a mess; she was daughter of wise Arsinous, and the       Achaeans had given her to Nestor because he excelled all of them       in counsel. First she set for them a fair and well-made table       that had feet of cyanus; on it there was a vessel of bronze and       an onion to give relish to the drink, with honey and cakes of       barley-meal. There was also a cup of rare workmanship which the       old man had brought with him from home, studded with bosses of       gold; it had four handles, on each of which there were two golden       doves feeding, and it had two feet to stand on. Any one else       would hardly have been able to lift it from the table when it was       full, but Nestor could do so quite easily. In this the woman, as       fair as a goddess, mixed them a mess with Pramnian wine; she       grated goat’s milk cheese into it with a bronze grater, threw in       a handful of white barley-meal, and having thus prepared the mess       she bade them drink it. When they had done so and had thus       quenched their thirst, they fell talking with one another, and at       this moment Patroclus appeared at the door.

      When the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his       hand, led him into the tent, and bade him take his place among       them; but Patroclus stood where he was and said, “Noble sir, I       may not stay, you cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me       is not one to be trifled with, and he bade me ask who the wounded       man was whom you were bearing away from the field. I can now see       for myself that he is Machaon, shepherd of his people. I must go       back and tell Achilles. You, sir, know what a terrible man he is,       and how ready to blame even where no blame should lie.”

      And Nestor answered, “Why should Achilles care to know how many       of the Achaeans may be wounded? He recks not of the dismay that       reigns in our host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled,       brave Diomed, son of Tydeus, is wounded; so are Ulysses and       Agamemnon; Eurypylus has been hit with an arrow in the thigh, and       I have just been bringing this man from the field—he too wounded       with an arrow. Nevertheless, Achilles, so valiant though he be,       cares not and knows no ruth. Will he wait till the ships, do what       we may, are in a blaze, and we perish one upon the other? As for       me, I have no strength nor stay in me any longer; would that I       were still young and strong as in the days when there was a fight       between us and the men of Elis about some cattle-raiding. I then       killed Itymoneus, the valiant son of Hypeirochus, a dweller in       Elis, as I was driving in the spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown       by my hand while fighting in the front rank in defence of his       cows, so he fell and the country people around him were in great       fear. We drove off a vast quantity of booty from the plain, fifty       herds of cattle and as many flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of       pigs, and as many wide-spreading flocks of goats. Of horses,       moreover, we seized a hundred and fifty, all of them mares, and       many had foals running with them. All these did we drive by night       to Pylus, the city of Neleus, taking them within the city; and       the heart of Neleus was glad in that I had taken so much, though       it was the first time I had ever been in the field. At daybreak       the heralds went round crying that all in Elis to whom there was       a debt owing should come; and the leading Pylians assembled to       divide the spoils. There were many to whom the Epeans owed       chattels, for we men of Pylus were few and had been oppressed       with wrong; in former years Hercules had come, and had laid his       hand heavy upon us, so that all our best men had perished. Neleus       had had twelve sons, but I alone was left; the others had all       been killed. The Epeans presuming upon all this had looked down       upon us and had done us much evil. My father chose a herd of       cattle and a great flock of sheep—three hundred in all—and he       took their shepherds with him, for there was a great debt due to       him in Elis, to wit four horses, winners of prizes. They and       their chariots with them had gone to the games and were to run       for a tripod, but King Augeas took them, and sent back their       driver grieving for the loss of his horses. Neleus was angered by       what he had both said and done, and took great value in return,       but he divided the rest, that no man might have less than his       full share.

      “Thus did we order all things, and offer sacrifices to the gods       throughout the city; but three days afterwards the Epeans came in       a body, many in number, they and their chariots, in full array,       and with them the two Moliones in their armour, though they were       still lads and unused to fighting. Now there is a certain town,       Thryoessa, perched upon a rock on the river Alpheus, the border       city of Pylus. This they would destroy, and pitched their camp       about it, but when they had crossed their whole plain, Minerva       darted down by night from Olympus and bade us set ourselves in       array; and she found willing soldiers in Pylos, for the men meant       fighting. Neleus would not let me arm, and hid my horses, for he       said that as yet I could know nothing about war; nevertheless       Minerva so ordered the fight that, all on foot as I was, I fought       among our mounted forces and vied with the foremost of them.       There is a river Minyeius that falls into the sea near Arene, and       there they that were mounted (and I with them) waited till       morning, when the companies of foot soldiers came up with us in       force. Thence in full panoply and equipment we came towards noon       to the sacred waters of the Alpheus, and there we offered victims       to almighty Jove, with a bull to Alpheus, another to Neptune, and       a herd-heifer to Minerva. After this we took supper in our       companies, and laid us down to rest each in his armour by the       river.

      “The Epeans were beleaguering the city and were determined to       take it, but ere this might be there was a desperate fight in       store for them. When the sun’s rays began to fall upon the earth       we joined battle, praying to Jove and to Minerva, and when the       fight had begun, I was the first to kill my man and take his       horses—to wit the warrior Mulius. He was son-in-law to Augeas,       having married his eldest daughter, golden-haired Agamede, who       knew the virtues of every herb which grows upon the face of the       earth. I speared him as he was coming towards me, and when he       fell headlong in the dust, I sprang upon his chariot and took my       place in the front ranks. The Epeans fled in all directions when       they saw the captain of their horsemen (the best man they had)       laid low, and I swept down on them like a whirlwind, taking fifty       chariots—and in each of them two men bit the dust, slain by my       spear. I should have even killed the two Moliones, sons of Actor,       unless their real father, Neptune lord of the earthquake, had       hidden them in a thick mist and borne them out of the fight.       Thereon Jove vouchsafed the Pylians a great victory, for we       chased them far over the plain, killing the men and bringing in       their armour, till we had brought our horses to Buprasium, rich       in wheat, and to the Olenian rock, with the hill that is called       Alision, at which point Minerva turned the people back. There I       slew the last man and left him; then the Achaeans drove their       horses back from Buprasium to Pylos and gave thanks to Jove among       the gods, and among mortal men to Nestor.

      “Such was I among my peers, as surely as ever was, but Achilles       is for keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue       it hereafter when the host is being cut to pieces. My good       friend, did not Menoetius charge you thus, on the day when he       sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon? Ulysses and I were in the       house, inside, and heard all that he said to you; for we came to       the fair house of Peleus while beating up recruits throughout all       Achaea, and when we got there we found Menoetius and yourself,       and Achilles with you. The old knight Peleus was in the outer       court, roasting the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to Jove the lord       of thunder; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which he       poured drink-offerings of wine over the burning sacrifice. You       two were busy cutting up the heifer, and at that moment we stood       at the gates, whereon Achilles sprang to his feet, led us by the       hand into the house, placed us at table, and set before us such       hospitable entertainment as guests expect. When we had satisfied       ourselves with meat and drink, I said my say and urged both of       you to join us. You were ready enough to do so, and the two old       men charged you much and straitly. Old Peleus bade his son       Achilles fight ever among the foremost and outvie his peers,       while Menoetius the son of Actor spoke thus to you: ‘My son,’       said he, ‘Achilles is of nobler birth than you are, but you are       older than he, though he is far the better man of the two.       Counsel him wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will       follow you to his own profit.’ Thus did your father charge you,       but you have forgotten; nevertheless, even now, say all this to       Achilles if he will listen to you. Who knows but with heaven’s       help you may talk him over, for it is good to take a friend’s       advice. If, however, he is fearful about some oracle, or if his       mother has told him something from Jove, then let him send you,       and let the rest of the Myrmidons follow with you, if perchance       you may bring light and saving to the Danaans. And let him send       you into battle clad in his own armour, that the Trojans may       mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the sons of the       Achaeans may thus have time to get their breath, for they are       hard pressed and there is little breathing time in battle. You,       who are fresh, might easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls       and away from the tents and ships.”

      With these words he moved the heart of Patroclus, who set off       running by the line of the ships to Achilles, descendant of       Aeacus. When he had got as far as the ships of Ulysses, where was       their place of assembly and court of justice, with their altars       dedicated to the gods, Eurypylus son of Euaemon, met him, wounded       in the thigh with an arrow, and limping out of the fight. Sweat       rained from his head and shoulders, and black blood welled from       his cruel wound, but his mind did not wander. The son of       Menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him and spoke       piteously saying, “O unhappy princes and counsellors of the       Danaans, are you then doomed to feed the hounds of Troy with your       fat, far from your friends and your native land? Say, noble       Eurypylus, will the Achaeans be able to hold great Hector in       check, or will they fall now before his spear?”

      Wounded Eurypylus made answer, “Noble Patroclus, there is no hope       left for the Achaeans but they will perish at their ships. All       they that were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded       at the hands of the Trojans, who are waxing stronger and       stronger. But save me and take me to your ship; cut out the arrow       from my thigh; wash the black blood from off it with warm water,       and lay upon it those gracious herbs which, so they say, have       been shown you by Achilles, who was himself shown them by Chiron,       most righteous of all the centaurs. For of the physicians       Podalirius and Machaon, I hear that the one is lying wounded in       his tent and is himself in need of healing, while the other is       fighting the Trojans upon the plain.”

      “Hero Eurypylus,” replied the brave son of Menoetius, “how may       these things be? What can I do? I am on my way to bear a message       to noble Achilles from Nestor of Gerene, bulwark of the Achaeans,       but even so I will not be unmindful of your distress.”

      With this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the       tent, and a servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the       ground for him to lie on. He laid him at full length and cut out       the sharp arrow from his thigh; he washed the black blood from       the wound with warm water; he then crushed a bitter herb, rubbing       it between his hands, and spread it upon the wound; this was a       virtuous herb which killed all pain; so the wound presently dried       and the blood left off flowing.




BOOK XII.


      The Trojans and their allies break the wall, led on by Hector.

      So the son of Menoetius was attending to the hurt of Eurypylus       within the tent, but the Argives and Trojans still fought       desperately, nor were the trench and the high wall above it, to       keep the Trojans in check longer. They had built it to protect       their ships, and had dug the trench all round it that it might       safeguard both the ships and the rich spoils which they had       taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the gods. It had       been built without the consent of the immortals, and therefore it       did not last. So long as Hector lived and Achilles nursed his       anger, and so long as the city of Priam remained untaken, the       great wall of the Achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of       the Trojans were no more, and many also of the Argives, though       some were yet left alive—when, moreover, the city was sacked in       the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back with their ships to       their own country—then Neptune and Apollo took counsel to destroy       the wall, and they turned on to it the streams of all the rivers       from Mount Ida into the sea, Rhesus, Heptaporus, Caresus,       Rhodius, Grenicus, Aesopus, and goodly Scamander, with Simois,       where many a shield and helm had fallen, and many a hero of the       race of demigods had bitten the dust. Phoebus Apollo turned the       mouths of all these rivers together and made them flow for nine       days against the wall, while Jove rained the whole time that he       might wash it sooner into the sea. Neptune himself, trident in       hand, surveyed the work and threw into the sea all the       foundations of beams and stones which the Achaeans had laid with       so much toil; he made all level by the mighty stream of the       Hellespont, and then when he had swept the wall away he spread a       great beach of sand over the place where it had been. This done       he turned the rivers back into their old courses.

      This was what Neptune and Apollo were to do in after time; but as       yet battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its       timbers rang under the blows that rained upon them. The Argives,       cowed by the scourge of Jove, were hemmed in at their ships in       fear of Hector the mighty minister of Rout, who as heretofore       fought with the force and fury of a whirlwind. As a lion or wild       boar turns fiercely on the dogs and men that attack him, while       these form a solid wall and shower their javelins as they face       him—his courage is all undaunted, but his high spirit will be the       death of him; many a time does he charge at his pursuers to       scatter them, and they fall back as often as he does so—even so       did Hector go about among the host exhorting his men, and       cheering them on to cross the trench.

      But the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its       brink, for the width frightened them. They could neither jump it       nor cross it, for it had overhanging banks all round upon either       side, above which there were the sharp stakes that the sons of       the Achaeans had planted so close and strong as a defence against       all who would assail it; a horse, therefore, could not get into       it and draw his chariot after him, but those who were on foot       kept trying their very utmost. Then Polydamas went up to Hector       and said, “Hector, and you other captains of the Trojans and       allies, it is madness for us to try and drive our horses across       the trench; it will be very hard to cross, for it is full of       sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the wall. Our horses       therefore cannot get down into it, and would be of no use if they       did; moreover it is a narrow place and we should come to harm.       If, indeed, great Jove is minded to help the Trojans, and in his       anger will utterly destroy the Achaeans, I would myself gladly       see them perish now and here far from Argos; but if they should       rally and we are driven back from the ships pell-mell into the       trench there will be not so much as a man get back to the city to       tell the tale. Now, therefore,