[ATH-iliad  —  part 4 of 5, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

me the meanest soldier among the Danaans.       His own feet never bore him back to gladden his wife and parents.       Even so shall I make an end of you too, if you withstand me; get       you back into the crowd and do not face me, or it shall be worse       for you. Even a fool may be wise after the event.”

      Euphorbus would not listen, and said, “Now indeed, Menelaus,       shall you pay for the death of my brother over whom you vaunted,       and whose wife you widowed in her bridal chamber, while you       brought grief unspeakable on his parents. I shall comfort these       poor people if I bring your head and armour and place them in the       hands of Panthous and noble Phrontis. The time is come when this       matter shall be fought out and settled, for me or against me.”

      As he spoke he struck Menelaus full on the shield, but the spear       did not go through, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus       then took aim, praying to father Jove as he did so; Euphorbus was       drawing back, and Menelaus struck him about the roots of his       throat, leaning his whole weight on the spear, so as to drive it       home. The point went clean through his neck, and his armour rang       rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. His hair       which was like that of the Graces, and his locks so deftly bound       in bands of silver and gold, were all bedrabbled with blood. As       one who has grown a fine young olive tree in a clear space where       there is abundance of water—the plant is full of promise, and       though the winds beat upon it from every quarter it puts forth       its white blossoms till the blasts of some fierce hurricane sweep       down upon it and level it with the ground—even so did Menelaus       strip the fair youth Euphorbus of his armour after he had slain       him. Or as some fierce lion upon the mountains in the pride of       his strength fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is       feeding—first he breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then       gorges on her blood and entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue       and cry against him, but they stand aloof and will not come close       to him, for they are pale with fear—even so no one had the       courage to face valiant Menelaus. The son of Atreus would have       then carried off the armour of the son of Panthous with ease, had       not Phoebus Apollo been angry, and in the guise of Mentes chief       of the Cicons incited Hector to attack him. “Hector,” said he,       “you are now going after the horses of the noble son of Aeacus,       but you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and       driven by mortal man, save only by Achilles, who is son to an       immortal mother. Meanwhile Menelaus son of Atreus has bestridden       the body of Patroclus and killed the noblest of the Trojans,       Euphorbus son of Panthous, so that he can fight no more.”

      The god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of       Hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the       ranks and saw Euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still       flowing from his wound, and Menelaus stripping him of his armour.       On this he made his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad       in his gleaming armour, and crying with a loud voice. When the       son of Atreus heard him, he said to himself in his dismay, “Alas!       what shall I do? I may not let the Trojans take the armour of       Patroclus who has fallen fighting on my behalf, lest some Danaan       who sees me should cry shame upon me. Still if for my honour’s       sake I fight Hector and the Trojans single-handed, they will       prove too many for me, for Hector is bringing them up in force.       Why, however, should I thus hesitate? When a man fights in       despite of heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue       it. Let no Danaan think ill of me if I give place to Hector, for       the hand of heaven is with him. Yet, if I could find Ajax, the       two of us would fight Hector and heaven too, if we might only       save the body of Patroclus for Achilles son of Peleus. This, of       many evils would be the least.”

      While he was thus in two minds, the Trojans came up to him with       Hector at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body,       turning about like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs       and men from a stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he       is daunted and slinks sulkily off—even so did Menelaus son of       Atreus turn and leave the body of Patroclus. When among the body       of his men, he looked around for mighty Ajax son of Telamon, and       presently saw him on the extreme left of the fight, cheering on       his men and exhorting them to keep on fighting, for Phoebus       Apollo had spread a great panic among them. He ran up to him and       said, “Ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to dead       Patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to Achilles—as for       his armour, Hector already has it.”

      These words stirred the heart of Ajax, and he made his way among       the front ranks, Menelaus going with him. Hector had stripped       Patroclus of his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his       head and take the body to fling before the dogs of Troy. But Ajax       came up with his shield like wall before him, on which Hector       withdrew under shelter of his men, and sprang on to his chariot,       giving the armour over to the Trojans to take to the city, as a       great trophy for himself; Ajax, therefore, covered the body of       Patroclus with his broad shield and bestrode him; as a lion       stands over his whelps if hunters have come upon him in a forest       when he is with his little ones—in the pride and fierceness of       his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover his       eyes—even so did Ajax bestride the body of Patroclus, and by his       side stood Menelaus son of Atreus, nursing great sorrow in his       heart.

      Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus looked fiercely at Hector and       rebuked him sternly. “Hector,” said he, “you make a brave show,       but in fight you are sadly wanting. A runaway like yourself has       no claim to so great a reputation. Think how you may now save       your town and citadel by the hands of your own people born in       Ilius; for you will get no Lycians to fight for you, seeing what       thanks they have had for their incessant hardships. Are you       likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less note, after       leaving Sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in arms,       to be the spoil and prey of the Danaans? So long as he lived he       did good service both to your city and yourself; yet you had no       stomach to save his body from the dogs. If the Lycians will       listen to me, they will go home and leave Troy to its fate. If       the Trojans had any of that daring fearless spirit which lays       hold of men who are fighting for their country and harassing       those who would attack it, we should soon bear off Patroclus into       Ilius. Could we get this dead man away and bring him into the       city of Priam, the Argives would readily give up the armour of       Sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. For he whose squire       has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the       Achaeans—he and his close fighting followers. Nevertheless you       dared not make a stand against Ajax, nor face him, eye to eye,       with battle all round you, for he is a braver man than you are.”

      Hector scowled at him and answered, “Glaucus, you should know       better. I have held you so far as a man of more understanding       than any in all Lycia, but now I despise you for saying that I am       afraid of Ajax. I fear neither battle nor the din of chariots,       but Jove’s will is stronger than ours; Jove at one time makes       even a strong man draw back and snatches victory from his grasp,       while at another he will set him on to fight. Come hither then,       my friend, stand by me and see indeed whether I shall play the       coward the whole day through as you say, or whether I shall not       stay some even of the boldest Danaans from fighting round the       body of Patroclus.”

      As he spoke he called loudly on the Trojans saying, “Trojans,       Lycians, and Dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my       friends, and fight might and main, while I put on the goodly       armour of Achilles, which I took when I killed Patroclus.”

      With this Hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men       who were taking the armour of Achilles to Troy, but had not yet       got far. Standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he       changed his armour. His own he sent to the strong city of Ilius       and to the Trojans, while he put on the immortal armour of the       son of Peleus, which the gods had given to Peleus, who in his age       gave it to his son; but the son did not grow old in his father’s       armour.

      When Jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw Hector standing aloof and       arming himself in the armour of the son of Peleus, he wagged his       head and muttered to himself saying, “A! poor wretch, you arm in       the armour of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you       reck nothing of the doom that is already close upon you. You have       killed his comrade so brave and strong, but it was not well that       you should strip the armour from his head and shoulders. I do       indeed endow you with great might now, but as against this you       shall not return from battle to lay the armour of the son of       Peleus before Andromache.”

      The son of Saturn bowed his portentous brows, and Hector fitted       the armour to his body, while terrible Mars entered into him, and       filled his whole body with might and valour. With a shout he       strode in among the allies, and his armour flashed about him so       that he seemed to all of them like the great son of Peleus       himself. He went about among them and cheered them on—Mesthles,       Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus, Asteropaeus, Deisenor and       Hippothous, Phorcys, Chromius and Ennomus the augur. All these       did he exhort saying, “Hear me, allies from other cities who are       here in your thousands, it was not in order to have a crowd about       me that I called you hither each from his several city, but that       with heart and soul you might defend the wives and little ones of       the Trojans from the fierce Achaeans. For this do I oppress my       people with your food and the presents that make you rich.       Therefore turn, and charge at the foe, to stand or fall as is the       game of war; whoever shall bring Patroclus, dead though he be,       into the hands of the Trojans, and shall make Ajax give way       before him, I will give him one half of the spoils while I keep       the other. He will thus share like honour with myself.”

      When he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the Danaans       with their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran       high that he should force Ajax son of Telamon to yield up the       body—fools that they were, for he was about to take the lives of       many. Then Ajax said to Menelaus, “My good friend Menelaus, you       and I shall hardly come out of this fight alive. I am less       concerned for the body of Patroclus, who will shortly become meat       for the dogs and vultures of Troy, than for the safety of my own       head and yours. Hector has wrapped us round in a storm of battle       from every quarter, and our destruction seems now certain. Call       then upon the princes of the Danaans if there is any who can hear       us.”

      Menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the Danaans for help at       the top of his voice. “My friends,” he cried, “princes and       counsellors of the Argives, all you who with Agamemnon and       Menelaus drink at the public cost, and give orders each to his       own people as Jove vouchsafes him power and glory, the fight is       so thick about me that I cannot distinguish you severally; come       on, therefore, every man unbidden, and think it shame that       Patroclus should become meat and morsel for Trojan hounds.”

      Fleet Ajax son of Oileus heard him and was first to force his way       through the fight and run to help him. Next came Idomeneus and       Meriones his esquire, peer of murderous Mars. As for the others       that came into the fight after these, who of his own self could       name them?

      The Trojans with Hector at their head charged in a body. As a       great wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some       heaven-born river, and the rocks that jut into the sea ring with       the roar of the breakers that beat and buffet them—even with such       a roar did the Trojans come on; but the Achaeans in singleness of       heart stood firm about the son of Menoetius, and fenced him with       their bronze shields. Jove, moreover, hid the brightness of their       helmets in a thick cloud, for he had borne no grudge against the       son of Menoetius while he was still alive and squire to the       descendant of Aeacus; therefore he was loth to let him fall a       prey to the dogs of his foes the Trojans, and urged his comrades       on to defend him.

      At first the Trojans drove the Achaeans back, and they withdrew       from the dead man daunted. The Trojans did not succeed in killing       any one, nevertheless they drew the body away. But the Achaeans       did not lose it long, for Ajax, foremost of all the Danaans after       the son of Peleus alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied       them and made towards the front like a wild boar upon the       mountains when he stands at bay in the forest glades and routs       the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked him—even so did       Ajax son of Telamon passing easily in among the phalanxes of the       Trojans, disperse those who had bestridden Patroclus and were       most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city. At       this moment Hippothous brave son of the Pelasgian Lethus, in his       zeal for Hector and the Trojans, was dragging the body off by the       foot through the press of the fight, having bound a strap round       the sinews near the ancle; but a mischief soon befell him from       which none of those could save him who would have gladly done so,       for the son of Telamon sprang forward and smote him on his       bronze-cheeked helmet. The plumed headpiece broke about the point       of the weapon, struck at once by the spear and by the strong hand       of Ajax, so that the bloody brain came oozing out through the       crest-socket. His strength then failed him and he let Patroclus’       foot drop from his hand, as he fell full length dead upon the       body; thus he died far from the fertile land of Larissa, and       never repaid his parents the cost of bringing him up, for his       life was cut short early by the spear of mighty Ajax. Hector then       took aim at Ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and just       managed to avoid it; the spear passed on and struck Schedius son       of noble Iphitus, captain of the Phoceans, who dwelt in famed       Panopeus and reigned over much people; it struck him under the       middle of the collar-bone the bronze point went right through       him, coming out at the bottom of his shoulder-blade, and his       armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.       Ajax in his turn struck noble Phorcys son of Phaenops in the       middle of the belly as he was bestriding Hippothous, and broke       the plate of his cuirass; whereon the spear tore out his entrails       and he clutched the ground in his palm as he fell to earth.       Hector and those who were in the front rank then gave ground,       while the Argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off the       bodies of Phorcys and Hippothous which they stripped presently of       their armour.

      The Trojans would now have been worsted by the brave Achaeans and       driven back to Ilius through their own cowardice, while the       Argives, so great was their courage and endurance, would have       achieved a triumph even against the will of Jove, if Apollo had       not roused Aeneas, in the likeness of Periphas son of Epytus, an       attendant who had grown old in the service of Aeneas’ aged       father, and was at all times devoted to him. In his likeness,       then, Apollo said, “Aeneas, can you not manage, even though       heaven be against us, to save high Ilius? I have known men, whose       numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people in       spite of Jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give       victory to us than to the Danaans, if you would only fight       instead of being so terribly afraid.”

      Aeneas knew Apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to       Hector saying, “Hector and all other Trojans and allies, shame on       us if we are beaten by the Achaeans and driven back to Ilius       through our own cowardice. A god has just come up to me and told       me that Jove the supreme disposer will be with us. Therefore let       us make for the Danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they       bear away dead Patroclus to the ships.”

      As he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then       rallied and again faced the Achaeans. Aeneas speared Leiocritus       son of Arisbas, a valiant follower of Lycomedes, and Lycomedes       was moved with pity as he saw him fall; he therefore went close       up, and speared Apisaon son of Hippasus shepherd of his people in       the liver under the midriff, so that he died; he had come from       fertile Paeonia and was the best man of them all after       Asteropaeus. Asteropaeus flew forward to avenge him and attack       the Danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch as those about       Patroclus were well covered by their shields, and held their       spears in front of them, for Ajax had given them strict orders       that no man was either to give ground, or to stand out before the       others, but all were to hold well together about the body and       fight hand to hand. Thus did huge Ajax bid them, and the earth       ran red with blood as the corpses fell thick on one another alike       on the side of the Trojans and allies, and on that of the       Danaans; for these last, too, fought no bloodless fight though       many fewer of them perished, through the care they took to defend       and stand by one another.

      Thus did they fight as it were a flaming fire; it seemed as       though it had gone hard even with the sun and moon, for they were       hidden over all that part where the bravest heroes were fighting       about the dead son of Menoetius, whereas the other Danaans and       Achaeans fought at their ease in full daylight with brilliant       sunshine all round them, and there was not a cloud to be seen       neither on plain nor mountain. These last moreover would rest for       a while and leave off fighting, for they were some distance apart       and beyond the range of one another’s weapons, whereas those who       were in the thick of the fray suffered both from battle and       darkness. All the best of them were being worn out by the great       weight of their armour, but the two valiant heroes, Thrasymedes       and Antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of Patroclus, and       believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the       Trojans; they were keeping themselves in reserve against the       death or rout of their own comrades, for so Nestor had ordered       when he sent them from the ships into battle.

      Thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the       sweat of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on       their hands and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet       son of Peleus. It was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all       drenched in fat to his men, and bids them stretch it; whereon       they stand round it in a ring and tug till the moisture leaves       it, and the fat soaks in for the many that pull at it, and it is       well stretched—even so did the two sides tug the dead body hither       and thither within the compass of but a little space—the Trojans       steadfastly set on dragging it into Ilius, while the Achaeans       were no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was the       fight between them. Not Mars himself the lord of hosts, nor yet       Minerva, even in their fullest fury could make light of such a       battle.

      Such fearful turmoil of men and horses did Jove on that day       ordain round the body of Patroclus. Meanwhile Achilles did not       know that he had fallen, for the fight was under the wall of Troy       a long way off the ships. He had no idea, therefore, that       Patroclus was dead, and deemed that he would return alive as soon       as he had gone close up to the gates. He knew that he was not to       sack the city neither with nor without himself, for his mother       had often told him this when he had sat alone with her, and she       had informed him of the counsels of great Jove. Now, however, she       had not told him how great a disaster had befallen him in the       death of the one who was far dearest to him of all his comrades.

      The others still kept on charging one another round the body with       their pointed spears and killing each other. Then would one say,       “My friends, we can never again show our faces at the       ships—better, and greatly better, that earth should open and       swallow us here in this place, than that we should let the       Trojans have the triumph of bearing off Patroclus to their city.”

      The Trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying,       “Friends, though we fall to a man beside this body, let none       shrink from fighting.” With such words did they exhort each       other. They fought and fought, and an iron clank rose through the       void air to the brazen vault of heaven. The horses of the       descendant of Aeacus stood out of the fight and wept when they       heard that their driver had been laid low by the hand of       murderous Hector. Automedon, valiant son of Diores, lashed them       again and again; many a time did he speak kindly to them, and       many a time did he upbraid them, but they would neither go back       to the ships by the waters of the broad Hellespont, nor yet into       battle among the Achaeans; they stood with their chariot stock       still, as a pillar set over the tomb of some dead man or woman,       and bowed their heads to the ground. Hot tears fell from their       eyes as they mourned the loss of their charioteer, and their       noble manes drooped all wet from under the yoke-straps on either       side the yoke.

      The son of Saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. He       wagged his head, and muttered to himself, saying, “Poor things,       why did we give you to King Peleus who is a mortal, while you are       yourselves ageless and immortal? Was it that you might share the       sorrows that befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and       move upon the earth there is none so pitiable as he is—still,       Hector son of Priam shall drive neither you nor your chariot. I       will not have it. It is enough that he should have the armour       over which he vaunts so vainly. Furthermore I will give you       strength of heart and limb to bear Automedon safely to the ships       from battle, for I shall let the Trojans triumph still further,       and go on killing till they reach the ships; whereon night shall       fall and darkness overshadow the land.”

      As he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so       that they shook the dust from out of their manes, and bore their       chariot swiftly into the fight that raged between Trojans and       Achaeans. Behind them fought Automedon full of sorrow for his       comrade, as a vulture amid a flock of geese. In and out, and here       and there, full speed he dashed amid the throng of the Trojans,       but for all the fury of his pursuit he killed no man, for he       could not wield his spear and keep his horses in hand when alone       in the chariot; at last, however, a comrade, Alcimedon, son of       Laerces son of Haemon caught sight of him and came up behind his       chariot. “Automedon,” said he, “what god has put this folly into       your heart and robbed you of your right mind, that you fight the       Trojans in the front rank single-handed? He who was your comrade       is slain, and Hector plumes himself on being armed in the armour       of the descendant of Aeacus.”

      Automedon son of Diores answered, “Alcimedon, there is no one       else who can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you       can, save only Patroclus—while he was alive—peer of gods in       counsel. Take then the whip and reins, while I go down from the       car and fight.”

      Alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and       reins, while Automedon leaped from off the car. When Hector saw       him he said to Aeneas who was near him, “Aeneas, counsellor of       the mail-clad Trojans, I see the steeds of the fleet son of       Aeacus come into battle with weak hands to drive them. I am sure,       if you think well, that we might take them; they will not dare       face us if we both attack them.”

      The valiant son of Anchises was of the same mind, and the pair       went right on, with their shoulders covered under shields of       tough dry ox-hide, overlaid with much bronze. Chromius and Aretus       went also with them, and their hearts beat high with hope that       they might kill the men and capture the horses—fools that they       were, for they were not to return scatheless from their meeting       with Automedon, who prayed to father Jove and was forthwith       filled with courage and strength abounding. He turned to his       trusty comrade Alcimedon and said, “Alcimedon, keep your horses       so close up that I may feel their breath upon my back; I doubt       that we shall not stay Hector son of Priam till he has killed us       and mounted behind the horses; he will then either spread panic       among the ranks of the Achaeans, or himself be killed among the       foremost.”

      On this he cried out to the two Ajaxes and Menelaus, “Ajaxes       captains of the Argives, and Menelaus, give the dead body over to       them that are best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of       us living; for Hector and Aeneas who are the two best men among       the Trojans, are pressing us hard in the full tide of war.       Nevertheless the issue lies on the lap of heaven, I will       therefore hurl my spear and leave the rest to Jove.”

      He poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the       round shield of Aretus, and went right through it for the shield       stayed it not, so that it was driven through his belt into the       lower part of his belly. As when some sturdy youth, axe in hand,       deals his blow behind the horns of an ox and severs the tendons       at the back of its neck so that it springs forward and then       drops, even so did Aretus give one bound and then fall on his       back the spear quivering in his body till it made an end of him.       Hector then aimed a spear at Automedon but he saw it coming and       stooped forward to avoid it, so that it flew past him and the       point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering       till Mars robbed it of its force. They would then have fought       hand to hand with swords had not the two Ajaxes forced their way       through the crowd when they heard their comrade calling, and       parted them for all their fury—for Hector, Aeneas, and Chromius       were afraid and drew back, leaving Aretus to lie there struck to       the heart. Automedon, peer of fleet Mars, then stripped him of       his armour and vaunted over him saying, “I have done little to       assuage my sorrow for the son of Menoetius, for the man I have       killed is not so good as he was.”

      As he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon       his chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all       steeped in gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull.

      And now the fierce groanful fight again raged about Patroclus,       for Minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the       command of far-seeing Jove, who had changed his mind and sent her       to encourage the Danaans. As when Jove bends his bright bow in       heaven in token to mankind either of war or of the chill storms       that stay men from their labour and plague the flocks—even so,       wrapped in such radiant raiment, did Minerva go in among the host       and speak man by man to each. First she took the form and voice       of Phoenix and spoke to Menelaus son of Atreus, who was standing       near her. “Menelaus,” said she, “it will be shame and dishonour       to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of Achilles under the       walls of Troy. Therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be so       also.”

      Menelaus answered, “Phoenix, my good old friend, may Minerva       vouchsafe me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so       shall I stand by Patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to       my heart, but Hector is as a raging fire and deals his blows       without ceasing, for Jove is now granting him a time of triumph.”

      Minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the       other gods. Therefore she put strength into his knees and       shoulders, and made him as bold as a fly, which, though driven       off will yet come again and bite if it can, so dearly does it       love man’s blood—even so bold as this did she make him as he       stood over Patroclus and threw his spear. Now there was among the       Trojans a man named Podes, son of Eetion, who was both rich and       valiant. Hector held him in the highest honour for he was his       comrade and boon companion; the spear of Menelaus struck this man       in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right       through him. Whereon he fell heavily forward, and Menelaus son of       Atreus drew off his body from the Trojans into the ranks of his       own people.

      Apollo then went up to Hector and spurred him on to fight, in the       likeness of Phaenops son of Asius who lived in Abydos and was the       most favoured of all Hector’s guests. In his likeness Apollo       said, “Hector, who of the Achaeans will fear you henceforward now       that you have quailed before Menelaus who has ever been rated       poorly as a soldier? Yet he has now got a corpse away from the       Trojans single-handed, and has slain your own true comrade, a man       brave among the foremost, Podes son of Eetion.”

      A dark cloud of grief fell upon Hector as he heard, and he made       his way to the front clad in full armour. Thereon the son of       Saturn seized his bright tasselled aegis, and veiled Ida in       cloud: he sent forth his lightnings and his thunders, and as he       shook his aegis he gave victory to the Trojans and routed the       Achaeans.

      The panic was begun by Peneleos the Boeotian, for while keeping       his face turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear       on the upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by Polydamas       had grazed the top of the bone, for Polydamas had come up to him       and struck him from close at hand. Then Hector in close combat       struck Leitus son of noble Alectryon in the hand by the wrist,       and disabled him from fighting further. He looked about him in       dismay, knowing that never again should he wield spear in battle       with the Trojans. While Hector was in pursuit of Leitus,       Idomeneus struck him on the breastplate over his chest near the       nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft, and the Trojans cheered       aloud. Hector then aimed at Idomeneus son of Deucalion as he was       standing on his chariot, and very narrowly missed him, but the       spear hit Coiranus, a follower and charioteer of Meriones who had       come with him from Lyctus. Idomeneus had left the ships on foot       and would have afforded a great triumph to the Trojans if       Coiranus had not driven quickly up to him, he therefore brought       life and rescue to Idomeneus, but himself fell by the hand of       murderous Hector. For Hector hit him on the jaw under the ear;       the end of the spear drove out his teeth and cut his tongue in       two pieces, so that he fell from his chariot and let the reins       fall to the ground. Meriones gathered them up from the ground and       took them into his own hands, then he said to Idomeneus, “Lay on,       till you get back to the ships, for you must see that the day is       no longer ours.”

      On this Idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had       taken hold upon him.

      Ajax and Menelaus noted how Jove had turned the scale in favour       of the Trojans, and Ajax was first to speak. “Alas,” said he,       “even a fool may see that father Jove is helping the Trojans. All       their weapons strike home; no matter whether it be a brave man or       a coward that hurls them, Jove speeds all alike, whereas ours       fall each one of them without effect. What, then, will be best       both as regards rescuing the body, and our return to the joy of       our friends who will be grieving as they look hitherwards; for       they will make sure that nothing can now check the terrible hands       of Hector, and that he will fling himself upon our ships. I wish       that some one would go and tell the son of Peleus at once, for I       do not think he can have yet heard the sad news that the dearest       of his friends has fallen. But I can see not a man among the       Achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in       darkness. O father Jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of       the Achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will       that we perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight.”

      Father Jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears.       Forthwith he chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun       shone out and all the fighting was revealed. Ajax then said to       Menelaus, “Look, Menelaus, and if Antilochus son of Nestor be       still living, send him at once to tell Achilles that by far the       dearest to him of all his comrades has fallen.”

      Menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a       stockyard—the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who       keep watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on       the fat of their herd. In his lust of meat he makes straight at       them but in vain, for darts from strong hands assail him, and       burning brands which daunt him for all his hunger, so in the       morning he slinks sulkily away—even so did Menelaus sorely       against his will leave Patroclus, in great fear lest the Achaeans       should be driven back in rout and let him fall into the hands of       the foe. He charged Meriones and the two Ajaxes straitly saying,       “Ajaxes and Meriones, leaders of the Argives, now indeed remember       how good Patroclus was; he was ever courteous while alive, bear       it in mind now that he is dead.”

      With this Menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an       eagle, whose sight they say is keener than that of any other       bird—however high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs       can escape him by crouching under bush or thicket, for he will       swoop down upon it and make an end of it—even so, O Menelaus, did       your keen eyes range round the mighty host of your followers to       see if you could find the son of Nestor still alive. Presently       Menelaus saw him on the extreme left of the battle cheering on       his men and exhorting them to fight boldly. Menelaus went up to       him and said, “Antilochus, come here and listen to sad news,       which I would indeed were untrue. You must see with your own eyes       that heaven is heaping calamity upon the Danaans, and giving       victory to the Trojans. Patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest       of the Achaeans, and sorely will the Danaans miss him. Run       instantly to the ships and tell Achilles, that he may come to       rescue the body and bear it to the ships. As for the armour,       Hector already has it.”

      Antilochus was struck with horror. For a long time he was       speechless; his eyes filled with tears and he could find no       utterance, but he did as Menelaus had said, and set off running       as soon as he had given his armour to a comrade, Laodocus, who       was wheeling his horses round, close beside him.

      Thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad       news to Achilles son of Peleus. Nor were you, O Menelaus, minded       to succour his harassed comrades, when Antilochus had left the       Pylians—and greatly did they miss him—but he sent them noble       Thrasymedes, and himself went back to Patroclus. He came running       up to the two Ajaxes and said, “I have sent Antilochus to the       ships to tell Achilles, but rage against Hector as he may, he       cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour. What then will       be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and our own       escape from death amid the battle-cries of the Trojans?”

      Ajax answered, “Menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and       Meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray,       while we two behind you keep off Hector and the Trojans, one in       heart as in name, and long used to fighting side by side with one       another.”

      On this Menelaus and Meriones took the dead man in their arms and       lifted him high aloft with a great effort. The Trojan host raised       a hue and cry behind them when they saw the Achaeans bearing the       body away, and flew after them like hounds attacking a wounded       boar at the loo of a band of young huntsmen. For a while the       hounds fly at him as though they would tear him in pieces, but       now and again he turns on them in a fury, scaring and scattering       them in all directions—even so did the Trojans for a while charge       in a body, striking with sword and with spears pointed at both       the ends, but when the two Ajaxes faced them and stood at bay,       they would turn pale and no man dared press on to fight further       about the dead.

      In this wise did the two heroes strain every nerve to bear the       body to the ships out of the fight. The battle raged round them       like fierce flames that when once kindled spread like wildfire       over a city, and the houses fall in the glare of its burning—even       such was the roar and tramp of men and horses that pursued them       as they bore Patroclus from the field. Or as mules that put forth       all their strength to draw some beam or great piece of ship’s       timber down a rough mountain-track, and they pant and sweat as       they go—even so did Menelaus and Meriones pant and sweat as they bore the       body of Patroclus. Behind them the two Ajaxes held stoutly out.       As some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain will       turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there       any stream strong enough to break through it—even so did the two       Ajaxes face the Trojans and stem the tide of their fighting       though they kept pouring on towards them and foremost among them       all was Aeneas son of Anchises with valiant Hector. As a flock of       daws or starlings fall to screaming and chattering when they see       a falcon, foe to all small birds, come soaring near them, even so       did the Achaean youth raise a babel of cries as they fled before       Aeneas and Hector, unmindful of their former prowess. In the rout       of the Danaans much goodly armour fell round about the trench,       and of fighting there was no end.




BOOK XVIII.


      The grief of Achilles over Patroclus—The visit of Thetis to       Vulcan and the armour that he made for Achilles.

      Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the       fleet runner Antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached       Achilles, and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that       which was indeed too surely true. “Alas,” said he to himself in       the heaviness of his heart, “why are the Achaeans again scouring       the plain and flocking towards the ships? Heaven grant the gods       be not now bringing that sorrow upon me of which my mother Thetis       spoke, saying that while I was yet alive the bravest of the       Myrmidons should fall before the Trojans, and see the light of       the sun no longer. I fear the brave son of Menoetius has fallen       through his own daring and yet I bade him return to the ships as       soon as he had driven back those that were bringing fire against       them, and not join battle with Hector.”

      As he was thus pondering, the son of Nestor came up to him and       told his sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. “Alas,” he cried,       “son of noble Peleus, I bring you bad tidings, would indeed that       they were untrue. Patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging       about his naked body—for Hector holds his armour.”

      A dark cloud of grief fell upon Achilles as he listened. He       filled both hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it       over his head, disfiguring his comely face, and letting the       refuse settle over his shirt so fair and new. He flung himself       down all huge and hugely at full length, and tore his hair with       his hands. The bondswomen whom Achilles and Patroclus had taken       captive screamed aloud for grief, beating their breasts, and with       their limbs failing them for sorrow. Antilochus bent over him the       while, weeping and holding both his hands as he lay groaning for       he feared that he might plunge a knife into his own throat. Then       Achilles gave a loud cry and his mother heard him as she was       sitting in the depths of the sea by the old man her father,       whereon she screamed, and all the goddesses daughters of Nereus       that dwelt at the bottom of the sea, came gathering round her.       There were Glauce, Thalia and Cymodoce, Nesaia, Speo, Thoe and       dark-eyed Halie, Cymothoe, Actaea and Limnorea, Melite, Iaera,       Amphithoe and Agave, Doto and Proto, Pherusa and Dynamene,       Dexamene, Amphinome and Callianeira, Doris, Panope, and the       famous sea-nymph Galatea, Nemertes, Apseudes and Callianassa.       There were also Clymene, Ianeira and Ianassa, Maera, Oreithuia       and Amatheia of the lovely locks, with other Nereids who dwell in       the depths of the sea. The crystal cave was filled with their       multitude and they all beat their breasts while Thetis led them       in their lament.

      “Listen,” she cried, “sisters, daughters of Nereus, that you may       hear the burden of my sorrows. Alas, woe is me, woe in that I       have borne the most glorious of offspring. I bore him fair and       strong, hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling; I tended       him as a plant in a goodly garden, and sent him with his ships to       Ilius to fight the Trojans, but never shall I welcome him back to       the house of Peleus. So long as he lives to look upon the light       of the sun he is in heaviness, and though I go to him I cannot       help him. Nevertheless I will go, that I may see my dear son and       learn what sorrow has befallen him though he is still holding       aloof from battle.”

      She left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping       after, and the waves opened a path before them. When they reached       the rich plain of Troy, they came up out of the sea in a long       line on to the sands, at the place where the ships of the       Myrmidons were drawn up in close order round the tents of       Achilles. His mother went up to him as he lay groaning; she laid       her hand upon his head and spoke piteously, saying, “My son, why       are you thus weeping? What sorrow has now befallen you? Tell me;       hide it not from me. Surely Jove has granted you the prayer you       made him, when you lifted up your hands and besought him that the       Achaeans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and rue it       bitterly in that you were no longer with them.”

      Achilles groaned and answered, “Mother, Olympian Jove has indeed       vouchsafed me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to       me, seeing that my dear comrade Patroclus has fallen—he whom I       valued more than all others, and loved as dearly as my own life?       I have lost him; aye, and Hector when he had killed him stripped       the wondrous armour, so glorious to behold, which the gods gave       to Peleus when they laid you in the couch of a mortal man. Would       that you were still dwelling among the immortal sea-nymphs, and       that Peleus had taken to himself some mortal bride. For now you       shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of that son whom       you can never welcome home—nay, I will not live nor go about       among mankind unless Hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for       having slain Patroclus son of Menoetius.”

      Thetis wept and answered, “Then, my son, is your end near at       hand—for your own death awaits you full soon after that of       Hector.”

      Then said Achilles in his great grief, “I would die here and now,       in that I could not save my comrade. He has fallen far from home,       and in his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. What       is there for me? Return to my own land I shall not, and I have       brought no saving neither to Patroclus nor to my other comrades       of whom so many have been slain by mighty Hector; I stay here by       my ships a bootless burden upon the earth, I, who in fight have       no peer among the Achaeans, though in council there are better       than I. Therefore, perish strife both from among gods and men,       and anger, wherein even a righteous man will harden his       heart—which rises up in the soul of a man like smoke, and the       taste thereof is sweeter than drops of honey. Even so has       Agamemnon angered me. And yet—so be it, for it is over; I will       force my soul into subjection as I needs must; I will go; I will       pursue Hector who has slain him whom I loved so dearly, and will       then abide my doom when it may please Jove and the other gods to       send it. Even Hercules, the best beloved of Jove—even he could       not escape the hand of death, but fate and Juno’s fierce anger       laid him low, as I too shall lie when I am dead if a like doom       awaits me. Till then I will win fame, and will bid Trojan and       Dardanian women wring tears from their tender cheeks with both       their hands in the grievousness of their great sorrow; thus shall       they know that he who has held aloof so long will hold aloof no       longer. Hold me not back, therefore, in the love you bear me, for       you shall not move me.”

      Then silver-footed Thetis answered, “My son, what you have said       is true. It is well to save your comrades from destruction, but       your armour is in the hands of the Trojans; Hector bears it in       triumph upon his own shoulders. Full well I know that his vaunt       shall not be lasting, for his end is close at hand; go not,       however, into the press of battle till you see me return hither;       to-morrow at break of day I shall be here, and will bring you       goodly armour from King Vulcan.”

      On this she left her brave son, and as she turned away she said       to the sea-nymphs her sisters, “Dive into the bosom of the sea       and go to the house of the old sea-god my father. Tell him       everything; as for me, I will go to the cunning workman Vulcan on       high Olympus, and ask him to provide my son with a suit of       splendid armour.”

      When she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves,       while silver-footed Thetis went her way that she might bring the       armour for her son.

      Thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to Olympus, and       meanwhile the Achaeans were flying with loud cries before       murderous Hector till they reached the ships and the Hellespont,       and they could not draw the body of Mars’s servant Patroclus out       of reach of the weapons that were showered upon him, for Hector       son of Priam with his host and horsemen had again caught up to       him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice did brave Hector       seize him by the feet, striving with might and main to draw him       away and calling loudly on the Trojans, and thrice did the two       Ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off       the body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of       the fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud, but       he would give no ground. As upland shepherds that cannot chase       some famished lion from a carcase, even so could not the two       Ajaxes scare Hector son of Priam from the body of Patroclus.

      And now he would even have dragged it off and have won       imperishable glory, had not Iris fleet as the wind, winged her       way as messenger from Olympus to the son of Peleus and bidden him       arm. She came secretly without the knowledge of Jove and of the       other gods, for Juno sent her, and when she had got close to him       she said, “Up, son of Peleus, mightiest of all mankind; rescue       Patroclus about whom this fearful fight is now raging by the       ships. Men are killing one another, the Danaans in defence of the       dead body, while the Trojans are trying to hale it away, and take       it to windy Ilius: Hector is the most furious of them all; he is       for cutting the head from the body and fixing it on the stakes of       the wall. Up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink from the       thought that Patroclus may become meat for the dogs of Troy.       Shame on you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage.”

      And Achilles said, “Iris, which of the gods was it that sent you       to me?”

      Iris answered, “It was Juno the royal spouse of Jove, but the son       of Saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of       the immortals who dwell on the snowy summits of Olympus.”

      Then fleet Achilles answered her saying, “How can I go up into       the battle? They have my armour. My mother forbade me to arm till       I should see her come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour       from Vulcan; I know no man whose arms I can put on, save only the       shield of Ajax son of Telamon, and he surely must be fighting in       the front rank and wielding his spear about the body of dead       Patroclus.”

      Iris said, “We know that your armour has been taken, but go as       you are; go to the deep trench and show yourself before the       Trojans, that they may fear you and cease fighting. Thus will the       fainting sons of the Achaeans gain some brief breathing time,       which in battle may hardly be.”

      Iris left him when she had so spoken. But Achilles dear to Jove       arose, and Minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong       shoulders; she crowned his head with a halo of golden cloud from       which she kindled a glow of gleaming fire. As the smoke that goes       up into heaven from some city that is being beleaguered on an       island far out at sea—all day long do men sally from the city and       fight their hardest, and at the going down of the sun the line of       beacon-fires blazes forth, flaring high for those that dwell near       them to behold, if so be that they may come with their ships and       succour them—even so did the light flare from the head of       Achilles, as he stood by the trench, going beyond the wall—but he       did not join the Achaeans for he heeded the charge which his       mother laid upon him.

      There did he stand and shout aloud. Minerva also raised her voice       from afar, and spread terror unspeakable among the Trojans.       Ringing as the note of a trumpet that sounds alarm then the foe       is at the gates of a city, even so brazen was the voice of the       son of Aeacus, and when the Trojans heard its clarion tones they       were dismayed; the horses turned back with their chariots for       they boded mischief, and their drivers were awe-struck by the       steady flame which the grey-eyed goddess had kindled above the       head of the great son of Peleus.

      Thrice did Achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench,       and thrice were the Trojans and their brave allies thrown into       confusion; whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath       the wheels of their chariots and perished by their own spears.       The Achaeans to their great joy then drew Patroclus out of reach       of the weapons, and laid him on a litter: his comrades stood       mourning round him, and among them fleet Achilles who wept       bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying dead upon his bier. He       had sent him out with horses and chariots into battle, but his       return he was not to welcome.

      Then Juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters       of Oceanus; so he set, and the Achaeans had rest from the tug and       turmoil of war.

      Now the Trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked       their horses and gathered in assembly before preparing their       supper. They kept their feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for       fear had fallen upon them all because Achilles had shown himself       after having held aloof so long from battle. Polydamas son of       Panthous was first to speak, a man of judgement, who alone among       them could look both before and after. He was comrade to Hector,       and they had been born upon the same night; with all sincerity       and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:—

      “Look to it well, my friends; I would urge you to go back now to       your city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are       far from our walls. So long as this man was at enmity with       Agamemnon the Achaeans were easier to deal with, and I would have       gladly camped by the ships in the hope of taking them; but now I       go in great fear of the fleet son of Peleus; he is so daring that       he will never bide here on the plain whereon the Trojans and       Achaeans fight with equal valour, but he will try to storm our       city and carry off our women. Do then as I say, and let us       retreat. For this is what will happen. The darkness of night will       for a time stay the son of Peleus, but if he find us here in the       morning when he sallies forth in full armour, we shall have       knowledge of him in good earnest. Glad indeed will he be who can       escape and get back to Ilius, and many a Trojan will become meat       for dogs and vultures may I never live to hear it. If we do as I       say, little though we may like it, we shall have strength in       counsel during the night, and the great gates with the doors that       close them will protect the city. At dawn we can arm and take our       stand on the walls; he will then rue it if he sallies from the       ships to fight us. He will go back when he has given his horses       their fill of being driven all whithers under our walls, and will       be in no mind to try and force his way into the city. Neither       will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour him ere he do so.”

      Hector looked fiercely at him and answered, “Polydamas, your       words are not to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent       within the city. Have you not had enough of being cooped up       behind walls? In the old-days the city of Priam was famous the       whole world over for its wealth of gold and bronze, but our       treasures are wasted out of our houses, and much goods have been       sold away to Phrygia and fair Meonia, for the hand of Jove has       been laid heavily upon us. Now, therefore, that the son of       scheming Saturn has vouchsafed me to win glory here and to hem       the Achaeans in at their ships, prate no more in this fool’s wise       among the people. You will have no man with you; it shall not be;       do all of you as I now say;—take your suppers in your companies       throughout the host, and keep your watches and be wakeful every       man of you. If any Trojan is uneasy about his possessions, let       him gather them and give them out among the people. Better let       these, rather than the Achaeans, have them. At daybreak we will       arm and fight about the ships; granted that Achilles has again       come forward to defend them, let it be as he will, but it shall       go hard with him. I shall not shun him, but will fight him, to       fall or conquer. The god of war deals out like measure to all,       and the slayer may yet be slain.”

      Thus spoke Hector; and the Trojans, fools that they were, shouted       in applause, for Pallas Minerva had robbed them of their       understanding. They gave ear to Hector with his evil counsel, but       the wise words of Polydamas no man would heed. They took their       supper throughout the host, and meanwhile through the whole night       the Achaeans mourned Patroclus, and the son of Peleus led them in       their lament. He laid his murderous hands upon the breast of his       comrade, groaning again and again as a bearded lion when a man       who was chasing deer has robbed him of his young in some dense       forest; when the lion comes back he is furious, and searches       dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can find him, for he is       mad with rage—even so with many a sigh did Achilles speak among       the Myrmidons saying, “Alas! vain were the words with which I       cheered the hero Menoetius in his own house; I said that I would       bring his brave son back again to Opoeis after he had sacked       Ilius and taken his share of the spoils—but Jove does not give       all men their heart’s desire. The same soil shall be reddened       here at Troy by the blood of us both, for I too shall never be       welcomed home by the old knight Peleus, nor by my mother Thetis,       but even in this place shall the earth cover me. Nevertheless, O       Patroclus, now that I am left behind you, I will not bury you,       till I have brought hither the head and armour of mighty Hector       who has slain you. Twelve noble sons of Trojans will I behead       before your bier to avenge you; till I have done so you shall lie       as you are by the ships, and fair women of Troy and Dardanus,       whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we sacked       men’s goodly cities, shall weep over you both night and day.”

      Then Achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire       that they might wash the clotted gore from off Patroclus. Thereon       they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire: they       threw sticks on to it to make it blaze, and the water became hot       as the flame played about the belly of the tripod. When the water       in the cauldron was boiling they washed the body, anointed it       with oil, and closed its wounds with ointment that had been kept       nine years. Then they laid it on a bier and covered it with a       linen cloth from head to foot, and over this they laid a fair       white robe. Thus all night long did the Myrmidons gather round       Achilles to mourn Patroclus.

      Then Jove said to Juno his sister-wife, “So, Queen Juno, you have       gained your end, and have roused fleet Achilles. One would think       that the Achaeans were of your own flesh and blood.”

      And Juno answered, “Dread son of Saturn, why should you say this       thing? May not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than       we do, do what he can for another person? And shall not       I—foremost of all goddesses both by descent and as wife to you       who reign in heaven—devise evil for the Trojans if I am angry       with them?”

      Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Thetis came to the house of       Vulcan, imperishable, star-bespangled, fairest of the abodes in       heaven, a house of bronze wrought by the lame god’s own hands.       She found him busy with his bellows, sweating and hard at work,       for he was making twenty tripods that were to stand by the wall       of his house, and he set wheels of gold under them all that they       might go of their own selves to the assemblies of the gods, and       come back again—marvels indeed to see. They were finished all but       the ears of cunning workmanship which yet remained to be fixed to       them: these he was now fixing, and he was hammering at the       rivets. While he was thus at work silver-footed Thetis came to       the house. Charis, of graceful head-dress, wife to the far-famed       lame god, came towards her as soon as she saw her, and took her       hand in her own, saying, “Why have you come to our house, Thetis,       honoured and ever welcome—for you do not visit us often? Come       inside and let me set refreshment before you.”

      The goddess led the way as she spoke, and bade Thetis sit on a       richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool       also under her feet. Then she called Vulcan and said, “Vulcan,       come here, Thetis wants you”; and the far-famed lame god       answered, “Then it is indeed an august and honoured goddess who       has come here; she it was that took care of me when I was       suffering from the heavy fall which I had through my cruel       mother’s anger—for she would have got rid of me because I was       lame. It would have gone hardly with me had not Eurynome,       daughter of the ever-encircling waters of Oceanus, and Thetis,       taken me to their bosom. Nine years did I stay with them, and       many beautiful works in bronze, brooches, spiral armlets, cups,       and chains, did I make for them in their cave, with the roaring       waters of Oceanus foaming as they rushed ever past it; and no one       knew, neither of gods nor men, save only Thetis and Eurynome who       took care of me. If, then, Thetis has come to my house I must       make her due requital for having saved me; entertain her,       therefore, with all hospitality, while I put by my bellows and       all my tools.”

      On this the mighty monster hobbled off from his anvil, his thin       legs plying lustily under him. He set the bellows away from the       fire, and gathered his tools into a silver chest. Then he took a       sponge and washed his face and hands, his shaggy chest and brawny       neck; he donned his shirt, grasped his strong staff, and limped       towards the door. There were golden handmaids also who worked for       him, and were like real young women, with sense and reason, voice       also and strength, and all the learning of the immortals; these       busied themselves as the king bade them, while he drew near to       Thetis, seated her upon a goodly seat, and took her hand in his       own, saying, “Why have you come to our house, Thetis honoured and       ever welcome—for you do not visit us often? Say what you want,       and I will do it for you at once if I can, and if it can be done       at all.”

      Thetis wept and answered, “Vulcan, is there another goddess in       Olympus whom the son of Saturn has been pleased to try with so       much affliction as he has me? Me alone of the marine goddesses       did he make subject to a mortal husband, Peleus son of Aeacus,       and sorely against my will did I submit to the embraces of one       who was but mortal, and who now stays at home worn out with age.       Neither is this all. Heaven vouchsafed me a son, hero among       heroes, and he shot up as a sapling. I tended him as a plant in a       goodly garden and sent him with his ships to Ilius to fight the       Trojans, but never shall I welcome him back to the house of       Peleus. So long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun, he       is in heaviness, and though I go to him I cannot help him; King       Agamemnon has made him give up the maiden whom the sons of the       Achaeans had awarded him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake.       Then the Trojans hemmed the Achaeans in at their ships’ sterns       and would not let them come forth; the elders, therefore, of the       Argives besought Achilles and offered him great treasure, whereon       he refused to bring deliverance to them himself, but put his own       armour on Patroclus and sent him into the fight with much people       after him. All day long they fought by the Scaean gates and would       have taken the city there and then, had not Apollo vouchsafed       glory to Hector and slain the valiant son of Menoetius after he       had done the Trojans much evil. Therefore I am suppliant at your       knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son, whose end is       near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly greaves fitted       with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost his own       when his true comrade fell at the hands of the Trojans, and he       now lies stretched on earth in the bitterness of his soul.”

      And Vulcan answered, “Take heart, and be no more disquieted about       this matter; would that I could hide him from death’s sight when       his hour is come, so surely as I can find him armour that shall       amaze the eyes of all who behold it.”

      When he had so said he left her and went to his bellows, turning       them towards the fire and bidding them do their office. Twenty       bellows blew upon the melting-pots, and they blew blasts of every       kind, some fierce to help him when he had need of them, and       others less strong as Vulcan willed it in the course of his work.       He threw tough copper into the fire, and tin, with silver and       gold; he set his great anvil on its block, and with one hand       grasped his mighty hammer while he took the tongs in the other.

      First he shaped the shield so great and strong, adorning it all       over and binding it round with a gleaming circuit in three       layers; and the baldric was made of silver. He made the shield in       five thicknesses, and with many a wonder did his cunning hand       enrich it.

      He wrought the earth, the heavens, and the sea; the moon also at       her full and the untiring sun, with all the signs that glorify       the face of heaven—the Pleiads, the Hyads, huge Orion, and the       Bear, which men also call the Wain and which turns round ever in       one place, facing Orion, and alone never dips into the stream of       Oceanus.

      He wrought also two cities, fair to see and busy with the hum of       men. In the one were weddings and wedding-feasts, and they were       going about the city with brides whom they were escorting by       torchlight from their chambers. Loud rose the cry of Hymen, and       the youths danced to the music of flute and lyre, while the women       stood each at her house door to see them.

      Meanwhile the people were gathered in assembly, for there was a       quarrel, and two men were wrangling about the blood-money for a       man who had been killed, the one saying before the people that he       had paid damages in full, and the other that he had not been       paid. Each was trying to make his own case good, and the people       took sides, each man backing the side that he had taken; but the       heralds kept them back, and the elders sate on their seats of       stone in a solemn circle, holding the staves which the heralds       had put into their hands. Then they rose and each in his turn       gave judgement, and there were two talents laid down, to be given       to him whose judgement should be deemed the fairest.

      About the other city there lay encamped two hosts in gleaming       armour, and they were divided whether to sack it, or to spare it       and accept the half of what it contained. But the men of the city       would not yet consent, and armed themselves for a surprise; their       wives and little children kept guard upon the walls, and with       them were the men who were past fighting through age; but the       others sallied forth with Mars and Pallas Minerva at their       head—both of them wrought in gold and clad in golden raiment,       great and fair with their armour as befitting gods, while they       that followed were smaller. When they reached the place where       they would lay their ambush, it was on a riverbed to which live       stock of all kinds would come from far and near to water; here,       then, they lay concealed, clad in full armour. Some way off them       there were two scouts who were on the look-out for the coming of       sheep or cattle, which presently came, followed by two shepherds       who were playing on their pipes, and had not so much as a thought       of danger. When those who were in ambush saw this, they cut off       the flocks and herds and killed the shepherds. Meanwhile the       besiegers, when they heard much noise among the cattle as they       sat in council, sprang to their horses, and made with all speed       towards them; when they reached them they set battle in array by       the banks of the river, and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod       spears at one another. With them were Strife and Riot, and fell       Fate who was dragging three men after her, one with a fresh       wound, and the other unwounded, while the third was dead, and she       was dragging him along by his heel: and her robe was bedrabbled       in men’s blood. They went in and out with one another and fought       as though they were living people haling away one another’s dead.

      He wrought also a fair fallow field, large and thrice ploughed       already. Many men were working at the plough within it, turning       their oxen to and fro, furrow after furrow. Each time that they       turned on reaching the headland a man would come up to them and       give them a cup of wine, and they would go back to their furrows       looking forward to the time when they should again reach the       headland. The part that they had ploughed was dark behind them,       so that the field, though it was of gold, still looked as if it       were being ploughed—very curious to behold.

      He wrought also a field of harvest corn, and the reapers were       reaping with sharp sickles in their hands. Swathe after swathe       fell to the ground in a straight line behind them, and the       binders bound them in bands of twisted straw. There were three       binders, and behind them there were boys who gathered the cut       corn in armfuls and kept on bringing them to be bound: among them       all the owner of the land stood by in silence and was glad. The       servants were getting a meal ready under an oak, for they had       sacrificed a great ox, and were busy cutting him up, while the       women were making a porridge of much white barley for the       labourers’ dinner.

      He wrought also a vineyard, golden and fair to see, and the vines       were loaded with grapes. The bunches overhead were black, but the       vines were trained on poles of silver. He ran a ditch of dark       metal all round it, and fenced it with a fence of tin; there was       only one path to it, and by this the vintagers went when they       would gather the vintage. Youths and maidens all blithe and full       of glee, carried the luscious fruit in plaited baskets; and with       them there went a boy who made sweet music with his lyre, and       sang the Linos-song with his clear boyish voice.

      He wrought also a herd of horned cattle. He made the cows of gold       and tin, and they lowed as they came full speed out of the yards       to go and feed among the waving reeds that grow by the banks of       the river. Along with the cattle there went four shepherds, all       of them in gold, and their nine fleet dogs went with them. Two       terrible lions had fastened on a bellowing bull that was with the       foremost cows, and bellow as he might they haled him, while the       dogs and men gave chase: the lions tore through the bull’s thick       hide and were gorging on his blood and bowels, but the herdsmen       were afraid to do anything, and only hounded on their dogs; the       dogs dared not fasten on the lions but stood by barking and       keeping out of harm’s way.

      The god wrought also a pasture in a fair mountain dell, and a       large flock of sheep, with a homestead and huts, and sheltered       sheepfolds.

      Furthermore he wrought a green, like that which Daedalus once       made in Cnossus for lovely Ariadne. Hereon there danced youths       and maidens whom all would woo, with their hands on one another’s       wrists. The maidens wore robes of light linen, and the youths       well woven shirts that were slightly oiled. The girls were       crowned with garlands, while the young men had daggers of gold       that hung by silver baldrics; sometimes they would dance deftly       in a ring with merry twinkling feet, as it were a potter sitting       at his work and making trial of his wheel to see whether it will       run, and sometimes they would go all in line with one another,       and much people was gathered joyously about the green. There was       a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while two tumblers       went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck up       with his tune.

      All round the outermost rim of the shield he set the mighty       stream of the river Oceanus.

      Then when he had fashioned the shield so great and strong, he       made a breastplate also that shone brighter than fire. He made a       helmet, close fitting to the brow, and richly worked, with a       golden plume overhanging it; and he made greaves also of beaten       tin.

      Lastly, when the famed lame god had made all the armour, he took       it and set it before the mother of Achilles; whereon she darted       like a falcon from the snowy summits of Olympus and bore away the       gleaming armour from the house of Vulcan.




BOOK XIX.


      Achilles is reconciled with Agamemnon, puts on the armour which       Vulcan had made him, and goes out to fight.

      Now when Dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of       Oceanus, to bring light to mortals and immortals, Thetis reached       the ships with the armour that the god had given her. She found       her son fallen about the body of Patroclus and weeping bitterly.       Many also of his followers were weeping round him, but when the       goddess came among them she clasped his hand in her own, saying,       “My son, grieve as we may we must let this man lie, for it is by       heaven’s will that he has fallen; now, therefore, accept from       Vulcan this rich and goodly armour, which no man has ever yet       borne upon his shoulders.”

      As she spoke she set the armour before Achilles, and it rang out       bravely as she did so. The Myrmidons were struck with awe, and       none dared look full at it, for they were afraid; but Achilles       was roused to still greater fury, and his eyes gleamed with a       fierce light, for he was glad when he handled the splendid       present which the god had made him. Then, as soon as he had       satisfied himself with looking at it, he said to his mother,       “Mother, the god has given me armour, meet handiwork for an       immortal and such as no-one living could have fashioned; I will       now arm, but I much fear that flies will settle upon the son of       Menoetius and breed worms about his wounds, so that his body, now       he is dead, will be disfigured and the flesh will rot.”

      Silver-footed Thetis answered, “My son, be not disquieted about       this matter. I will find means to protect him from the swarms of       noisome flies that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed       in battle. He may lie for a whole year, and his flesh shall still       be as sound as ever, or even sounder. Call, therefore, the       Achaean heroes in assembly; unsay your anger against Agamemnon;       arm at once, and fight with might and main.”

      As she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she       then dropped ambrosia and red nectar into the wounds of       Patroclus, that his body might suffer no change.

      Then Achilles went out upon the sea-shore, and with a loud cry       called on the Achaean heroes. On this even those who as yet had       stayed always at the ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the       stewards who were about the ships and served out rations, all       came to the place of assembly because Achilles had shown himself       after having held aloof so long from fighting. Two sons of Mars,       Ulysses and the son of Tydeus, came limping, for their wounds       still pained them; nevertheless they came, and took their seats       in the front row of the assembly. Last of all came Agamemnon,       king of men, he too wounded, for Coon son of Antenor had struck       him with a spear in battle.

      When the Achaeans were got together Achilles rose and said, “Son       of Atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you       and me, when we two were in such high anger about Briseis, surely       it would have been better, had Diana’s arrow slain her at the       ships on the day when I took her after having sacked Lyrnessus.       For so, many an Achaean the less would have bitten dust before       the foe in the days of my anger. It has been well for Hector and       the Trojans, but the Achaeans will long indeed remember our       quarrel. Now, however, let it be, for it is over. If we have been       angry, necessity has schooled our anger. I put it from me: I dare       not nurse it for ever; therefore, bid the Achaeans arm forthwith       that I may go out against the Trojans, and learn whether they       will be in a mind to sleep by the ships or no. Glad, I ween, will       he be to rest his knees who may fly my spear when I wield it.”

      Thus did he speak, and the Achaeans rejoiced in that he had put       away his anger.

      Then Agamemnon spoke, rising in his place, and not going into the       middle of the assembly. “Danaan heroes,” said he, “servants of       Mars, it is well to listen when a man stands up to speak, and it       is not seemly to interrupt him, or it will go hard even with a       practised speaker. Who can either hear or speak in an uproar?       Even the finest orator will be disconcerted by it. I will expound       to the son of Peleus, and do you other Achaeans heed me and mark       me well. Often have the Achaeans spoken to me of this matter and       upbraided me, but it was not I that did it: Jove, and Fate, and       Erinys that walks in darkness struck me mad when we were       assembled on the day that I took from Achilles the meed that had       been awarded to him. What could I do? All things are in the hand       of heaven, and Folly, eldest of Jove’s daughters, shuts men’s       eyes to their destruction. She walks delicately, not on the solid       earth, but hovers over the heads of men to make them stumble or       to ensnare them.

      “Time was when she fooled Jove himself, who they say is greatest       whether of gods or men; for Juno, woman though she was, beguiled       him on the day when Alcmena was to bring forth mighty Hercules in       the fair city of Thebes. He told it out among the gods saying,       ‘Hear me, all gods and goddesses, that I may speak even as I am       minded; this day shall an Ilithuia, helper of women who are in       labour, bring a man child into the world who shall be lord over       all that dwell about him who are of my blood and lineage.’ Then       said Juno all crafty and full of guile, ‘You will play false, and       will not hold to your word. Swear me, O Olympian, swear me a       great oath, that he who shall this day fall between the feet of a       woman, shall be lord over all that dwell about him who are of       your blood and lineage.’

      “Thus she spoke, and Jove suspected her not, but swore the great       oath, to his much ruing thereafter. For Juno darted down from the       high summit of Olympus, and went in haste to Achaean Argos where       she knew that the noble wife of Sthenelus son of Perseus then       was. She being with child and in her seventh month, Juno brought       the child to birth though there was a month still wanting, but       she stayed the offspring of Alcmena, and kept back the Ilithuiae.       Then she went to tell Jove the son of Saturn, and said, ‘Father       Jove, lord of the lightning—I have a word for your ear. There is       a fine child born this day, Eurystheus, son to Sthenelus the son       of Perseus; he is of your lineage; it is well, therefore, that he       should reign over the Argives.’

      “On this Jove was stung to the very quick, and in his rage he       caught Folly by the hair, and swore a great oath that never       should she again invade starry heaven and Olympus, for she was       the bane of all. Then he whirled her round with a twist of his       hand, and flung her down from heaven so that she fell on to the       fields of mortal men; and he was ever angry with her when he saw       his son groaning under the cruel labours that Eurystheus laid       upon him. Even so did I grieve when mighty Hector was killing the       Argives at their ships, and all the time I kept thinking of Folly       who had so baned me. I was blind, and Jove robbed me of my       reason; I will now make atonement, and will add much treasure by       way of amends. Go, therefore, into battle, you and your people       with you. I will give you all that Ulysses offered you yesterday       in your tents: or if it so please you, wait, though you would       fain fight at once, and my squires shall bring the gifts from my       ship, that you may see whether what I give you is enough.”

      And Achilles answered, “Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, you       can give such gifts as you think proper, or you can withhold       them: it is in your own hands. Let us now set battle in array; it       is not well to tarry talking about trifles, for there is a deed       which is as yet to do. Achilles shall again be seen fighting       among the foremost, and laying low the ranks of the Trojans: bear       this in mind each one of you when he is fighting.”

      Then Ulysses said, “Achilles, godlike and brave, send not the       Achaeans thus against Ilius to fight the Trojans fasting, for the       battle will be no brief one, when it is once begun, and heaven       has filled both sides with fury; bid them first take food both       bread and wine by the ships, for in this there is strength and       stay. No man can do battle the livelong day to the going down of       the sun if he is without food; however much he may want to fight       his strength will fail him before he knows it; hunger and thirst       will find him out, and his limbs will grow weary under him. But a       man can fight all day if he is full fed with meat and wine; his       heart beats high, and his strength will stay till he has routed       all his foes; therefore, send the people away and bid them       prepare their meal; King Agamemnon will bring out the gifts in       presence of the assembly, that all may see them and you may be       satisfied. Moreover let him swear an oath before the Argives that       he has never gone up into the couch of Briseis, nor been with her       after the manner of men and women; and do you, too, show yourself       of a gracious mind; let Agamemnon entertain you in his tents with       a feast of reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in       full. As for you, son of Atreus, treat people more righteously in       future; it is no disgrace even to a king that he should make       amends if he was wrong in the first instance.”

      And King Agamemnon answered, “Son of Laertes, your words please       me well, for throughout you have spoken wisely. I will swear as       you would have me do; I do so of my own free will, neither shall       I take the name of heaven in vain. Let, then, Achilles wait,       though he would fain fight at once, and do you others wait also,       till the gifts come from my tent and we ratify the oath with       sacrifice. Thus, then, do I charge you: take some noble young       Achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the gifts that I       promised yesterday to Achilles, and bring the women also;       furthermore let Talthybius find me a boar from those that are       with the host, and make it ready for sacrifice to Jove and to the       sun.”

      Then said Achilles, “Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, see to       these matters at some other season, when there is breathing time       and when I am calmer. Would you have men eat while the bodies of       those whom Hector son of Priam slew are still lying mangled upon       the plain? Let the sons of the Achaeans, say I, fight fasting and       without food, till we have avenged them; afterwards at the going       down of the sun let them eat their fill. As for me, Patroclus is       lying dead in my tent, all hacked and hewn, with his feet to the       door, and his comrades are mourning round him. Therefore I can       take thought of nothing save only slaughter and blood and the       rattle in the throat of the dying.”

      Ulysses answered, “Achilles, son of Peleus, mightiest of all the       Achaeans, in battle you are better than I, and that more than a       little, but in counsel I am much before you, for I am older and       of greater knowledge. Therefore be patient under my words.       Fighting is a thing of which men soon surfeit, and when Jove, who       is war’s steward, weighs the upshot, it may well prove that the       straw which our sickles have reaped is far heavier than the       grain. It may not be that the Achaeans should mourn the dead with       their bellies; day by day men fall thick and threefold       continually; when should we have respite from our sorrow? Let us       mourn our dead for a day and bury them out of sight and mind, but       let those of us who are left eat and drink that we may arm and       fight our foes more fiercely. In that hour let no man hold back,       waiting for a second summons; such summons shall bode ill for him       who is found lagging behind at our ships; let us rather sally as       one man and loose the fury of war upon the Trojans.”

      When he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of Nestor, with       Meges son of Phyleus, Thoas, Meriones, Lycomedes son of Creontes,       and Melanippus, and went to the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus.       The word was not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought       out the seven tripods which Agamemnon had promised, with the       twenty metal cauldrons and the twelve horses; they also brought       the women skilled in useful arts, seven in number, with Briseis,       which made eight. Ulysses weighed out the ten talents of gold and       then led the way back, while the young Achaeans brought the rest       of the gifts, and laid them in the middle of the assembly.

      Agamemnon then rose, and Talthybius whose voice was like that of       a god came to him with the boar. The son of Atreus drew the knife       which he wore by the scabbard of his mighty sword, and began by       cutting off some bristles from the boar, lifting up his hands in       prayer as he did so. The other Achaeans sat where they were all       silent and orderly to hear the king, and Agamemnon looked into       the vault of heaven and prayed saying, “I call Jove the first and       mightiest of all gods to witness, I call also Earth and Sun and       the Erinyes who dwell below and take vengeance on him who shall       swear falsely, that I have laid no hand upon the girl Briseis,       neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise, but that she has       remained in my tents inviolate. If I swear falsely may heaven       visit me with all the penalties which it metes out to those who       perjure themselves.”

      He cut the boar’s throat as he spoke, whereon Talthybius whirled       it round his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the       fishes. Then Achilles also rose and said to the Argives, “Father       Jove, of a truth you blind men’s eyes and bane them. The son of       Atreus had not else stirred me to so fierce an anger, nor so       stubbornly taken Briseis from me against my will. Surely Jove       must have counselled the destruction of many an Argive. Go, now,       and take your food that we may begin fighting.”

      On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his       own ship. The Myrmidons attended to the presents and took them       away to the ship of Achilles. They placed them in his tents,       while the stable-men drove the horses in among the others.

      Briseis, fair as Venus, when she saw the mangled body of       Patroclus, flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her       breast, her neck, and her lovely face with both her hands.       Beautiful as a goddess she wept and said, “Patroclus, dearest       friend, when I went hence I left you living; I return, O prince,       to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows multiply upon me one       after the other. I saw him to whom my father and mother married       me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear brothers       perished with him on the self-same day; but you, Patroclus, even       when Achilles slew my husband and sacked the city of noble Mynes,       told me that I was not to weep, for you said you would make       Achilles marry me, and take me back with him to Phthia, we should       have a wedding feast among the Myrmidons. You were always kind to       me and I shall never cease to grieve for you.”

      She wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making       as though their tears were for Patroclus, but in truth each was       weeping for her own sorrows. The elders of the Achaeans gathered       round Achilles and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and       would not do so. “I pray you,” said he, “if any comrade will hear       me, bid me neither eat nor drink, for I am in great heaviness,       and will stay fasting even to the going down of the sun.”

      On this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of       Atreus and Ulysses, Nestor, Idomeneus, and the knight Phoenix,       who stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of       his sorrow: but he would not be comforted till he should have       flung himself into the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on       sigh, thinking ever of Patroclus. Then he said—

      “Hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good       dinner ready for me at once and without delay when the Achaeans       were hasting to fight the Trojans; now, therefore, though I have       meat and drink in my tents, yet will I fast for sorrow. Grief       greater than this I could not know, not even though I were to       hear of the death of my father, who is now in Phthia weeping for       the loss of me his son, who am here fighting the Trojans in a       strange land for the accursed sake of Helen, nor yet though I       should hear that my son is no more—he who is being brought up in       Scyros—if indeed Neoptolemus is still living. Till now I made       sure that I alone was to fall here at Troy away from Argos, while       you were to return to Phthia, bring back my son with you in your       own ship, and show him all my property, my bondsmen, and the       greatness of my house—for Peleus must surely be either dead, or       what little life remains to him is oppressed alike with the       infirmities of age and ever present fear lest he should hear the       sad tidings of my death.”

      He wept as he spoke, and the elders sighed in concert as each       thought on what he had left at home behind him. The son of Saturn       looked down with pity upon them, and said presently to Minerva,       “My child, you have quite deserted your hero; is he then gone so       clean out of your recollection? There he sits by the ships all       desolate for the loss of his dear comrade, and though the others       are gone to their dinner he will neither eat nor drink. Go then       and drop nectar and ambrosia into his breast, that he may know no       hunger.”

      With these words he urged Minerva, who was already of the same       mind. She darted down from heaven into the air like some falcon       sailing on his broad wings and screaming. Meanwhile the Achaeans       were arming throughout the host, and when Minerva had dropped       nectar and ambrosia into Achilles so that no cruel hunger should       cause his limbs to fail him, she went back to the house of her       mighty father. Thick as the chill snow-flakes shed from the hand       of Jove and borne on the keen blasts of the north wind, even so       thick did the gleaming helmets, the bossed shields, the strongly       plated breastplates, and the ashen spears stream from the ships.       The sheen pierced the sky, the whole land was radiant with their       flashing armour, and the sound of the tramp of their treading       rose from under their feet. In the midst of them all Achilles put       on his armour; he gnashed his teeth, his eyes gleamed like fire,       for his grief was greater than he could bear. Thus, then, full of       fury against the Trojans, did he don the gift of the god, the       armour that Vulcan had made him.

      First he put on the goodly greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and       next he did on the breastplate about his chest. He slung the       silver-studded sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then took       up the shield so great and strong that shone afar with a       splendour as of the moon. As the light seen by sailors from out       at sea, when men have lit a fire in their homestead high up among       the mountains, but the sailors are carried out to sea by wind and       storm far from the haven where they would be—even so did the       gleam of Achilles’ wondrous shield strike up into the heavens. He       lifted the redoubtable helmet, and set it upon his head, from       whence it shone like a star, and the golden plumes which Vulcan       had set thick about the ridge of the helmet, waved all around it.       Then Achilles made trial of himself in his armour to see whether       it fitted him, so that his limbs could play freely under it, and       it seemed to buoy him up as though it had been wings.

      He also drew his father’s spear out of the spear-stand, a spear       so great and heavy and strong that none of the Achaeans save only       Achilles had strength to wield it; this was the spear of Pelian       ash from the topmost ridges of Mt. Pelion, which Chiron had once       given to Peleus, fraught with the death of heroes. Automedon and       Alcimus busied themselves with the harnessing of his horses; they       made the bands fast about them, and put the bit in their mouths,       drawing the reins back towards the chariot. Automedon, whip in       hand, sprang up behind the horses, and after him Achilles mounted       in full armour, resplendent as the sun-god Hyperion. Then with a       loud voice he chided with his father’s horses saying, “Xanthus       and Balius, famed offspring of Podarge—this time when we have       done fighting be sure and bring your driver safely back to the       host of the Achaeans, and do not leave him dead on the plain as       you did Patroclus.”

      Then fleet Xanthus answered under the yoke—for white-armed Juno       had endowed him with human speech—and he bowed his head till his       mane touched the ground as it hung down from under the yoke-band.       “Dread Achilles,” said he, “we will indeed save you now, but the       day of your death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it       will be heaven and stern fate that will destroy you. Neither was       it through any sloth or slackness on our part that the Trojans       stripped Patroclus of his armour; it was the mighty god whom       lovely Leto bore that slew him as he fought among the foremost,       and vouchsafed a triumph to Hector. We two can fly as swiftly as       Zephyrus who they say is fleetest of all winds; nevertheless it       is your doom to fall by the hand of a man and of a god.”

      When he had thus said the Erinyes stayed his speech, and Achilles       answered him in great sadness, saying, “Why, O Xanthus, do you       thus foretell my death? You need not do so, for I well know that       I am to fall here, far from my dear father and mother; none the       more, however, shall I stay my hand till I have given the Trojans       their fill of fighting.”

      So saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front.




BOOK XX.


      The gods hold a council and determine to watch the fight, from       the hill Callicolone, and the barrow of Hercules—A fight between       Achilles and AEneas is interrupted by Neptune, who saves       AEneas—Achilles kills many Trojans.

      Thus, then, did the Achaeans arm by their ships round you, O son       of Peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the Trojans over       against them armed upon the rise of the plain.

      Meanwhile Jove from the top of many-delled Olympus, bade Themis       gather the gods in council, whereon she went about and called       them to the house of Jove. There was not a river absent except       Oceanus, nor a single one of the nymphs that haunt fair groves,       or springs of rivers and meadows of green grass. When they       reached the house of cloud-compelling Jove, they took their seats       in the arcades of polished marble which Vulcan with his       consummate skill had made for father Jove.

      In such wise, therefore, did they gather in the house of Jove.       Neptune also, lord of the earthquake, obeyed the call of the       goddess, and came up out of the sea to join them. There, sitting       in the midst of them, he asked what Jove’s purpose might be.       “Why,” said he, “wielder of the lightning, have you called the       gods in council? Are you considering some matter that concerns       the Trojans and Achaeans—for the blaze of battle is on the point       of being kindled between them?”

      And Jove answered, “You know my purpose, shaker of earth, and       wherefore I have called you hither. I take thought for them even       in their destruction. For my own part I shall stay here seated on       Mt. Olympus and look on in peace, but do you others go about       among Trojans and Achaeans, and help either side as you may be       severally disposed. If Achilles fights the Trojans without       hindrance they will make no stand against him; they have ever       trembled at the sight of him, and now that he is roused to such       fury about his comrade, he will override fate itself and storm       their city.”

      Thus spoke Jove and gave the word for war, whereon the gods took       their several sides and went into battle. Juno, Pallas Minerva,       earth-encircling Neptune, Mercury bringer of good luck and       excellent in all cunning—all these joined the host that came from       the ships; with them also came Vulcan in all his glory, limping,       but yet with his thin legs plying lustily under him. Mars of       gleaming helmet joined the Trojans, and with him Apollo of locks       unshorn, and the archer goddess Diana, Leto, Xanthus, and       laughter-loving Venus.

      So long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors       the Achaeans were triumphant, for Achilles who had long refused       to fight was now with them. There was not a Trojan but his limbs       failed him for fear as he beheld the fleet son of Peleus all       glorious in his armour, and looking like Mars himself. When,       however, the Olympians came to take their part among men,       forthwith uprose strong Strife, rouser of hosts, and Minerva       raised her loud voice, now standing by the deep trench that ran       outside the wall, and now shouting with all her might upon the       shore of the sounding sea. Mars also bellowed out upon the other       side, dark as some black thunder-cloud, and called on the Trojans       at the top of his voice, now from the acropolis, and now speeding       up the side of the river Simois till he came to the hill       Callicolone.

      Thus did the gods spur on both hosts to fight, and rouse fierce       contention also among themselves. The sire of gods and men       thundered from heaven above, while from beneath Neptune shook the       vast earth, and bade the high hills tremble. The spurs and crests       of many-fountained Ida quaked, as also the city of the Trojans       and the ships of the Achaeans. Hades, king of the realms below,       was struck with fear; he sprang panic-stricken from his throne       and cried aloud in terror lest Neptune, lord of the earthquake,       should crack the ground over his head, and lay bare his mouldy       mansions to the sight of mortals and immortals—mansions so       ghastly grim that even the gods shudder to think of them. Such       was the uproar as the gods came together in battle. Apollo with       his arrows took his stand to face King Neptune, while Minerva       took hers against the god of war; the archer goddess Diana with       her golden arrows, sister of far-darting Apollo, stood to face       Juno; Mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced Leto, while       the mighty eddying river whom men can Scamander, but gods       Xanthus, matched himself against Vulcan.

      The gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. But the       heart of Achilles was set on meeting Hector son of Priam, for it       was with his blood that he longed above all things else to glut       the stubborn lord of battle. Meanwhile Apollo set Aeneas on to       attack the son of Peleus, and put courage into his heart,       speaking with the voice of Lycaon son of Priam. In his likeness       therefore, he said to Aeneas, “Aeneas, counsellor of the Trojans,       where are now the brave words with which you vaunted over your       wine before the Trojan princes, saying that you would fight       Achilles son of Peleus in single combat?”

      And Aeneas answered, “Why do you thus bid me fight the proud son       of Peleus, when I am in no mind to do so? Were I to face him now,       it would not be for the first time. His spear has already put me       to flight from Ida, when he attacked our cattle and sacked       Lyrnessus and Pedasus; Jove indeed saved me in that he vouchsafed       me strength to fly, else had I fallen by the hands of Achilles       and Minerva, who went before him to protect him and urged him to       fall upon the Lelegae and Trojans. No man may fight Achilles, for       one of the gods is always with him as his guardian angel, and       even were it not so, his weapon flies ever straight, and fails       not to pierce the flesh of him who is against him; if heaven       would let me fight him on even terms he should not soon overcome       me, though he boasts that he is made of bronze.”

      Then said King Apollo, son to Jove, “Nay, hero, pray to the       ever-living gods, for men say that you were born of Jove’s       daughter Venus, whereas Achilles is son to a goddess of inferior       rank. Venus is child to Jove, while Thetis is but daughter to the       old man of the sea. Bring, therefore, your spear to bear upon       him, and let him not scare you with his taunts and menaces.”

      As he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his       people, and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the       foremost fighters. Nor did the son of Anchises escape the notice       of white-armed Juno, as he went forth into the throng to meet       Achilles. She called the gods about her, and said, “Look to it,       you two, Neptune and Minerva, and consider how this shall be;       Phoebus Apollo has been sending Aeneas clad in full armour to       fight Achilles. Shall we turn him back at once, or shall one of       us stand by Achilles and endow him with strength so that his       heart fail not, and he may learn that the chiefs of the immortals       are on his side, while the others who have all along been       defending the Trojans are but vain helpers? Let us all come down       from Olympus and join in the fight, that this day he may take no       hurt at the hands of the Trojans. Hereafter let him suffer       whatever fate may have spun out for him when he was begotten and       his mother bore him. If Achilles be not thus assured by the voice       of a god, he may come to fear presently when one of us meets him       in battle, for the gods are terrible if they are seen face to       face.”

      Neptune lord of the earthquake answered her saying, “Juno,       restrain your fury; it is not well; I am not in favour of forcing       the other gods to fight us, for the advantage is too greatly on       our own side; let us take our places on some hill out of the       beaten track, and let mortals fight it out among themselves. If       Mars or Phoebus Apollo begin fighting, or keep Achilles in check       so that he cannot fight, we too, will at once raise the cry of       battle, and in that case they will soon leave the field and go       back vanquished to Olympus among the other gods.”

      With these words the dark-haired god led the way to the high       earth-barrow of Hercules, built round solid masonry, and made by       the Trojans and Pallas Minerva for him to fly to when the       sea-monster was chasing him from the shore on to the plain. Here       Neptune and those that were with him took their seats, wrapped in       a thick cloud of darkness; but the other gods seated themselves       on the brow of Callicolone round you, O Phoebus, and Mars the       waster of cities.

      Thus did the gods sit apart and form their plans, but neither       side was willing to begin battle with the other, and Jove from       his seat on high was in command over them all. Meanwhile the       whole plain was alive with men and horses, and blazing with the       gleam of armour. The earth rang again under the tramp of their       feet as they rushed towards each other, and two champions, by far       the foremost of them all, met between the hosts to fight—to wit,       Aeneas son of Anchises, and noble Achilles.

      Aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet       tossing defiance as he came on. He held his strong shield before       his breast, and brandished his bronze spear. The son of Peleus       from the other side sprang forth to meet him, like some fierce       lion that the whole country-side has met to hunt and kill—at       first he bodes no ill, but when some daring youth has struck him       with a spear, he crouches openmouthed, his jaws foam, he roars       with fury, he lashes his tail from side to side about his ribs       and loins, and glares as he springs straight before him, to find       out whether he is to slay, or be slain among the foremost of his       foes—even with such fury did Achilles burn to spring upon Aeneas.

      When they were now close up with one another Achilles was first       to speak. “Aeneas,” said he, “why do you stand thus out before       the host to fight me? Is it that you hope to reign over the       Trojans in the seat of Priam? Nay, though you kill me Priam will       not hand his kingdom over to you. He is a man of sound judgement,       and he has sons of his own. Or have the Trojans been allotting       you a demesne of passing richness, fair with orchard lawns and       corn lands, if you should slay me? This you shall hardly do. I       have discomfited you once already. Have you forgotten how when       you were alone I chased you from your herds helter-skelter down       the slopes of Ida? You did not turn round to look behind you; you       took refuge in Lyrnessus, but I attacked the city, and with the       help of Minerva and father Jove I sacked it and carried its women       into captivity, though Jove and the other gods rescued you. You       think they will protect you now, but they will not do so;       therefore I say go back into the host, and do not face me, or you       will rue it. Even a fool may be wise after the event.”

      Then Aeneas answered, “Son of Peleus, think not that your words       can scare me as though I were a child. I too, if I will, can brag       and talk unseemly. We know one another’s race and parentage as       matters of common fame, though neither have you ever seen my       parents nor I yours. Men say that you are son to noble Peleus,       and that your mother is Thetis, fair-haired daughter of the sea.       I have noble Anchises for my father, and Venus for my mother; the       parents of one or other of us shall this day mourn a son, for it       will be more than silly talk that shall part us when the fight is       over. Learn, then, my lineage if you will—and it is known to       many.

      “In the beginning Dardanus was the son of Jove, and founded       Dardania, for Ilius was not yet stablished on the plain for men       to dwell in, and her people still abode on the spurs of       many-fountained Ida. Dardanus had a son, king Erichthonius, who       was wealthiest of all men living; he had three thousand mares       that fed by the water-meadows, they and their foals with them.       Boreas was enamoured of them as they were feeding, and covered       them in the semblance of a dark-maned stallion. Twelve filly       foals did they conceive and bear him, and these, as they sped       over the rich plain, would go bounding on over the ripe ears of       corn and not break them; or again when they would disport       themselves on the broad back of Ocean they could gallop on the       crest of a breaker. Erichthonius begat Tros, king of the Trojans,       and Tros had three noble sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede who       was comeliest of mortal men; wherefore the gods carried him off       to be Jove’s cup-bearer, for his beauty’s sake, that he might       dwell among the immortals. Ilus begat Laomedon, and Laomedon       begat Tithonus, Priam, Lampus, Clytius, and Hiketaon of the stock       of Mars. But Assaracus was father to Capys, and Capys to       Anchises, who was my father, while Hector is son to Priam.

      “Such do I declare my blood and lineage, but as for valour, Jove       gives it or takes it as he will, for he is lord of all. And now       let there be no more of this prating in mid-battle as though we       were children. We could fling taunts without end at one another;       a hundred-oared galley would not hold them. The tongue can run       all whithers and talk all wise; it can go here and there, and as       a man says, so shall he be gainsaid. What is the use of our       bandying hard like women who when they fall foul of one another       go out and wrangle in the streets, one half true and the other       lies, as rage inspires them? No words of yours shall turn me now       that I am fain to fight—therefore let us make trial of one       another with our spears.”

      As he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield       of Achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. The son of       Peleus held the shield before him with his strong hand, and he       was afraid, for he deemed that Aeneas’s spear would go through it       quite easily, not reflecting that the god’s glorious gifts were       little likely to yield before the blows of mortal men; and indeed       Aeneas’s spear did not pierce the shield, for the layer of gold,       gift of the god, stayed the point. It went through two layers,       but the god had made the shield in five, two of bronze, the two       innermost ones of tin, and one of gold; it was in this that the       spear was stayed.

      Achilles in his turn threw, and struck the round shield of Aeneas       at the very edge, where the bronze was thinnest; the spear of       Pelian ash went clean through, and the shield rang under the       blow; Aeneas was afraid, and crouched backwards, holding the       shield away from him; the spear, however, flew over his back, and       stuck quivering in the ground, after having gone through both       circles of the sheltering shield. Aeneas though he had avoided       the spear, stood still, blinded with fear and grief because the       weapon had gone so near him; then Achilles sprang furiously upon       him, with a cry as of death and with his keen blade drawn, and       Aeneas seized a great stone, so huge that two men, as men now       are, would be unable to lift it, but Aeneas wielded it quite       easily.

      Aeneas would then have struck Achilles as he was springing       towards him, either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered       him, and Achilles would have closed with him and despatched him       with his sword, had not Neptune lord of the earthquake been quick       to mark, and said forthwith to the immortals, “Alas, I am sorry       for great Aeneas, who will now go down to the house of Hades,       vanquished by the son of Peleus. Fool that he was to give ear to       the counsel of Apollo. Apollo will never save him from       destruction. Why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to       no purpose, and in another’s quarrel? Has he not at all times       offered acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven?       Let us then snatch him from death’s jaws, lest the son of Saturn       be angry should Achilles slay him. It is fated, moreover, that he       should escape, and that the race of Dardanus, whom Jove loved       above all the sons born to him of mortal women, shall not perish       utterly without seed or sign. For now indeed has Jove hated the       blood of Priam, while Aeneas shall reign over the Trojans, he and       his children’s children that shall be born hereafter.”

      Then answered Juno, “Earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself,       and consider concerning Aeneas, whether you will save him, or       suffer him, brave though he be, to fall by the hand of Achilles       son of Peleus. For of a truth we two, I and Pallas Minerva, have       sworn full many a time before all the immortals, that never would       we shield Trojans from destruction, not even when all Troy is       burning in the flames that the Achaeans shall kindle.”

      When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went into the battle       amid the clash of spears, and came to the place where Achilles       and Aeneas were. Forthwith he shed a darkness before the eyes of       the son of Peleus, drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the       shield of Aeneas, and laid it at the feet of Achilles. Then he       lifted Aeneas on high from off the earth and hurried him away.       Over the heads of many a band of warriors both horse and foot did       he soar as the god’s hand sped him, till he came to the very       fringe of the battle where the Cauconians were arming themselves       for fight. Neptune, shaker of the earth, then came near to him       and said, “Aeneas, what god has egged you on to this folly in       fighting the son of Peleus, who is both a mightier man of valour       and more beloved of heaven than you are? Give way before him       whensoever you meet him, lest you go down to the house of Hades       even though fate would have it otherwise. When Achilles is dead       you may then fight among the foremost undaunted, for none other       of the Achaeans shall slay you.”

      The god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at       once removed the darkness from before the eyes of Achilles, who       opened them wide indeed and said in great anger, “Alas! what       marvel am I now beholding? Here is my spear upon the ground, but       I see not him whom I meant to kill when I hurled it. Of a truth       Aeneas also must be under heaven’s protection, although I had       thought his boasting was idle. Let him go hang; he will be in no       mood to fight me further, seeing how narrowly he has missed being       killed. I will now give my orders to the Danaans and attack some       other of the Trojans.”

      He sprang forward along the line and cheered his men on as he did       so. “Let not the Trojans,” he cried, “keep you at arm’s length,       Achaeans, but go for them and fight them man for man. However       valiant I may be, I cannot give chase to so many and fight all of       them. Even Mars, who is an immortal, or Minerva, would shrink       from flinging himself into the jaws of such a fight and laying       about him; nevertheless, so far as in me lies I will show no       slackness of hand or foot nor want of endurance, not even for a       moment; I will utterly break their ranks, and woe to the Trojan       who shall venture within reach of my spear.”

      Thus did he exhort them. Meanwhile Hector called upon the Trojans       and declared that he would fight Achilles. “Be not afraid, proud       Trojans,” said he, “to face the son of Peleus; I could fight gods       myself if the battle were one of words only, but they would be       more than a match for me, if we had to use our spears. Even so       the deed of Achilles will fall somewhat short of his word; he       will do in part, and the other part he will clip short. I will go       up against him though his hands be as fire—though his hands be       fire and his strength iron.”

      Thus urged the Trojans lifted up their spears against the       Achaeans, and raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves       into the midst of their ranks. But Phoebus Apollo came up to       Hector and said, “Hector, on no account must you challenge       Achilles to single combat; keep a look-out for him while you are       under cover of the others and away from the thick of the fight,       otherwise he will either hit you with a spear or cut you down at       close quarters.”

      Thus he spoke, and Hector drew back within the crowd, for he was       afraid when he heard what the god had said to him. Achilles then       sprang upon the Trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as       with a garment. First he killed Iphition son of Otrynteus, a       leader of much people whom a naiad nymph had borne to Otrynteus       waster of cities, in the land of Hyde under the snowy heights of       Mt. Tmolus. Achilles struck him full on the head as he was coming       on towards him, and split it clean in two; whereon he fell       heavily to the ground and Achilles vaunted over him saying, “You       be low, son of Otrynteus, mighty hero; your death is here, but       your lineage is on the Gygaean lake where your father’s estate       lies, by Hyllus, rich in fish, and the eddying waters of Hermus.”

      Thus did he vaunt, but darkness closed the eyes of the other. The       chariots of the Achaeans cut him up as their wheels passed over       him in the front of the battle, and after him Achilles killed       Demoleon, a valiant man of war and son to Antenor. He struck him       on the temple through his bronze-cheeked helmet. The helmet did       not stay the spear, but it went right on, crushing the bone so       that the brain inside was shed in all directions, and his lust of       fighting was ended. Then he struck Hippodamas in the midriff as       he was springing down from his chariot in front of him, and       trying to escape. He breathed his last, bellowing like a bull       bellows when young men are dragging him to offer him in sacrifice       to the King of Helice, and the heart of the earth-shaker is glad;       even so did he bellow as he lay dying. Achilles then went in       pursuit of Polydorus son of Priam, whom his father had always       forbidden to fight because he was the youngest of his sons, the       one he loved best, and the fastest runner. He, in his folly and       showing off the fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among       front ranks until he lost his life, for Achilles struck him in       the middle of the back as he was darting past him: he struck him       just at the golden fastenings of his belt and where the two       pieces of the double breastplate overlapped. The point of the       spear pierced him through and came out by the navel, whereon he       fell groaning on to his knees and a cloud of darkness       overshadowed him as he sank holding his entrails in his hands.

      When Hector saw his brother Polydorus with his entrails in his       hands and sinking down upon the ground, a mist came over his       eyes, and he could not bear to keep longer at a distance; he       therefore poised his spear and darted towards Achilles like a       flame of fire. When Achilles saw him he bounded forward and       vaunted saying, “This is he that has wounded my heart most deeply       and has slain my beloved comrade. Not for long shall we two quail       before one another on the highways of war.”

      He looked fiercely on Hector and said, “Draw near, that you may       meet your doom the sooner.” Hector feared him not and answered,       “Son of Peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though       I were a child; I too if I will can brag and talk unseemly; I       know that you are a mighty warrior, mightier by far than I,       nevertheless the issue lies in the lap of heaven whether I, worse       man though I be, may not slay you with my spear, for this too has       been found keen ere now.”

      He hurled his spear as he spoke, but Minerva breathed upon it,       and though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from       going towards Achilles, so that it returned to Hector and lay at       his feet in front of him. Achilles then sprang furiously on him       with a loud cry, bent on killing him, but Apollo caught him up       easily as a god can, and hid him in a thick darkness. Thrice did       Achilles spring towards him spear in hand, and thrice did he       waste his blow upon the air. When he rushed forward for the       fourth time as though he were a god, he shouted aloud saying,       “Hound, this time too you have escaped death—but of a truth it       came exceedingly near you. Phoebus Apollo, to whom it seems you       pray before you go into battle, has again saved you; but if I too       have any friend among the gods I will surely make an end of you       when I come across you at some other time. Now, however, I will       pursue and overtake other Trojans.”

      On this he struck Dryops with his spear, about the middle of his       neck, and he fell headlong at his feet. There he let him lie and       stayed Demouchus son of Philetor, a man both brave and of great       stature, by hitting him on the knee with a spear; then he smote       him with his sword and killed him. After this he sprang on       Laogonus and Dardanus, sons of Bias, and threw them from their       chariot, the one with a blow from a thrown spear, while the other       he cut down in hand-to-hand fight. There was also Tros the son of       Alastor—he came up to Achilles and clasped his knees in the hope       that he would spare him and not kill him but let him go, because       they were both of the same age. Fool, he might have known that he       should not prevail with him, for the man was in no mood for pity       or forbearance but was in grim earnest. Therefore when Tros laid       hold of his knees and sought a hearing for his prayers, Achilles       drove his sword into his liver, and the liver came rolling out,       while his bosom was all covered with the black blood that welled       from the wound. Thus did death close his eyes as he lay lifeless.

      Achilles then went up to Mulius and struck him on the ear with a       spear, and the bronze spear-head came right out at the other ear.       He also struck Echeclus son of Agenor on the head with his sword,       which became warm with the blood, while death and stern fate       closed the eyes of Echeclus. Next in order the bronze point of       his spear wounded Deucalion in the fore-arm where the sinews of       the elbow are united, whereon he waited Achilles’ onset with his       arm hanging down and death staring him in the face. Achilles cut       his head off with a blow from his sword and flung it helmet and       all away from him, and the marrow came oozing out of his backbone       as he lay. He then went in pursuit of Rhigmus, noble son of       Peires, who had come from fertile Thrace, and struck him through       the middle with a spear which fixed itself in his belly, so that       he fell headlong from his chariot. He also speared Areithous       squire to Rhigmus in the back as he was turning his horses in       flight, and thrust him from his chariot, while the horses were       struck with panic.

      As a fire raging in some mountain glen after long drought—and the       dense forest is in a blaze, while the wind carries great tongues       of fire in every direction—even so furiously did Achilles rage,       wielding his spear as though he were a god, and giving chase to       those whom he would slay, till the dark earth ran with blood. Or       as one who yokes broad-browed oxen that they may tread barley in       a threshing-floor—and it is soon bruised small under the feet of       the lowing cattle—even so did the horses of Achilles trample on       the shields and bodies of the slain. The axle underneath and the       railing that ran round the car were bespattered with clots of       blood thrown up by the horses’ hoofs, and from the tyres of the       wheels; but the son of Peleus pressed on to win still further       glory, and his hands were bedrabbled with gore.




BOOK XXI.


      The fight between Achilles and the river Scamander—The gods fight       among themselves—Achilles drives the Trojans within their gates.

      Now when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river Xanthus,       begotten of immortal Jove, Achilles cut their forces in two: one       half he chased over the plain towards the city by the same way       that the Achaeans had taken when flying panic-stricken on the       preceding day with Hector in full triumph; this way did they fly       pell-mell, and Juno sent down a thick mist in front of them to       stay them. The other half were hemmed in by the deep       silver-eddying stream, and fell into it with a great uproar. The       waters resounded, and the banks rang again, as they swam hither       and thither with loud cries amid the whirling eddies. As locusts       flying to a river before the blast of a grass fire—the flame       comes on and on till at last it overtakes them and they huddle       into the water—even so was the eddying stream of Xanthus filled       with the uproar of men and horses, all struggling in confusion       before Achilles.

      Forthwith the hero left his spear upon the bank, leaning it       against a tamarisk bush, and plunged into the river like a god,       armed with his sword only. Fell was his purpose as he hewed the       Trojans down on every side. Their dying groans rose hideous as       the sword smote them, and the river ran red with blood. As when       fish fly scared before a huge dolphin, and fill every nook and       corner of some fair haven—for he is sure to eat all he can       catch—even so did the Trojans cower under the banks of the mighty       river, and when Achilles’ arms grew weary with killing them, he       drew twelve youths alive out of the water, to sacrifice in       revenge for Patroclus son of Menoetius. He drew them out like       dazed fawns, bound their hands behind them with the girdles of       their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to       the ships. Then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still       further blood.

      There he found Lycaon, son of Priam seed of Dardanus, as he was       escaping out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken       prisoner when he was in his father’s vineyard, having set upon       him by night, as he was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree       to make the wicker sides of a chariot. Achilles then caught him       to his sorrow unawares, and sent him by sea to Lemnos, where the       son of Jason bought him. But a guest-friend, Eetion of Imbros,       freed him with a great sum, and sent him to Arisbe, whence he had       escaped and returned to his father’s house. He had spent eleven       days happily with his friends after he had come from Lemnos, but       on the twelfth heaven again delivered him into the hands of       Achilles, who was to send him to the house of Hades sorely       against his will. He was unarmed when Achilles caught sight of       him, and had neither helmet nor shield; nor yet had he any spear,       for he had thrown all his armour from him on to the bank, and was       sweating with his struggles to get out of the river, so that his       strength was now failing him.

      Then Achilles said to himself in his surprise, “What marvel do I       see here? If this man can come back alive after having been sold       over into Lemnos, I shall have the Trojans also whom I have slain       rising from the world below. Could not even the waters of the       grey sea imprison him, as they do many another whether he will or       no? This time let him taste my spear, that I may know for certain       whether mother earth who can keep even a strong man down, will be       able to hold him, or whether thence too he will return.”

      Thus did he pause and ponder. But Lycaon came up to him dazed and       trying hard to embrace his knees, for he would fain live, not       die. Achilles thrust at him with his spear, meaning to kill him,       but Lycaon ran crouching up to him and caught his knees, whereby       the spear passed over his back, and stuck in the ground,       hungering though it was for blood. With one hand he caught       Achilles’ knees as he besought him, and with the other he       clutched the spear and would not let it go. Then he said,       “Achilles, have mercy upon me and spare me, for I am your       suppliant. It was in your tents that I first broke bread on the       day when you took me prisoner in the vineyard; after which you       sold me away to Lemnos far from my father and my friends, and I       brought you the price of a hundred oxen. I have paid three times       as much to gain my freedom; it is but twelve days that I have       come to Ilius after much suffering, and now cruel fate has again       thrown me into your hands. Surely father Jove must hate me, that       he has given me over to you a second time. Short of life indeed       did my mother Laothoe bear me, daughter of aged Altes—of Altes       who reigns over the warlike Lelegae and holds steep Pedasus on       the river Satnioeis. Priam married his daughter along with many       other women and two sons were born of her, both of whom you will       have slain. Your spear slew noble Polydorus as he was fighting in       the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for I fear       that I shall not escape you since heaven has delivered me over to       you. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare       me, for I am not of the same womb as Hector who slew your brave       and noble comrade.”

      With such words did the princely son of Priam beseech Achilles;       but Achilles answered him sternly. “Idiot,” said he, “talk not to       me of ransom. Until Patroclus fell I preferred to give the       Trojans quarter, and sold beyond the sea many of those whom I had       taken alive; but now not a man shall live of those whom heaven       delivers into my hands before the city of Ilius—and of all       Trojans it shall fare hardest with the sons of Priam. Therefore,       my friend, you too shall die. Why should you whine in this way?       Patroclus fell, and he was a better man than you are. I too—see       you not how I am great and goodly? I am son to a noble father,       and have a goddess for my mother, but the hands of doom and death       overshadow me all as surely. The day will come, either at dawn or       dark, or at the noontide, when one shall take my life also in       battle, either with his spear, or with an arrow sped from his       bow.”

      Thus did he speak, and Lycaon’s heart sank within him. He loosed       his hold of the spear, and held out both hands before him; but       Achilles drew his keen blade, and struck him by the collar-bone       on his neck; he plunged his two-edged sword into him to the very       hilt, whereon he lay at full length on the ground, with the dark       blood welling from him till the earth was soaked. Then Achilles       caught him by the foot and flung him into the river to go down       stream, vaunting over him the while, and saying, “Lie there among       the fishes, who will lick the blood from your wound and gloat       over it; your mother shall not lay you on any bier to mourn you,       but the eddies of Scamander shall bear you into the broad bosom       of the sea. There shall the fishes feed on the fat of Lycaon as       they dart under the dark ripple of the waters—so perish all of       you till we reach the citadel of strong Ilius—you in flight, and       I following after to destroy you. The river with its broad silver       stream shall serve you in no stead, for all the bulls you offered       him and all the horses that you flung living into his waters.       None the less miserably shall you perish till there is not a man       of you but has paid in full for the death of Patroclus and the       havoc you wrought among the Achaeans whom you have slain while I       held aloof from battle.”

      So spoke Achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and       pondered within himself how he should stay the hand of Achilles       and save the Trojans from disaster. Meanwhile the son of Peleus,       spear in hand, sprang upon Asteropaeus son of Pelegon to kill       him. He was son to the broad river Axius and Periboea eldest       daughter of Acessamenus; for the river had lain with her.       Asteropaeus stood up out of the water to face him with a spear in       either hand, and Xanthus filled him with courage, being angry for       the death of the youths whom Achilles was slaying ruthlessly       within his waters. When they were close up with one another       Achilles was first to speak. “Who and whence are you,” said he,       “who dare to face me? Woe to the parents whose son stands up       against me.” And the son of Pelegon answered, “Great son of       Peleus, why should you ask my lineage. I am from the fertile land       of far Paeonia, captain of the Paeonians, and it is now eleven       days that I am at Ilius. I am of the blood of the river Axius—of       Axius that is the fairest of all rivers that run. He begot the       famed warrior Pelegon, whose son men call me. Let us now fight,       Achilles.”

      Thus did he defy him, and Achilles raised his spear of Pelian       ash. Asteropaeus failed with both his spears, for he could use       both hands alike; with the one spear he struck Achilles’ shield,       but did not pierce it, for the layer of gold, gift of the god,       stayed the point; with the other spear he grazed the elbow of       Achilles’ right arm drawing dark blood, but the spear itself went       by him and fixed itself in the ground, foiled of its bloody       banquet. Then Achilles, fain to kill him, hurled his spear at       Asteropaeus, but failed to hit him and struck the steep bank of       the river, driving the spear half its length into the earth. The       son of Peleus then drew his sword and sprang furiously upon him.       Asteropaeus vainly tried to draw Achilles’ spear out of the bank       by main force; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his might       to draw it out, and thrice he had to leave off trying; the fourth       time he tried to bend and break it, but ere he could do so       Achilles smote him with his sword and killed him. He struck him       in the belly near the navel, so that all his bowels came gushing       out on to the ground, and the darkness of death came over him as       he lay gasping. Then Achilles set his foot on his chest and       spoiled him of his armour, vaunting over him and saying, “Lie       there—begotten of a river though you be, it is hard for you to       strive with the offspring of Saturn’s son. You declare yourself       sprung from the blood of a broad river, but I am of the seed of       mighty Jove. My father is Peleus, son of Aeacus ruler over the       many Myrmidons, and Aeacus was the son of Jove. Therefore as Jove       is mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are his       children stronger than those of any river whatsoever. Moreover       you have a great river hard by if he can be of any use to you,       but there is no fighting against Jove the son of Saturn, with       whom not even King Achelous can compare, nor the mighty stream of       deep-flowing Oceanus, from whom all rivers and seas with all       springs and deep wells proceed; even Oceanus fears the lightnings       of great Jove, and his thunder that comes crashing out of       heaven.”

      With this he drew his bronze spear out of the bank, and now that       he had killed Asteropaeus, he let him lie where he was on the       sand, with the dark water flowing over him and the eels and       fishes busy nibbling and gnawing the fat that was about his       kidneys. Then he went in chase of the Paeonians, who were flying       along the bank of the river in panic when they saw their leader       slain by the hands of the son of Peleus. Therein he slew       Thersilochus, Mydon, Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius, Oeneus, and       Ophelestes, and he would have slain yet others, had not the river       in anger taken human form, and spoken to him from out the deep       waters saying, “Achilles, if you excel all in strength, so do you       also in wickedness, for the gods are ever with you to protect       you: if, then, the son of Saturn has vouchsafed it to you to       destroy all the Trojans, at any rate drive them out of my stream,       and do your grim work on land. My fair waters are now filled with       corpses, nor can I find any channel by which I may pour myself       into the sea for I am choked with dead, and yet you go on       mercilessly slaying. I am in despair, therefore, O captain of       your host, trouble me no further.”

      Achilles answered, “So be it, Scamander, Jove-descended; but I       will never cease dealing out death among the Trojans, till I have       pent them up in their city, and made trial of Hector face to       face, that I may learn whether he is to vanquish me, or I him.”

      As he spoke he set upon the Trojans with a fury like that of the       gods. But the river said to Apollo, “Surely, son of Jove, lord of       the silver bow, you are not obeying the commands of Jove who       charged you straitly that you should stand by the Trojans and       defend them, till twilight fades, and darkness is over the       earth.”

      Meanwhile Achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon       the river raised a high wave and attacked him. He swelled his       stream into a torrent, and swept away the many dead whom Achilles       had slain and left within his waters. These he cast out on to the       land, bellowing like a bull the while, but the living he saved       alive, hiding them in his mighty eddies. The great and terrible       wave gathered about Achilles, falling upon him and beating on his       shield, so that he could not keep his feet; he caught hold of a       great elm-tree, but it came up by the roots, and tore away the       bank, damming the stream with its thick branches and bridging it       all across; whereby Achilles struggled out of the stream, and       fled full speed over the plain, for he was afraid.

      But the mighty god ceased not in his pursuit, and sprang upon him       with a dark-crested wave, to stay his hands and save the Trojans       from destruction. The son of Peleus darted away a spear’s throw       from him; swift as the swoop of a black hunter-eagle which is the       strongest and fleetest of all birds, even so did he spring       forward, and the armour rang loudly about his breast. He fled on       in front, but the river with a loud roar came tearing after. As       one who would water his garden leads a stream from some fountain       over his plants, and all his ground—spade in hand he clears away       the dams to free the channels, and the little stones run rolling       round and round with the water as it goes merrily down the bank       faster than the man can follow—even so did the river keep       catching up with Achilles albeit he was a fleet runner, for the       gods are stronger than men. As often as he would strive to stand       his ground, and see whether or no all the gods in heaven were in       league against him, so often would the mighty wave come beating       down upon his shoulders, and he would have to keep flying on and       on in great dismay; for the angry flood was tiring him out as it       flowed past him and ate the ground from under his feet.

      Then the son of Peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying,       “Father Jove, is there none of the gods who will take pity upon       me, and save me from the river? I do not care what may happen to       me afterwards. I blame none of the other dwellers on Olympus so       severely as I do my dear mother, who has beguiled and tricked me.       She told me I was to fall under the walls of Troy by the flying       arrows of Apollo; would that Hector, the best man among the       Trojans, might there slay me; then should I fall a hero by the       hand of a hero; whereas now it seems that I shall come to a most       pitiable end, trapped in this river as though I were some       swineherd’s boy, who gets carried down a torrent while trying to       cross it during a storm.”

      As soon as he had spoken thus, Neptune and Minerva came up to him       in the likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure       him. Neptune spoke first. “Son of Peleus,” said he, “be not so       exceeding fearful; we are two gods, come with Jove’s sanction to       assist you, I, and Pallas Minerva. It is not your fate to perish       in this river; he will abate presently as you will see; moreover       we strongly advise you, if you will be guided by us, not to stay       your hand from fighting till you have pent the Trojan host within       the famed walls of Ilius—as many of them as may escape. Then kill       Hector and go back to the ships, for we will vouchsafe you a       triumph over him.”

      When they had so said they went back to the other immortals, but       Achilles strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge       the gods had laid upon him. All was now covered with the flood of       waters, and much goodly armour of the youths that had been slain       was rifting about, as also many corpses, but he forced his way       against the stream, speeding right onwards, nor could the broad       waters stay him, for Minerva had endowed him with great strength.       Nevertheless Scamander did not slacken in his pursuit, but was       still more furious with the son of Peleus. He lifted his waters       into a high crest and cried aloud to Simois saying, “Dear       brother, let the two of us unite to save this man, or he will       sack the mighty city of King Priam, and the Trojans will not hold       out against him. Help me at once; fill your streams with water       from their sources, rouse all your torrents to a fury; raise your       wave on high, and let snags and stones come thundering down you       that we may make an end of this savage creature who is now       lording it as though he were a god. Nothing shall serve him       longer, not strength nor comeliness, nor his fine armour, which       forsooth shall soon be lying low in the deep waters covered over       with mud. I will wrap him in sand, and pour tons of shingle round       him, so that the Achaeans shall not know how to gather his bones       for the silt in which I shall have hidden him, and when they       celebrate his funeral they need build no barrow.”

      On this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against Achilles,       seething as it was with foam and blood and the bodies of the       dead. The dark waters of the river stood upright and would have       overwhelmed the son of Peleus, but Juno, trembling lest Achilles       should be swept away in the mighty torrent, lifted her voice on       high and called out to Vulcan her son. “Crook-foot,” she cried,       “my child, be up and doing, for I deem it is with you that       Xanthus is fain to fight; help us at once, kindle a fierce fire;       I will then bring up the west and the white south wind in a       mighty hurricane from the sea, that shall bear the flames against       the heads and armour of the Trojans and consume them, while you       go along the banks of Xanthus burning his trees and wrapping him       round with fire. Let him not turn you back neither by fair words       nor foul, and slacken not till I shout and tell you. Then you may       stay your flames.”

      On this Vulcan kindled a fierce fire, which broke out first upon       the plain and burned the many dead whom Achilles had killed and       whose bodies were lying about in great numbers; by this means the       plain was dried and the flood stayed. As the north wind, blowing       on an orchard that has been sodden with autumn rain, soon dries       it, and the heart of the owner is glad—even so the whole plain       was dried and the dead bodies were consumed. Then he turned       tongues of fire on to the river. He burned the elms the willows       and the tamarisks, the lotus also, with the rushes and marshy       herbage that grew abundantly by the banks of the river. The eels       and fishes that go darting about everywhere in the water, these,       too, were sorely harassed by the flames that cunning Vulcan had       kindled, and the river himself was scalded, so that he spoke       saying, “Vulcan, there is no god can hold his own against you. I       cannot fight you when you flare out your flames in this way;       strive with me no longer. Let Achilles drive the Trojans out of       their city immediately. What have I to do with quarrelling and       helping people?”

      He was boiling as he spoke, and all his waters were seething. As       a cauldron upon a large fire boils when it is melting the lard of       some fatted hog, and the lard keeps bubbling up all over when the       dry faggots blaze under it—even so were the goodly waters of       Xanthus heated with the fire till they were boiling. He could       flow no longer but stayed his stream, so afflicted was he by the       blasts of fire which cunning Vulcan had raised. Then he prayed to       Juno and besought her saying, “Juno, why should your son vex my       stream with such especial fury? I am not so much to blame as all       the others are who have been helping the Trojans. I will leave       off, since you so desire it, and let your son leave off also.       Furthermore I swear never again will I do anything to save the       Trojans from destruction, not even when all Troy is burning in       the flames which the Achaeans will kindle.”

      As soon as Juno heard this she said to her son Vulcan, “Son       Vulcan, hold now your flames; we ought not to use such violence       against a god for the sake of mortals.”

      When she had thus spoken Vulcan quenched his flames, and the       river went back once more into his own fair bed.

      Xanthus was now beaten, so these two left off fighting, for Juno       stayed them though she was still angry; but a furious quarrel       broke out among the other gods, for they were of divided       counsels. They fell on one another with a mighty uproar—earth       groaned, and the spacious firmament rang out as with a blare of       trumpets. Jove heard as he was sitting on Olympus, and laughed       for joy when he saw the gods coming to blows among themselves.       They were not long about beginning, and Mars piercer of shields       opened the battle. Sword in hand he sprang at once upon Minerva       and reviled her. “Why, vixen,” said he, “have you again set the       gods by the ears in the pride and haughtiness of your heart? Have       you forgotten how you set Diomed son of Tydeus on to wound me,       and yourself took visible spear and drove it into me to the hurt       of my fair body? You shall now suffer for what you then did to       me.”

      As he spoke he struck her on the terrible tasselled aegis—so       terrible that not even can Jove’s lightning pierce it. Here did       murderous Mars strike her with his great spear. She drew back and       with her strong hand seized a stone that was lying on the       plain—great and rugged and black—which men of old had set for the       boundary of a field. With this she struck Mars on the neck, and       brought him down. Nine roods did he cover in his fall, and his       hair was all soiled in the dust, while his armour rang rattling       round him. But Minerva laughed and vaunted over him saying,       “Idiot, have you not learned how far stronger I am than you, but       you must still match yourself against me? Thus do your mother’s       curses now roost upon you, for she is angry and would do you       mischief because you have deserted the Achaeans and are helping       the Trojans.”

      She then turned her two piercing eyes elsewhere, whereon Jove’s       daughter Venus took Mars by the hand and led him away groaning       all the time, for it was only with great difficulty that he had       come to himself again. When Queen Juno saw her, she said to       Minerva, “Look, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, that       vixen Venus is again taking Mars through the crowd out of the       battle; go after her at once.”

      Thus she spoke. Minerva sped after Venus with a will, and made at       her, striking her on the bosom with her strong hand so that she       fell fainting to the ground, and there they both lay stretched at       full length. Then Minerva vaunted over her saying, “May all who       help the Trojans against the Argives prove just as redoubtable       and stalwart as Venus did when she came across me while she was       helping Mars. Had this been so, we should long since have ended       the war by sacking the strong city of Ilius.”

      Juno smiled as she listened. Meanwhile King Neptune turned to       Apollo saying, “Phoebus, why should we keep each other at arm’s       length? it is not well, now that the others have begun fighting;       it will be disgraceful to us if we return to Jove’s       bronze-floored mansion on Olympus without having fought each       other; therefore come on, you are the younger of the two, and I       ought not to attack you, for I am older and have had more       experience. Idiot, you have no sense, and forget how we two alone       of all the gods fared hardly round about Ilius when we came from       Jove’s house and worked for Laomedon a whole year at a stated       wage and he gave us his orders. I built the Trojans the wall       about their city, so wide and fair that it might be impregnable,       while you, Phoebus, herded cattle for him in the dales of many       valleyed Ida. When, however, the glad hours brought round the       time of payment, mighty Laomedon robbed us of all our hire and       sent us off with nothing but abuse. He threatened to bind us hand       and foot and sell us over into some distant island. He tried,       moreover, to cut off the ears of both of us, so we went away in a       rage, furious about the payment he had promised us, and yet       withheld; in spite of all this, you are now showing favour to his       people, and will not join us in compassing the utter ruin of the       proud Trojans with their wives and children.”

      And King Apollo answered, “Lord of the earthquake, you would have       no respect for me if I were to fight you about a pack of       miserable mortals, who come out like leaves in summer and eat the       fruit of the field, and presently fall lifeless to the ground.       Let us stay this fighting at once and let them settle it among       themselves.”

      He turned away as he spoke, for he would lay no hand on the       brother of his own father. But his sister the huntress Diana,       patroness of wild beasts, was very angry with him and said, “So       you would fly, Far-Darter, and hand victory over to Neptune with       a cheap vaunt to boot. Baby, why keep your bow thus idle? Never       let me again hear you bragging in my father’s house, as you have       often done in the presence of the immortals, that you would stand       up and fight with Neptune.”

      Apollo made her no answer, but Jove’s august queen was angry and       upbraided her bitterly. “Bold vixen,” she cried, “how dare you       cross me thus? For all your bow you will find it hard to hold       your own against me. Jove made you as a lion among women, and       lets you kill them whenever you choose. You will find it better       to chase wild beasts and deer upon the mountains than to fight       those who are stronger than you are. If you would try war, do so,       and find out by pitting yourself against me, how far stronger I       am than you are.”

      She caught both Diana’s wrists with her left hand as she spoke,       and with her right she took the bow from her shoulders, and       laughed as she beat her with it about the ears while Diana       wriggled and writhed under her blows. Her swift arrows were shed       upon the ground, and she fled weeping from under Juno’s hand as a       dove that flies before a falcon to the cleft of some hollow rock,       when it is her good fortune to escape. Even so did she fly       weeping away, leaving her bow and arrows behind her.

      Then the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, said to Leto,       “Leto, I shall not fight you; it is ill to come to blows with any       of Jove’s wives. Therefore boast as you will among the immortals       that you worsted me in fair fight.”

      Leto then gathered up Diana’s bow and arrows that had fallen       about amid the whirling dust, and when she had got them she made       all haste after her daughter. Diana had now reached Jove’s       bronze-floored mansion on Olympus, and sat herself down with many       tears on the knees of her father, while her ambrosial raiment was       quivering all about her. The son of Saturn drew her towards him,       and laughing pleasantly the while began to question her saying,       “Which of the heavenly beings, my dear child, has been treating       you in this cruel manner, as though you had been misconducting       yourself in the face of everybody?” and the fair-crowned goddess       of the chase answered, “It was your wife Juno, father, who has       been beating me; it is always her doing when there is any       quarrelling among the immortals.”

      Thus did they converse, and meanwhile Phoebus Apollo entered the       strong city of Ilius, for he was uneasy lest the wall should not       hold out and the Danaans should take the city then and there,       before its hour had come; but the rest of the ever-living gods       went back, some angry and some triumphant to Olympus, where they       took their seats beside Jove lord of the storm-cloud, while       Achilles still kept on dealing out death alike on the Trojans and       on their horses. As when the smoke from some burning city ascends       to heaven when the anger of the gods has kindled it—there is then       toil for all, and sorrow for not a few—even so did Achilles bring       toil and sorrow on the Trojans.

      Old King Priam stood on a high tower of the wall looking down on       huge Achilles as the Trojans fled panic-stricken before him, and       there was none to help them. Presently he came down from off the       tower and with many a groan went along the wall to give orders to       the brave warders of the gate. “Keep the gates,” said he, “wide       open till the people come flying into the city, for Achilles is       hard by and is driving them in rout before him. I see we are in       great peril. As soon as our people are inside and in safety,       close the strong gates for I fear lest that terrible man should       come bounding inside along with the others.”

      As he spoke they drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and       when these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the       Trojans. Apollo then came full speed out of the city to meet them       and protect them. Right for the city and the high wall, parched       with thirst and grimy with dust, still they fled on, with       Achilles wielding his spear furiously behind them. For he was as       one possessed, and was thirsting after glory.

      Then had the sons of the Achaeans taken the lofty gates of Troy       if Apollo had not spurred on Agenor, valiant and noble son to       Antenor. He put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to       guard him, leaning against a beech tree and shrouded in thick       darkness. When Agenor saw Achilles he stood still and his heart       was clouded with care. “Alas,” said he to himself in his dismay,       “if I fly before mighty Achilles, and go where all the others are       being driven in rout, he will none the less catch me and kill me       for a coward. How would it be were I to let Achilles drive the       others before him, and then fly from the wall to the plain that       is behind Ilius till I reach the spurs of Ida and can hide in the       underwood that is thereon? I could then wash the sweat from off       me in the river and in the evening return to Ilius. But why       commune with myself in this way? Like enough he would see me as I       am hurrying from the city over the plain, and would speed after       me till he had caught me—I should stand no chance against him,       for he is mightiest of all mankind. What, then, if I go out and       meet him in front of the city? His flesh too, I take it, can be       pierced by pointed bronze. Life is the same in one and all, and       men say that he is but mortal despite the triumph that Jove son       of Saturn vouchsafes him.”

      So saying he stood on his guard and awaited Achilles, for he was       now fain to fight him. As a leopardess that bounds from out a       thick covert to attack a hunter—she knows no fear and is not       dismayed by the baying of the hounds; even though the man be too       quick for her and wound her either with thrust or spear, still,       though the spear has pierced her she will not give in till she       has either caught him in her grip or been killed outright—even so       did noble Agenor son of Antenor refuse to fly till he had made       trial of Achilles, and took aim at him with his spear, holding       his round shield before him and crying with a loud voice. “Of a       truth,” said he, “noble Achilles, you deem that you shall this       day sack the city of the proud Trojans. Fool, there will be       trouble enough yet before it, for there is many a brave man of us       still inside who will stand in front of our dear parents with our       wives and children, to defend Ilius. Here therefore, huge and       mighty warrior though you be, here shall you die.”

      As he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the       spear struck Achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of       newly wrought tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the       body of him whom it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the       god’s gift stayed it. Achilles in his turn attacked noble Agenor,       but Apollo would not vouchsafe him glory, for he snatched Agenor       away and hid him in a thick mist, sending him out of the battle       unmolested. Then he craftily drew the son of Peleus away from       going after the host, for he put on the semblance of Agenor and       stood in front of Achilles, who ran towards him to give him chase       and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain, turning him       towards the deep waters of the river Scamander. Apollo ran but a       little way before him and beguiled Achilles by making him think       all the time that he was on the point of overtaking him.       Meanwhile the rabble of routed Trojans was thankful to crowd       within the city till their numbers thronged it; no longer did       they dare wait for one another outside the city walls, to learn       who had escaped and who were fallen in fight, but all whose feet       and knees could still carry them poured pell-mell into the town.




BOOK XXII.


      The death of Hector.

      Thus the Trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat       from off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against       the goodly battlements, while the Achaeans with their shields       laid upon their shoulders drew close up to the walls. But stern       fate bade Hector stay where he was before Ilius and the Scaean       gates. Then Phoebus Apollo spoke to the son of Peleus saying,       “Why, son of Peleus, do you, who are but man, give chase to me       who am immortal? Have you not yet found out that it is a god whom       you pursue so furiously? You did not harass the Trojans whom you       had routed, and now they are within their walls, while you have       been decoyed hither away from them. Me you cannot kill, for death       can take no hold upon me.”

      Achilles was greatly angered and said, “You have baulked me,       Far-Darter, most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away       from the wall, where many another man would have bitten the dust       ere he got within Ilius; you have robbed me of great glory and       have saved the Trojans at no risk to yourself, for you have       nothing to fear, but I would indeed have my revenge if it were in       my power to do so.”

      On this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the       winning horse in a chariot race strains every nerve when he is       flying over the plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs       of Achilles bear him onwards. King Priam was first to note him as       he scoured the plain, all radiant as the star which men call       Orion’s Hound, and whose beams blaze forth in time of harvest       more brilliantly than those of any other that shines by night;       brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill for mortals,       for he brings fire and fever in his train—even so did Achilles’       armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. Priam raised a cry       and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted       out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but Hector still       stayed before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle       with Achilles. The old man reached out his arms towards him and       bade him for pity’s sake come within the walls. “Hector,” he       cried, “my son, stay not to face this man alone and unsupported,       or you will meet death at the hands of the son of Peleus, for he       is mightier than you. Monster that he is; would indeed that the       gods loved him no better than I do, for so, dogs and vultures       would soon devour him as he lay stretched on earth, and a load of       grief would be lifted from my heart, for many a brave son has he       reft from me, either by killing them or selling them away in the       islands that are beyond the sea: even now I miss two sons from       among the Trojans who have thronged within the city, Lycaon and       Polydorus, whom Laothoe peeress among women bore me. Should they       be still alive and in the hands of the Achaeans, we will ransom       them with gold and bronze, of which we have store, for the old       man Altes endowed his daughter richly; but if they are already       dead and in the house of Hades, sorrow will it be to us two who       were their parents; albeit the grief of others will be more       short-lived unless you too perish at the hands of Achilles. Come,       then, my son, within the city, to be the guardian of Trojan men       and Trojan women, or you will both lose your own life and afford       a mighty triumph to the son of Peleus. Have pity also on your       unhappy father while life yet remains to him—on me, whom the son       of Saturn will destroy by a terrible doom on the threshold of old       age, after I have seen my sons slain and my daughters haled away       as captives, my bridal chambers pillaged, little children dashed       to earth amid the rage of battle, and my sons’ wives dragged away       by the cruel hands of the Achaeans; in the end fierce hounds will       tear me in pieces at my own gates after some one has beaten the       life out of my body with sword or spear-hounds that I myself       reared and fed at my own table to guard my gates, but who will       yet lap my blood and then lie all distraught at my doors. When a       young man falls by the sword in battle, he may lie where he is       and there is nothing unseemly; let what will be seen, all is       honourable in death, but when an old man is slain there is       nothing in this world more pitiable than that dogs should defile       his grey hair and beard and all that men hide for shame.”

      The old man tore his grey hair as he spoke, but he moved not the       heart of Hector. His mother hard by wept and moaned aloud as she       bared her bosom and pointed to the breast which had suckled him.       “Hector,” she cried, weeping bitterly the while, “Hector, my son,       spurn not this breast, but have pity upon me too: if I have ever       given you comfort from my own bosom, think on it now, dear son,       and come within the wall to protect us from this man; stand not       without to meet him. Should the wretch kill you, neither I nor       your richly dowered wife shall ever weep, dear offshoot of       myself, over the bed on which you lie, for dogs will devour you       at the ships of the Achaeans.”

      Thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they       moved not the heart of Hector, and he stood his ground awaiting       huge Achilles as he drew nearer towards him. As a serpent in its       den upon the mountains, full fed with deadly poisons, waits for       the approach of man—he is filled with fury and his eyes glare       terribly as he goes writhing round his den—even so Hector leaned       his shield against a tower that jutted out from the wall and       stood where he was, undaunted.

      “Alas,” said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, “if I       go within the gates, Polydamas will be the first to heap reproach       upon me, for it was he that urged me to lead the Trojans back to       the city on that awful night when Achilles again came forth       against us. I would not listen, but it would have been indeed       better if I had done so. Now that my folly has destroyed the       host, I dare not look Trojan men and Trojan women in the face,       lest a worse man should say, ‘Hector has ruined us by his       self-confidence.’ Surely it would be better for me to return       after having fought Achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously       here before the city. What, again, if I were to lay down my       shield and helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight       up to noble Achilles? What if I were to promise to give up Helen,       who was the fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure       that Alexandrus brought with him in his ships to Troy, aye, and       to let the Achaeans divide the half of everything that the city       contains among themselves? I might make the Trojans, by the       mouths of their princes, take a solemn oath that they would hide       nothing, but would divide into two shares all that is within the       city—but why argue with myself in this way? Were I to go up to       him he would show me no kind of mercy; he would kill me then and       there as easily as though I were a woman, when I had off my       armour. There is no parleying with him from some rock or oak tree       as young men and maidens prattle with one another. Better fight       him at once, and learn to which of us Jove will vouchsafe       victory.”

      Thus did he stand and ponder, but Achilles came up to him as it       were Mars himself, plumed lord of battle. From his right shoulder       he brandished his terrible spear of Pelian ash, and the bronze       gleamed around him like flashing fire or the rays of the rising       sun. Fear fell upon Hector as he beheld him, and he dared not       stay longer where he was but fled in dismay from before the       gates, while Achilles darted after him at his utmost speed. As a       mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds, swoops down upon some       cowering dove—the dove flies before him but the falcon with a       shrill scream follows close after, resolved to have her—even so       did Achilles make straight for Hector with all his might, while       Hector fled under the Trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take       him.

      On they flew along the waggon-road that ran hard by under the       wall, past the look-out station, and past the weather-beaten wild       fig-tree, till they came to two fair springs which feed the river       Scamander. One of these two springs is warm, and steam rises from       it as smoke from a burning fire, but the other even in summer is       as cold as hail or snow, or the ice that forms on water. Here,       hard by the springs, are the goodly washing-troughs of stone,       where in the time of peace before the coming of the Achaeans the       wives and fair daughters of the Trojans used to wash their       clothes. Past these did they fly, the one in front and the other       giving chase behind him: good was the man that fled, but better       far was he that followed after, and swiftly indeed did they run,       for the prize was no mere beast for sacrifice or bullock’s hide,       as it might be for a common foot-race, but they ran for the life       of Hector. As horses in a chariot race speed round the       turning-posts when they are running for some great prize—a tripod       or woman—at the games in honour of some dead hero, so did these       two run full speed three times round the city of Priam. All the       gods watched them, and the sire of gods and men was the first to       speak.

      “Alas,” said he, “my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being       pursued round the walls of Troy; my heart is full of pity for       Hector, who has burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my       honour, one while on the crests of many-valleyed Ida, and again       on the citadel of Troy; and now I see noble Achilles in full       pursuit of him round the city of Priam. What say you? Consider       among yourselves and decide whether we shall now save him or let       him fall, valiant though he be, before Achilles, son of Peleus.”

      Then Minerva said, “Father, wielder of the lightning, lord of       cloud and storm, what mean you? Would you pluck this mortal whose       doom has long been decreed out of the jaws of death? Do as you       will, but we others shall not be of a mind with you.”

      And Jove answered, “My child, Trito-born, take heart. I did not       speak in full earnest, and I will let you have your way. Do       without let or hindrance as you are minded.”

      Thus did he urge Minerva who was already eager, and down she       darted from the topmost summits of Olympus.

      Achilles was still in full pursuit of Hector, as a hound chasing       a fawn which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and       hunts through glade and thicket. The fawn may try to elude him by       crouching under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and       follow her up until he gets her—even so there was no escape for       Hector from the fleet son of Peleus. Whenever he made a set to       get near the Dardanian gates and under the walls, that his people       might help him by showering down weapons from above, Achilles       would gain on him and head him back towards the plain, keeping       himself always on the city side. As a man in a dream who fails to       lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing—the one cannot escape       nor the other overtake—even so neither could Achilles come up       with Hector, nor Hector break away from Achilles; nevertheless he       might even yet have escaped death had not the time come when       Apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved his       running, was now no longer to stay by him. Achilles made signs to       the Achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to       aim a dart at Hector, lest another might win the glory of having       hit him and he might himself come in second. Then, at last, as       they were nearing the fountains for the fourth time, the father       of all balanced his golden scales and placed a doom in each of       them, one for Achilles and the other for Hector. As he held the       scales by the middle, the doom of Hector fell down deep into the       house of Hades—and then Phoebus Apollo left him. Thereon Minerva       went close up to the son of Peleus and said, “Noble Achilles,       favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to the ships a       triumph for the Achaeans by slaying Hector, for all his lust of       battle. Do what Apollo may as he lies grovelling before his       father, aegis-bearing Jove, Hector cannot escape us longer. Stay       here and take breath, while I go up to him and persuade him to       make a stand and fight you.”

      Thus spoke Minerva. Achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still,       leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while Minerva left him       and went after Hector in the form and with the voice of       Deiphobus. She came close up to him and said, “Dear brother, I       see you are hard pressed by Achilles who is chasing you at full       speed round the city of Priam, let us await his onset and stand       on our defence.”

      And Hector answered, “Deiphobus, you have always been dearest to       me of all my brothers, children of Hecuba and Priam, but       henceforth I shall rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have       ventured outside the wall for my sake when all the others remain       inside.”

      Then Minerva said, “Dear brother, my father and mother went down       on their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain       inside, so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but I was in an       agony of grief when I beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make       a stand and fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in       reserve, that we may learn whether Achilles shall kill us and       bear off our spoils to the ships, or whether he shall fall before       you.”

      Thus did Minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two       were now close to one another great Hector was first to speak. “I       will no longer fly you, son of Peleus,” said he, “as I have been       doing hitherto. Three times have I fled round the mighty city of       Priam, without daring to withstand you, but now, let me either       slay or be slain, for I am in the mind to face you. Let us, then,       give pledges to one another by our gods, who are the fittest       witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let it be agreed       between us that if Jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and I take       your life, I am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly       fashion, but when I have stripped you of your armour, I am to       give up your body to the Achaeans. And do you likewise.”

      Achilles glared at him and answered, “Fool, prate not to me about       covenants. There can be no covenants between men and lions,       wolves and lambs can never be of one mind, but hate each other       out and out all through. Therefore there can be no understanding       between you and me, nor may there be any covenants between us,       till one or other shall fall and glut grim Mars with his life’s       blood. Put forth all your strength; you have need now to prove       yourself indeed a bold soldier and man of war. You have no more       chance, and Pallas Minerva will forthwith vanquish you by my       spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief you have caused       me on account of my comrades whom you have killed in battle.”

      He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. Hector saw it       coming and avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it       flew over his head and stuck in the ground beyond; Minerva then       snatched it up and gave it back to Achilles without Hector’s       seeing her; Hector thereon said to the son of Peleus, “You have       missed your aim, Achilles, peer of the gods, and Jove has not yet       revealed to you the hour of my doom, though you made sure that he       had done so. You were a false-tongued liar when you deemed that I       should forget my valour and quail before you. You shall not drive       your spear into the back of a runaway—drive it, should heaven so       grant you power, drive it into me as I make straight towards you;       and now for your own part avoid my spear if you can—would that       you might receive the whole of it into your body; if you were       once dead the Trojans would find the war an easier matter, for it       is you who have harmed them most.”

      He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. His aim was true       for he hit the middle of Achilles’ shield, but the spear       rebounded from it, and did not pierce it. Hector was angry when       he saw that the weapon had sped from his hand in vain, and stood       there in dismay for he had no second spear. With a loud cry he       called Deiphobus and asked him for one, but there was no man;       then he saw the truth and said to himself, “Alas! the gods have       lured me on to my destruction. I deemed that the hero Deiphobus       was by my side, but he is within the wall, and Minerva has       inveigled me; death is now indeed exceedingly near at hand and       there is no way out of it—for so Jove and his son Apollo the       far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever       ready to protect me. My doom has come upon me; let me not then       die ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some       great thing that shall be told among men hereafter.”

      As he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong       by his side, and gathering himself together be sprang on Achilles       like a soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some       lamb or timid hare—even so did Hector brandish his sword and       spring upon Achilles. Achilles mad with rage darted towards him,       with his wondrous shield before his breast, and his gleaming       helmet, made with four layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward.       The thick tresses of gold with which Vulcan had crested the       helmet floated round it, and as the evening star that shines       brighter than all others through the stillness of night, even       such was the gleam of the spear which Achilles poised in his       right hand, fraught with the death of noble Hector. He eyed his       fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it, but       all was protected by the goodly armour of which Hector had       spoiled Patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat       where the collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and       this is a most deadly place: here then did Achilles strike him as       he was coming on towards him, and the point of his spear went       right through the fleshy part of the neck, but it did not sever       his windpipe so that he could still speak. Hector fell headlong,       and Achilles vaunted over him saying, “Hector, you deemed that       you should come off scatheless when you were spoiling Patroclus,       and recked not of myself who was not with him. Fool that you       were: for I, his comrade, mightier far than he, was still left       behind him at the ships, and now I have laid you low. The       Achaeans shall give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and       vultures shall work their will upon yourself.”

      Then Hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, “I pray you by       your life and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me       at the ships of the Achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of       gold and bronze which my father and mother will offer you, and       send my body home, that the Trojans and their wives may give me       my dues of fire when I am dead.”

      Achilles glared at him and answered, “Dog, talk not to me neither       of knees nor parents; would that I could be as sure of being able       to cut your flesh into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill you       have done me, as I am that nothing shall save you from the       dogs—it shall not be, though they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom       and weigh it out for me on the spot, with promise of yet more       hereafter. Though Priam son of Dardanus should bid them offer me       your weight in gold, even so your mother shall never lay you out       and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and vultures       shall eat you utterly up.”

      Hector with his dying breath then said, “I know you what you are,       and was sure that I should not move you, for your heart is hard       as iron; look to it that I bring not heaven’s anger upon you on       the day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo, valiant though you be,       shall slay you at the Scaean gates.”

      When he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon       his soul went out of him and flew down to the house of Hades,       lamenting its sad fate that it should enjoy youth and strength no       longer. But Achilles said, speaking to the dead body, “Die; for       my part I will accept my fate whensoever Jove and the other gods       see fit to send it.”

      As he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one       side; then he stripped the blood-stained armour from Hector’s       shoulders while the other Achaeans came running up to view his       wondrous strength and beauty; and no one came near him without       giving him a fresh wound. Then would one turn to his neighbour       and say, “It is easier to handle Hector now than when he was       flinging fire on to our ships”—and as he spoke he would thrust       his spear into him anew.

      When Achilles had done spoiling Hector of his armour, he stood       among the Argives and said, “My friends, princes and counsellors       of the Argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome       this man, who has done us more hurt than all the others together,       consider whether we should not attack the city in force, and       discover in what mind the Trojans may be. We should thus learn       whether they will desert their city now that Hector has fallen,       or will still hold out even though he is no longer living. But       why argue with myself in this way, while Patroclus is still lying       at the ships unburied, and unmourned—he whom I can never forget       so long as I am alive and my strength fails not? Though men       forget their dead when once they are within the house of Hades,       yet not even there will I forget the comrade whom I have lost.       Now, therefore, Achaean youths, let us raise the song of victory       and go back to the ships taking this man along with us; for we       have achieved a mighty triumph and have slain noble Hector to       whom the Trojans prayed throughout their city as though he were a       god.”

      On this he treated the body of Hector with contumely: he pierced       the sinews at the back of both his feet from heel to ancle and       passed thongs of ox-hide through the slits he had made: thus he       made the body fast to his chariot, letting the head trail upon       the ground. Then when he had put the goodly armour on the chariot       and had himself mounted, he lashed his horses on and they flew       forward nothing loth. The dust rose from Hector as he was being       dragged along, his dark hair flew all abroad, and his head once       so comely was laid low on earth, for Jove had now delivered him       into the hands of his foes to do him outrage in his own land.

      Thus was the head of Hector being dishonoured in the dust. His       mother tore her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry       as she looked upon her son. His father made piteous moan, and       throughout the city the people fell to weeping and wailing. It       was as though the whole of frowning Ilius was being smirched with       fire. Hardly could the people hold Priam back in his hot haste to       rush without the gates of the city. He grovelled in the mire and       besought them, calling each one of them by his name. “Let be, my       friends,” he cried, “and for all your sorrow, suffer me to go       single-handed to the ships of the Achaeans. Let me beseech this       cruel and terrible man, if maybe he will respect the feeling of       his fellow-men, and have compassion on my old age. His own father       is even such another as myself—Peleus, who bred him and reared       him to be the bane of us Trojans, and of myself more than of all       others. Many a son of mine has he slain in the flower of his       youth, and yet, grieve for these as I may, I do so for       one—Hector—more than for them all, and the bitterness of my       sorrow will bring me down to the house of Hades. Would that he       had died in my arms, for so both his ill-starred mother who bore       him, and myself, should have had the comfort of weeping and       mourning over him.”

      Thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city       joined in his lament. Hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among       the Trojans. “Alas, my son,” she cried, “what have I left to live       for now that you are no more? Night and day did I glory in you       throughout the city, for you were a tower of strength to all in       Troy, and both men and women alike hailed you as a god. So long       as you lived you were their pride, but now death and destruction       have fallen upon you.”

      Hector’s wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to       tell her that her husband had remained without the gates. She was       at her loom in an inner part of the house, weaving a double       purple web, and embroidering it with many flowers. She told her       maids to set a large tripod on the fire, so as to have a warm       bath ready for Hector when he came out of battle; poor woman, she       knew not that he was now beyond the reach of baths, and that       Minerva had laid him low by the hands of Achilles. She heard the       cry coming as from the wall, and trembled in every limb; the       shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke to her       waiting-women. “Two of you,” she said, “come with me that I may       learn what it is that has befallen; I heard the voice of my       husband’s honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would       come into my mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great       misfortune for Priam’s children must be at hand. May I never live       to hear it, but I greatly fear that Achilles has cut off the       retreat of brave Hector and has chased him on to the plain where       he was single-handed; I fear he may have put an end to the       reckless daring which possessed my husband, who would never       remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in front,       foremost of them all in valour.”

      Her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house       like a maniac, with her waiting-women following after. When she       reached the battlements and the crowd of people, she stood       looking out upon the wall, and saw Hector being borne away in       front of the city—the horses dragging him without heed or care       over the ground towards the ships of the Achaeans. Her eyes were       then shrouded as with the darkness of night and she fell fainting       backwards. She tore the attiring from her head and flung it from       her, the frontlet and net with its plaited band, and the veil       which golden Venus had given her on the day when Hector took her       with him from the house of Eetion, after having given countless       gifts of wooing for her sake. Her husband’s sisters and the wives       of his brothers crowded round her and supported her, for she was       fain to die in her distraction; when she again presently breathed       and came to herself, she sobbed and made lament among the Trojans       saying, “Woe is me, O Hector; woe, indeed, that to share a common       lot we were born, you at Troy in the house of Priam, and I at       Thebes under the wooded mountain of Placus in the house of Eetion       who brought me up when I was a child—ill-starred sire of an       ill-starred daughter—would that he had never begotten me. You are       now going into the house of Hades under the secret places of the       earth, and you leave me a sorrowing widow in your house. The       child, of whom you and I are the unhappy parents, is as yet a       mere infant. Now that you are gone, O Hector, you can do nothing       for him nor he for you. Even though he escape the horrors of this       woeful war with the Achaeans, yet shall his life henceforth be       one of labour and sorrow, for others will seize his lands. The       day that robs a child of his parents severs him from his own       kind; his head is bowed, his cheeks are wet with tears, and he       will go about destitute among the friends of his father, plucking       one by the cloak and another by the shirt. Some one or other of       these may so far pity him as to hold the cup for a moment towards       him and let him moisten his lips, but he must not drink enough to       wet the roof of his mouth; then one whose parents are alive will       drive him from the table with blows and angry words. ‘Out with       you,’ he will say, ‘you have no father here,’ and the child will       go crying back to his widowed mother—he, Astyanax, who erewhile       would sit upon his father’s knees, and have none but the       daintiest and choicest morsels set before him. When he had played       till he was tired and went to sleep, he would lie in a bed, in       the arms of his nurse, on a soft couch, knowing neither want nor       care, whereas now that he has lost his father his lot will be       full of hardship—he, whom the Trojans name Astyanax, because you,       O Hector, were the only defence of their gates and battlements.       The wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at the ships, far       from your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves upon       you. You will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and       goodly raiment made by hands of women. This will I now burn; it       is of no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus       you will have respect shown you by the Trojans both men and       women.”

      In such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women       joined in her lament.




BOOK XXIII.


      The funeral of Patroclus, and the funeral games.

      Thus did they make their moan throughout the city, while the       Achaeans when they reached the Hellespont went back every man to       his own ship. But Achilles would not let the Myrmidons go, and       spoke to his brave comrades saying, “Myrmidons, famed horsemen       and my own trusted friends, not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but       with horse and chariot draw near to the body and mourn Patroclus,       in due honour to the dead. When we have had full comfort of       lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take supper all of us       here.”

      On this they all joined in a cry of wailing and Achilles led them       in their lament. Thrice did they drive their chariots all       sorrowing round the body, and Thetis stirred within them a still       deeper yearning. The sands of the sea-shore and the men’s armour       were wet with their weeping, so great a minister of fear was he       whom they had lost. Chief in all their mourning was the son of       Peleus: he laid his blood-stained hand on the breast of his       friend. “Fare well,” he cried, “Patroclus, even in the house of       Hades. I will now do all that I erewhile promised you; I will       drag Hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons       of Trojans will I also slay before your pyre to avenge you.”

      As he spoke he treated the body of noble Hector with contumely,       laying it at full length in the dust beside the bier of       Patroclus. The others then put off every man his armour, took the       horses from their chariots, and seated themselves in great       multitude by the ship of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, who       thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral banquet. Many a       goodly ox, with many a sheep and bleating goat did they butcher       and cut up; many a tusked boar moreover, fat and well-fed, did       they singe and set to roast in the flames of Vulcan; and rivulets       of blood flowed all round the place where the body was lying.

      Then the princes of the Achaeans took the son of Peleus to       Agamemnon, but hardly could they persuade him to come with them,       so wroth was he for the death of his comrade. As soon as they       reached Agamemnon’s tent they told the serving-men to set a large       tripod over the fire in case they might persuade the son of       Peleus to wash the clotted gore from this body, but he denied       them sternly, and swore it with a solemn oath, saying, “Nay, by       King Jove, first and mightiest of all gods, it is not meet that       water should touch my body, till I have laid Patroclus on the       flames, have built him a barrow, and shaved my head—for so long       as I live no such second sorrow shall ever draw nigh me. Now,       therefore, let us do all that this sad festival demands, but at       break of day, King Agamemnon, bid your men bring wood, and       provide all else that the dead may duly take into the realm of       darkness; the fire shall thus burn him out of our sight the       sooner, and the people shall turn again to their own labours.”

      Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They made       haste to prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full       share so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough       to eat and drink, the others went to their rest each in his own       tent, but the son of Peleus lay grieving among his Myrmidons by       the shore of the sounding sea, in an open place where the waves       came surging in one after another. Here a very deep slumber took       hold upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows, for his limbs       were weary with chasing Hector round windy Ilius. Presently the       sad spirit of Patroclus drew near him, like what he had been in       stature, voice, and the light of his beaming eyes, clad, too, as       he had been clad in life. The spirit hovered over his head and       said—

      “You sleep, Achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living,       but now that I am dead you think for me no further.