[ATH-iliad  —  part 3 of 5, continuation of part 2]
============================================================

let us all do as I say; let our       squires hold our horses by the trench, but let us follow Hector       in a body on foot, clad in full armour, and if the day of their       doom is at hand the Achaeans will not be able to withstand us.”

      Thus spoke Polydamas and his saying pleased Hector, who sprang in       full armour to the ground, and all the other Trojans, when they       saw him do so, also left their chariots. Each man then gave his       horses over to his charioteer in charge to hold them ready for       him at the trench. Then they formed themselves into companies,       made themselves ready, and in five bodies followed their leaders.       Those that went with Hector and Polydamas were the bravest and       most in number, and the most determined to break through the wall       and fight at the ships. Cebriones was also joined with them as       third in command, for Hector had left his chariot in charge of a       less valiant soldier. The next company was led by Paris,       Alcathous, and Agenor; the third by Helenus and Deiphobus, two       sons of Priam, and with them was the hero Asius—Asius, the son of       Hyrtacus, whose great black horses of the breed that comes from       the river Selleis had brought him from Arisbe. Aeneas, the       valiant son of Anchises, led the fourth; he and the two sons of       Antenor, Archelochus and Acamas, men well versed in all the arts       of war. Sarpedon was captain over the allies, and took with him       Glaucus and Asteropaeus whom he deemed most valiant after       himself—for he was far the best man of them all. These helped to       array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged       straight at the Danaans, for they felt sure that they would not       hold out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the       ships.

      The rest of the Trojans and their allies now followed the counsel       of Polydamas but Asius, son of Hyrtacus, would not leave his       horses and his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took       them on with him towards the ships, nor did he fail to come by       his end in consequence. Nevermore was he to return to wind-beaten       Ilius, exulting in his chariot and his horses; ere he could do       so, death of ill-omened name had overshadowed him and he had       fallen by the spear of Idomeneus the noble son of Deucalion. He       had driven towards the left wing of the ships, by which way the       Achaeans used to return with their chariots and horses from the       plain. Hither he drove and found the gates with their doors       opened wide, and the great bar down—for the gatemen kept them       open so as to let those of their comrades enter who might be       flying towards the ships. Hither of set purpose did he direct his       horses, and his men followed him with a loud cry, for they felt       sure that the Achaeans would not hold out longer, and that they       should now fall upon the ships. Little did they know that at the       gates they should find two of the bravest chieftains, proud sons       of the fighting Lapithae—the one, Polypoetes, mighty son of       Pirithous, and the other Leonteus, peer of murderous Mars. These       stood before the gates like two high oak trees upon the       mountains, that tower from their wide-spreading roots, and year       after year battle with wind and rain—even so did these two men       await the onset of great Asius confidently and without flinching.       The Trojans led by him and by Iamenus, Orestes, Adamas the son of       Asius, Thoon and Oenomaus, raised a loud cry of battle and made       straight for the wall, holding their shields of dry ox-hide above       their heads; for a while the two defenders remained inside and       cheered the Achaeans on to stand firm in the defence of their       ships; when, however, they saw that the Trojans were attacking       the wall, while the Danaans were crying out for help and being       routed, they rushed outside and fought in front of the gates like       two wild boars upon the mountains that abide the attack of men       and dogs, and charging on either side break down the wood all       round them tearing it up by the roots, and one can hear the       clattering of their tusks, till some one hits them and makes an       end of them—even so did the gleaming bronze rattle about their       breasts, as the weapons fell upon them; for they fought with       great fury, trusting to their own prowess and to those who were       on the wall above them. These threw great stones at their       assailants in defence of themselves their tents and their ships.       The stones fell thick as the flakes of snow which some fierce       blast drives from the dark clouds and showers down in sheets upon       the earth—even so fell the weapons from the hands alike of       Trojans and Achaeans. Helmet and shield rang out as the great       stones rained upon them, and Asius, the son of Hyrtacus, in his       dismay cried aloud and smote his two thighs. “Father Jove,” he       cried, “of a truth you too are altogether given to lying. I made       sure the Argive heroes could not withstand us, whereas like       slim-waisted wasps, or bees that have their nests in the rocks by       the wayside—they leave not the holes wherein they have built       undefended, but fight for their little ones against all who would       take them—even so these men, though they be but two, will not be       driven from the gates, but stand firm either to slay or be       slain.”

      He spoke, but moved not the mind of Jove, whose counsel it then       was to give glory to Hector. Meanwhile the rest of the Trojans       were fighting about the other gates; I, however, am no god to be       able to tell about all these things, for the battle raged       everywhere about the stone wall as it were a fiery furnace. The       Argives, discomfited though they were, were forced to defend       their ships, and all the gods who were defending the Achaeans       were vexed in spirit; but the Lapithae kept on fighting with       might and main.

      Thereon Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, hit Damasus with a       spear upon his cheek-pierced helmet. The helmet did not protect       him, for the point of the spear went through it, and broke the       bone, so that the brain inside was scattered about, and he died       fighting. He then slew Pylon and Ormenus. Leonteus, of the race       of Mars, killed Hippomachus the son of Antimachus by striking him       with his spear upon the girdle. He then drew his sword and sprang       first upon Antiphates whom he killed in combat, and who fell face       upwards on the earth. After him he killed Menon, Iamenus, and       Orestes, and laid them low one after the other.

      While they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the       youths who were led on by Polydamas and Hector (and these were       the greater part and the most valiant of those that were trying       to break through the wall and fire the ships) were still standing       by the trench, uncertain what they should do; for they had seen a       sign from heaven when they had essayed to cross it—a soaring       eagle that flew skirting the left wing of their host, with a       monstrous blood-red snake in its talons still alive and       struggling to escape. The snake was still bent on revenge,       wriggling and twisting itself backwards till it struck the bird       that held it, on the neck and breast; whereon the bird being in       pain, let it fall, dropping it into the middle of the host, and       then flew down the wind with a sharp cry. The Trojans were struck       with terror when they saw the snake, portent of aegis-bearing       Jove, writhing in the midst of them, and Polydamas went up to       Hector and said, “Hector, at our councils of war you are ever       given to rebuke me, even when I speak wisely, as though it were       not well, forsooth, that one of the people should cross your will       either in the field or at the council board; you would have them       support you always: nevertheless I will say what I think will be       best; let us not now go on to fight the Danaans at their ships,       for I know what will happen if this soaring eagle which skirted       the left wing of our host with a monstrous blood-red snake in its       talons (the snake being still alive) was really sent as an omen       to the Trojans on their essaying to cross the trench. The eagle       let go her hold; she did not succeed in taking it home to her       little ones, and so will it be—with ourselves; even though by a       mighty effort we break through the gates and wall of the       Achaeans, and they give way before us, still we shall not return       in good order by the way we came, but shall leave many a man       behind us whom the Achaeans will do to death in defence of their       ships. Thus would any seer who was expert in these matters, and       was trusted by the people, read the portent.”

      Hector looked fiercely at him and said, “Polydamas, I like not of       your reading. You can find a better saying than this if you will.       If, however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has       heaven robbed you of your reason. You would have me pay no heed       to the counsels of Jove, nor to the promises he made me—and he       bowed his head in confirmation; you bid me be ruled rather by the       flight of wild-fowl. What care I whether they fly towards dawn or       dark, and whether they be on my right hand or on my left? Let us       put our trust rather in the counsel of great Jove, king of       mortals and immortals. There is one omen, and one only—that a man       should fight for his country. Why are you so fearful? Though we       be all of us slain at the ships of the Argives you are not likely       to be killed yourself, for you are not steadfast nor courageous.       If you will not fight, or would talk others over from doing so,       you shall fall forthwith before my spear.”

      With these words he led the way, and the others followed after       with a cry that rent the air. Then Jove the lord of thunder sent       the blast of a mighty wind from the mountains of Ida, that bore       the dust down towards the ships; he thus lulled the Achaeans into       security, and gave victory to Hector and to the Trojans, who,       trusting to their own might and to the signs he had shown them,       essayed to break through the great wall of the Achaeans. They       tore down the breastworks from the walls, and overthrew the       battlements; they upheaved the buttresses, which the Achaeans had       set in front of the wall in order to support it; when they had       pulled these down they made sure of breaking through the wall,       but the Danaans still showed no sign of giving ground; they still       fenced the battlements with their shields of ox-hide, and hurled       their missiles down upon the foe as soon as any came below the       wall.

      The two Ajaxes went about everywhere on the walls cheering on the       Achaeans, giving fair words to some while they spoke sharply to       any one whom they saw to be remiss. “My friends,” they cried,       “Argives one and all—good bad and indifferent, for there was       never fight yet, in which all were of equal prowess—there is now       work enough, as you very well know, for all of you. See that you       none of you turn in flight towards the ships, daunted by the       shouting of the foe, but press forward and keep one another in       heart, if it may so be that Olympian Jove the lord of lightning       will vouchsafe us to repel our foes, and drive them back towards       the city.”

      Thus did the two go about shouting and cheering the Achaeans on.       As the flakes that fall thick upon a winter’s day, when Jove is       minded to snow and to display these his arrows to mankind—he       lulls the wind to rest, and snows hour after hour till he has       buried the tops of the high mountains, the headlands that jut       into the sea, the grassy plains, and the tilled fields of men;       the snow lies deep upon the forelands, and havens of the grey       sea, but the waves as they come rolling in stay it that it can       come no further, though all else is wrapped as with a mantle, so       heavy are the heavens with snow—even thus thickly did the stones       fall on one side and on the other, some thrown at the Trojans,       and some by the Trojans at the Achaeans; and the whole wall was       in an uproar.

      Still the Trojans and brave Hector would not yet have broken down       the gates and the great bar, had not Jove turned his son Sarpedon       against the Argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle.       Before him he held his shield of hammered bronze, that the smith       had beaten so fair and round, and had lined with ox-hides which       he had made fast with rivets of gold all round the shield; this       he held in front of him, and brandishing his two spears came on       like some lion of the wilderness, who has been long famished for       want of meat and will dare break even into a well-fenced       homestead to try and get at the sheep. He may find the shepherds       keeping watch over their flocks with dogs and spears, but he is       in no mind to be driven from the fold till he has had a try for       it; he will either spring on a sheep and carry it off, or be hit       by a spear from some strong hand—even so was Sarpedon fain to       attack the wall and break down its battlements. Then he said to       Glaucus son of Hippolochus, “Glaucus, why in Lycia do we receive       especial honour as regards our place at table? Why are the       choicest portions served us and our cups kept brimming, and why       do men look up to us as though we were gods? Moreover we hold a       large estate by the banks of the river Xanthus, fair with orchard       lawns and wheat-growing land; it becomes us, therefore, to take       our stand at the head of all the Lycians and bear the brunt of       the fight, that one may say to another, ‘Our princes in Lycia eat       the fat of the land and drink best of wine, but they are fine       fellows; they fight well and are ever at the front in battle.’ My       good friend, if, when we were once out of this fight, we could       escape old age and death thenceforward and forever, I should       neither press forward myself nor bid you do so, but death in ten       thousand shapes hangs ever over our heads, and no man can elude       him; therefore let us go forward and either win glory for       ourselves, or yield it to another.”

      Glaucus heeded his saying, and the pair forthwith led on the host       of Lycians. Menestheus son of Peteos was dismayed when he saw       them, for it was against his part of the wall that they       came—bringing destruction with them; he looked along the wall for       some chieftain to support his comrades and saw the two Ajaxes,       men ever eager for the fray, and Teucer, who had just come from       his tent, standing near them; but he could not make his voice       heard by shouting to them, so great an uproar was there from       crashing shields and helmets and the battering of gates with a       din which reached the skies. For all the gates had been closed,       and the Trojans were hammering at them to try and break their way       through them. Menestheus, therefore, sent Thootes with a message       to Ajax. “Run, good Thootes,” he said, “and call Ajax, or better       still bid both come, for it will be all over with us here       directly; the leaders of the Lycians are upon us, men who have       ever fought desperately heretofore. But if they have too much on       their hands to let them come, at any rate let Ajax son of Telamon       do so, and let Teucer, the famous bowman, come with him.”

      The messenger did as he was told, and set off running along the       wall of the Achaeans. When he reached the Ajaxes he said to them,       “Sirs, princes of the Argives, the son of noble Peteos bids you       come to him for a while and help him. You had better both come if       you can, or it will be all over with him directly; the leaders of       the Lycians are upon him, men who have ever fought desperately       heretofore; if you have too much on your hands to let both come,       at any rate let Ajax, son of Telamon, do so, and let Teucer, the       famous bowman, come with him.”

      Great Ajax son of Telamon heeded the message, and at once spoke       to the son of Oileus. “Ajax,” said he, “do you two, yourself and       brave Lycomedes, stay here and keep the Danaans in heart to fight       their hardest. I will go over yonder, and bear my part in the       fray, but I will come back here at once as soon as I have given       them the help they need.”

      With this, Ajax son of Telamon set off, and Teucer, his brother       by the same father, went also, with Pandion to carry Teucer’s       bow. They went along inside the wall, and when they came to the       tower where Menestheus was (and hard pressed indeed did they find       him) the brave captains and leaders of the Lycians were storming       the battlements as it were a thick dark cloud, fighting in close       quarters, and raising the battle-cry aloud.

      First, Ajax son of Telamon killed brave Epicles, a comrade of       Sarpedon, hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the       battlements at the very top of the wall. As men now are, even one       who is in the bloom of youth could hardly lift it with his two       hands, but Ajax raised it high aloft and flung it down, smashing       Epicles’ four-crested helmet so that the bones of his head were       crushed to pieces, and he fell from the high wall as though he       were diving, with no more life left in him. Then Teucer wounded       Glaucus the brave son of Hippolochus as he was coming on to       attack the wall. He saw his shoulder bare and aimed an arrow at       it, which made Glaucus leave off fighting. Thereon he sprang       covertly down for fear some of the Achaeans might see that he was       wounded and taunt him. Sarpedon was stung with grief when he saw       Glaucus leave him, still he did not leave off fighting, but aimed       his spear at Alcmaon the son of Thestor and hit him. He drew his       spear back again and Alcmaon came down headlong after it with his       bronzed armour rattling round him. Then Sarpedon seized the       battlement in his strong hands, and tugged at it till it all gave       way together, and a breach was made through which many might       pass.

      Ajax and Teucer then both of them attacked him. Teucer hit him       with an arrow on the band that bore the shield which covered his       body, but Jove saved his son from destruction that he might not       fall by the ships’ sterns. Meanwhile Ajax sprang on him and       pierced his shield, but the spear did not go clean through,       though it hustled him back that he could come on no further. He       therefore retired a little space from the battlement, yet without       losing all his ground, for he still thought to cover himself with       glory. Then he turned round and shouted to the brave Lycians       saying, “Lycians, why do you thus fail me? For all my prowess I       cannot break through the wall and open a way to the ships       single-handed. Come close on behind me, for the more there are of       us the better.”

      The Lycians, shamed by his rebuke, pressed closer round him who       was their counsellor and their king. The Argives on their part       got their men in fighting order within the wall, and there was a       deadly struggle between them. The Lycians could not break through       the wall and force their way to the ships, nor could the Danaans       drive the Lycians from the wall now that they had once reached       it. As two men, measuring-rods in hand, quarrel about their       boundaries in a field that they own in common, and stickle for       their rights though they be but in a mere strip, even so did the       battlements now serve as a bone of contention, and they beat one       another’s round shields for their possession. Many a man’s body       was wounded with the pitiless bronze, as he turned round and       bared his back to the foe, and many were struck clean through       their shields; the wall and battlements were everywhere deluged       with the blood alike of Trojans and of Achaeans. But even so the       Trojans could not rout the Achaeans, who still held on; and as       some honest hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and       sees that the scales be true, for she would gain some pitiful       earnings for her little ones, even so was the fight balanced       evenly between them till the time came when Jove gave the greater       glory to Hector son of Priam, who was first to spring towards the       wall of the Achaeans. When he had done so, he cried aloud to the       Trojans, “Up, Trojans, break the wall of the Argives, and fling       fire upon their ships.”

      Thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight       at the wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements       with sharp spears in their hands. Hector laid hold of a stone       that lay just outside the gates and was thick at one end but       pointed at the other; two of the best men in a town, as men now       are, could hardly raise it from the ground and put it on to a       waggon, but Hector lifted it quite easily by himself, for the son       of scheming Saturn made it light for him. As a shepherd picks up       a ram’s fleece with one hand and finds it no burden, so easily       did Hector lift the great stone and drive it right at the doors       that closed the gates so strong and so firmly set. These doors       were double and high, and were kept closed by two cross-bars to       which there was but one key. When he had got close up to them,       Hector strode towards them that his blow might gain in force and       struck them in the middle, leaning his whole weight against them.       He broke both hinges, and the stone fell inside by reason of its       great weight. The portals re-echoed with the sound, the bars held       no longer, and the doors flew open, one one way, and the other       the other, through the force of the blow. Then brave Hector       leaped inside with a face as dark as that of flying night. The       gleaming bronze flashed fiercely about his body and he had two       spears in his hand. None but a god could have withstood him as he       flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes glared like fire.       Then he turned round towards the Trojans and called on them to       scale the wall, and they did as he bade them—some of them at once       climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates.       The Danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their ships, and all       was uproar and confusion.




BOOK XIII.


      Neptune helps the Achaeans—The feats of Idomeneus—Hector at the       ships.

      Now when Jove had thus brought Hector and the Trojans to the       ships, he left them to their never-ending toil, and turned his       keen eyes away, looking elsewhither towards the horse-breeders of       Thrace, the Mysians, fighters at close quarters, the noble       Hippemolgi, who live on milk, and the Abians, justest of mankind.       He no longer turned so much as a glance towards Troy, for he did       not think that any of the immortals would go and help either       Trojans or Danaans.

      But King Neptune had kept no blind look-out; he had been looking       admiringly on the battle from his seat on the topmost crests of       wooded Samothrace, whence he could see all Ida, with the city of       Priam and the ships of the Achaeans. He had come from under the       sea and taken his place here, for he pitied the Achaeans who were       being overcome by the Trojans; and he was furiously angry with       Jove.

      Presently he came down from his post on the mountain top, and as       he strode swiftly onwards the high hills and the forest quaked       beneath the tread of his immortal feet. Three strides he took,       and with the fourth he reached his goal—Aegae, where is his       glittering golden palace, imperishable, in the depths of the sea.       When he got there, he yoked his fleet brazen-footed steeds with       their manes of gold all flying in the wind; he clothed himself in       raiment of gold, grasped his gold whip, and took his stand upon       his chariot. As he went his way over the waves the sea-monsters       left their lairs, for they knew their lord, and came gambolling       round him from every quarter of the deep, while the sea in her       gladness opened a path before his chariot. So lightly did the       horses fly that the bronze axle of the car was not even wet       beneath it; and thus his bounding steeds took him to the ships of       the Achaeans.

      Now there is a certain huge cavern in the depths of the sea       midway between Tenedos and rocky Imbrus; here Neptune lord of the       earthquake stayed his horses, unyoked them, and set before them       their ambrosial forage. He hobbled their feet with hobbles of       gold which none could either unloose or break, so that they might       stay there in that place until their lord should return. This       done he went his way to the host of the Achaeans.

      Now the Trojans followed Hector son of Priam in close array like       a storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and       raising the cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the       ships of the Achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and       there. Meanwhile earth-encircling Neptune lord of the earthquake       cheered on the Argives, for he had come up out of the sea and had       assumed the form and voice of Calchas.

      First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, who were doing their best       already, and said, “Ajaxes, you two can be the saving of the       Achaeans if you will put out all your strength and not let       yourselves be daunted. I am not afraid that the Trojans, who have       got over the wall in force, will be victorious in any other part,       for the Achaeans can hold all of them in check, but I much fear       that some evil will befall us here where furious Hector, who       boasts himself the son of great Jove himself, is leading them on       like a pillar of flame. May some god, then, put it into your       hearts to make a firm stand here, and to incite others to do the       like. In this case you will drive him from the ships even though       he be inspired by Jove himself.”

      As he spoke the earth-encircling lord of the earthquake struck       both of them with his sceptre and filled their hearts with       daring. He made their legs light and active, as also their hands       and their feet. Then, as the soaring falcon poises on the wing       high above some sheer rock, and presently swoops down to chase       some bird over the plain, even so did Neptune lord of the       earthquake wing his flight into the air and leave them. Of the       two, swift Ajax son of Oileus was the first to know who it was       that had been speaking with them, and said to Ajax son of       Telamon, “Ajax, this is one of the gods that dwell on Olympus,       who in the likeness of the prophet is bidding us fight hard by       our ships. It was not Calchas the seer and diviner of omens; I       knew him at once by his feet and knees as he turned away, for the       gods are soon recognised. Moreover I feel the lust of battle burn       more fiercely within me, while my hands and my feet under me are       more eager for the fray.”

      And Ajax son of Telamon answered, “I too feel my hands grasp my       spear more firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more       nimble; I long, moreover, to meet furious Hector son of Priam,       even in single combat.”

      Thus did they converse, exulting in the hunger after battle with       which the god had filled them. Meanwhile the earth-encircler       roused the Achaeans, who were resting in the rear by the ships       overcome at once by hard fighting and by grief at seeing that the       Trojans had got over the wall in force. Tears began falling from       their eyes as they beheld them, for they made sure that they       should not escape destruction; but the lord of the earthquake       passed lightly about among them and urged their battalions to the       front.

      First he went up to Teucer and Leitus, the hero Peneleos, and       Thoas and Deipyrus; Meriones also and Antilochus, valiant       warriors; all did he exhort. “Shame on you young Argives,” he       cried, “it was on your prowess I relied for the saving of our       ships; if you fight not with might and main, this very day will       see us overcome by the Trojans. Of a truth my eyes behold a great       and terrible portent which I had never thought to see—the Trojans       at our ships—they, who were heretofore like panic-stricken hinds,       the prey of jackals and wolves in a forest, with no strength but       in flight for they cannot defend themselves. Hitherto the Trojans       dared not for one moment face the attack of the Achaeans, but now       they have sallied far from their city and are fighting at our       very ships through the cowardice of our leader and the       disaffection of the people themselves, who in their discontent       care not to fight in defence of the ships but are being       slaughtered near them. True, King Agamemnon son of Atreus is the       cause of our disaster by having insulted the son of Peleus, still       this is no reason why we should leave off fighting. Let us be       quick to heal, for the hearts of the brave heal quickly. You do       ill to be thus remiss, you, who are the finest soldiers in our       whole army. I blame no man for keeping out of battle if he is a       weakling, but I am indignant with such men as you are. My good       friends, matters will soon become even worse through this       slackness; think, each one of you, of his own honour and credit,       for the hazard of the fight is extreme. Great Hector is now       fighting at our ships; he has broken through the gates and the       strong bolt that held them.”

      Thus did the earth-encircler address the Achaeans and urge them       on. Thereon round the two Ajaxes there gathered strong bands of       men, of whom not even Mars nor Minerva, marshaller of hosts could       make light if they went among them, for they were the picked men       of all those who were now awaiting the onset of Hector and the       Trojans. They made a living fence, spear to spear, shield to       shield, buckler to buckler, helmet to helmet, and man to man. The       horse-hair crests on their gleaming helmets touched one another       as they nodded forward, so closely serried were they; the spears       they brandished in their strong hands were interlaced, and their       hearts were set on battle.

      The Trojans advanced in a dense body, with Hector at their head       pressing right on as a rock that comes thundering down the side       of some mountain from whose brow the winter torrents have torn       it; the foundations of the dull thing have been loosened by       floods of rain, and as it bounds headlong on its way it sets the       whole forest in an uproar; it swerves neither to right nor left       till it reaches level ground, but then for all its fury it can go       no further—even so easily did Hector for a while seem as though       he would career through the tents and ships of the Achaeans till       he had reached the sea in his murderous course; but the closely       serried battalions stayed him when he reached them, for the sons       of the Achaeans thrust at him with swords and spears pointed at       both ends, and drove him from them so that he staggered and gave       ground; thereon he shouted to the Trojans, “Trojans, Lycians, and       Dardanians, fighters in close combat, stand firm: the Achaeans       have set themselves as a wall against me, but they will not check       me for long; they will give ground before me if the mightiest of       the gods, the thundering spouse of Juno, has indeed inspired my       onset.”

      With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Deiphobus       son of Priam went about among them intent on deeds of daring with       his round shield before him, under cover of which he strode       quickly forward. Meriones took aim at him with a spear, nor did       he fail to hit the broad orb of ox-hide; but he was far from       piercing it for the spear broke in two pieces long ere he could       do so; moreover Deiphobus had seen it coming and had held his       shield well away from him. Meriones drew back under cover of his       comrades, angry alike at having failed to vanquish Deiphobus, and       having broken his spear. He turned therefore towards the ships       and tents to fetch a spear which he had left behind in his tent.

      The others continued fighting, and the cry of battle rose up into       the heavens. Teucer son of Telamon was the first to kill his man,       to wit, the warrior Imbrius, son of Mentor, rich in horses. Until       the Achaeans came he had lived in Pedaeum, and had married       Medesicaste, a bastard daughter of Priam; but on the arrival of       the Danaan fleet he had gone back to Ilius, and was a great man       among the Trojans, dwelling near Priam himself, who gave him like       honour with his own sons. The son of Telamon now struck him under       the ear with a spear which he then drew back again, and Imbrius       fell headlong as an ash-tree when it is felled on the crest of       some high mountain beacon, and its delicate green foliage comes       toppling down to the ground. Thus did he fall with his       bronze-dight armour ringing harshly round him, and Teucer sprang       forward with intent to strip him of his armour; but as he was       doing so, Hector took aim at him with a spear. Teucer saw the       spear coming and swerved aside, whereon it hit Amphimachus, son       of Cteatus son of Actor, in the chest as he was coming into       battle, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily       to the ground. Hector sprang forward to take Amphimachus’s helmet       from off his temples, and in a moment Ajax threw a spear at him,       but did not wound him, for he was encased all over in his       terrible armour; nevertheless the spear struck the boss of his       shield with such force as to drive him back from the two corpses,       which the Achaeans then drew off. Stichius and Menestheus,       captains of the Athenians, bore away Amphimachus to the host of       the Achaeans, while the two brave and impetuous Ajaxes did the       like by Imbrius. As two lions snatch a goat from the hounds that       have it in their fangs, and bear it through thick brushwood high       above the ground in their jaws, thus did the Ajaxes bear aloft       the body of Imbrius, and strip it of its armour. Then the son of       Oileus severed the head from the neck in revenge for the death of       Amphimachus, and sent it whirling over the crowd as though it had       been a ball, till it fell in the dust at Hector’s feet.

      Neptune was exceedingly angry that his grandson Amphimachus       should have fallen; he therefore went to the tents and ships of       the Achaeans to urge the Danaans still further, and to devise       evil for the Trojans. Idomeneus met him, as he was taking leave       of a comrade, who had just come to him from the fight, wounded in       the knee. His fellow-soldiers bore him off the field, and       Idomeneus having given orders to the physicians went on to his       tent, for he was still thirsting for battle. Neptune spoke in the       likeness and with the voice of Thoas son of Andraemon who ruled       the Aetolians of all Pleuron and high Calydon, and was honoured       among his people as though he were a god. “Idomeneus,” said he,       “lawgiver to the Cretans, what has now become of the threats with       which the sons of the Achaeans used to threaten the Trojans?”

      And Idomeneus chief among the Cretans answered, “Thoas, no one,       so far as I know, is in fault, for we can all fight. None are       held back neither by fear nor slackness, but it seems to be the       will of almighty Jove that the Achaeans should perish       ingloriously here far from Argos: you, Thoas, have been always       staunch, and you keep others in heart if you see any fail in       duty; be not then remiss now, but exhort all to do their utmost.”

      To this Neptune lord of the earthquake made answer, “Idomeneus,       may he never return from Troy, but remain here for dogs to batten       upon, who is this day wilfully slack in fighting. Get your armour       and go, we must make all haste together if we may be of any use,       though we are only two. Even cowards gain courage from       companionship, and we two can hold our own with the bravest.”

      Therewith the god went back into the thick of the fight, and       Idomeneus when he had reached his tent donned his armour, grasped       his two spears, and sallied forth. As the lightning which the son       of Saturn brandishes from bright Olympus when he would show a       sign to mortals, and its gleam flashes far and wide—even so did       his armour gleam about him as he ran. Meriones his sturdy squire       met him while he was still near his tent (for he was going to       fetch his spear) and Idomeneus said:

      “Meriones, fleet son of Molus, best of comrades, why have you       left the field? Are you wounded, and is the point of the weapon       hurting you? or have you been sent to fetch me? I want no       fetching; I had far rather fight than stay in my tent.”

      “Idomeneus,” answered Meriones, “I come for a spear, if I can       find one in my tent; I have broken the one I had, in throwing it       at the shield of Deiphobus.”

      And Idomeneus captain of the Cretans answered, “You will find one       spear, or twenty if you so please, standing up against the end       wall of my tent. I have taken them from Trojans whom I have       killed, for I am not one to keep my enemy at arm’s length;       therefore I have spears, bossed shields, helmets, and burnished       corslets.”

      Then Meriones said, “I too in my tent and at my ship have spoils       taken from the Trojans, but they are not at hand. I have been at       all times valorous, and wherever there has been hard fighting       have held my own among the foremost. There may be those among the       Achaeans who do not know how I fight, but you know it well enough       yourself.”

      Idomeneus answered, “I know you for a brave man: you need not       tell me. If the best men at the ships were being chosen to go on       an ambush—and there is nothing like this for showing what a man       is made of; it comes out then who is cowardly and who brave; the       coward will change colour at every touch and turn; he is full of       fears, and keeps shifting his weight first on one knee and then       on the other; his heart beats fast as he thinks of death, and one       can hear the chattering of his teeth; whereas the brave man will       not change colour nor be frightened on finding himself in ambush,       but is all the time longing to go into action—if the best men       were being chosen for such a service, no one could make light of       your courage nor feats of arms. If you were struck by a dart or       smitten in close combat, it would not be from behind, in your       neck nor back, but the weapon would hit you in the chest or belly       as you were pressing forward to a place in the front ranks. But       let us no longer stay here talking like children, lest we be ill       spoken of; go, fetch your spear from the tent at once.”

      On this Meriones, peer of Mars, went to the tent and got himself       a spear of bronze. He then followed after Idomeneus, big with       great deeds of valour. As when baneful Mars sallies forth to       battle, and his son Panic so strong and dauntless goes with him,       to strike terror even into the heart of a hero—the pair have gone       from Thrace to arm themselves among the Ephyri or the brave       Phlegyans, but they will not listen to both the contending hosts,       and will give victory to one side or to the other—even so did       Meriones and Idomeneus, captains of men, go out to battle clad in       their bronze armour. Meriones was first to speak. “Son of       Deucalion,” said he, “where would you have us begin fighting? On       the right wing of the host, in the centre, or on the left wing,       where I take it the Achaeans will be weakest?”

      Idomeneus answered, “There are others to defend the centre—the       two Ajaxes and Teucer, who is the finest archer of all the       Achaeans, and is good also in a hand-to-hand fight. These will       give Hector son of Priam enough to do; fight as he may, he will       find it hard to vanquish their indomitable fury, and fire the       ships, unless the son of Saturn fling a firebrand upon them with       his own hand. Great Ajax son of Telamon will yield to no man who       is in mortal mould and eats the grain of Ceres, if bronze and       great stones can overthrow him. He would not yield even to       Achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is       none to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing,       that we may know forthwith whether we are to give glory to some       other, or he to us.”

      Meriones, peer of fleet Mars, then led the way till they came to       the part of the host which Idomeneus had named.

      Now when the Trojans saw Idomeneus coming on like a flame of       fire, him and his squire clad in their richly wrought armour,       they shouted and made towards him all in a body, and a furious       hand-to-hand fight raged under the ships’ sterns. Fierce as the       shrill winds that whistle upon a day when dust lies deep on the       roads, and the gusts raise it into a thick cloud—even such was       the fury of the combat, and might and main did they hack at each       other with spear and sword throughout the host. The field       bristled with the long and deadly spears which they bore.       Dazzling was the sheen of their gleaming helmets, their       fresh-burnished breastplates, and glittering shields as they       joined battle with one another. Iron indeed must be his courage       who could take pleasure in the sight of such a turmoil, and look       on it without being dismayed.

      Thus did the two mighty sons of Saturn devise evil for mortal       heroes. Jove was minded to give victory to the Trojans and to       Hector, so as to do honour to fleet Achilles, nevertheless he did       not mean to utterly overthrow the Achaean host before Ilius, and       only wanted to glorify Thetis and her valiant son. Neptune on the       other hand went about among the Argives to incite them, having       come up from the grey sea in secret, for he was grieved at seeing       them vanquished by the Trojans, and was furiously angry with       Jove. Both were of the same race and country, but Jove was elder       born and knew more, therefore Neptune feared to defend the       Argives openly, but in the likeness of man, he kept on       encouraging them throughout their host. Thus, then, did these two       devise a knot of war and battle, that none could unloose or       break, and set both sides tugging at it, to the failing of men’s       knees beneath them.

      And now Idomeneus, though his hair was already flecked with grey,       called loud on the Danaans and spread panic among the Trojans as       he leaped in among them. He slew Othryoneus from Cabesus, a       sojourner, who had but lately come to take part in the war. He       sought Cassandra, the fairest of Priam’s daughters, in marriage,       but offered no gifts of wooing, for he promised a great thing, to       wit, that he would drive the sons of the Achaeans willy nilly       from Troy; old King Priam had given his consent and promised her       to him, whereon he fought on the strength of the promises thus       made to him. Idomeneus aimed a spear, and hit him as he came       striding on. His cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and the       spear stuck in his belly, so that he fell heavily to the ground.       Then Idomeneus vaunted over him saying, “Othryoneus, there is no       one in the world whom I shall admire more than I do you, if you       indeed perform what you have promised Priam son of Dardanus in       return for his daughter. We too will make you an offer; we will       give you the loveliest daughter of the son of Atreus, and will       bring her from Argos for you to marry, if you will sack the       goodly city of Ilius in company with ourselves; so come along       with me, that we may make a covenant at the ships about the       marriage, and we will not be hard upon you about gifts of       wooing.”

      With this Idomeneus began dragging him by the foot through the       thick of the fight, but Asius came up to protect the body, on       foot, in front of his horses which his esquire drove so close       behind him that he could feel their breath upon his shoulder. He       was longing to strike down Idomeneus, but ere he could do so       Idomeneus smote him with his spear in the throat under the chin,       and the bronze point went clean through it. He fell as an oak, or       poplar, or pine which shipwrights have felled for ship’s timber       upon the mountains with whetted axes—even thus did he lie full       length in front of his chariot and horses, grinding his teeth and       clutching at the blood-stained dust. His charioteer was struck       with panic and did not dare turn his horses round and escape:       thereupon Antilochus hit him in the middle of his body with a       spear; his cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and the spear       stuck in his belly. He fell gasping from his chariot and       Antilochus, great Nestor’s son, drove his horses from the Trojans       to the Achaeans.

      Deiphobus then came close up to Idomeneus to avenge Asius, and       took aim at him with a spear, but Idomeneus was on the look-out       and avoided it, for he was covered by the round shield he always       bore—a shield of ox-hide and bronze with two arm-rods on the       inside. He crouched under cover of this, and the spear flew over       him, but the shield rang out as the spear grazed it, and the       weapon sped not in vain from the strong hand of Deiphobus, for it       struck Hypsenor son of Hippasus, shepherd of his people, in the       liver under the midriff, and his limbs failed beneath him.       Deiphobus vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying,       “Of a truth Asius has not fallen unavenged; he will be glad even       while passing into the house of Hades, strong warden of the gate,       that I have sent some one to escort him.”

      Thus did he vaunt, and the Argives were stung by his saying.       Noble Antilochus was more angry than any one, but grief did not       make him forget his friend and comrade. He ran up to him,       bestrode him, and covered him with his shield; then two of his       staunch comrades, Mecisteus son of Echius, and Alastor, stooped       down, and bore him away groaning heavily to the ships. But       Idomeneus ceased not his fury. He kept on striving continually       either to enshroud some Trojan in the darkness of death, or       himself to fall while warding off the evil day from the Achaeans.       Then fell Alcathous son of noble Aesyetes; he was son-in-law to       Anchises, having married his eldest daughter Hippodameia, who was       the darling of her father and mother, and excelled all her       generation in beauty, accomplishments, and understanding,       wherefore the bravest man in all Troy had taken her to wife—him       did Neptune lay low by the hand of Idomeneus, blinding his bright       eyes and binding his strong limbs in fetters so that he could       neither go back nor to one side, but stood stock still like       pillar or lofty tree when Idomeneus struck him with a spear in       the middle of his chest. The coat of mail that had hitherto       protected his body was now broken, and rang harshly as the spear       tore through it. He fell heavily to the ground, and the spear       stuck in his heart, which still beat, and made the butt-end of       the spear quiver till dread Mars put an end to his life.       Idomeneus vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying,       “Deiphobus, since you are in a mood to vaunt, shall we cry quits       now that we have killed three men to your one? Nay, sir, stand in       fight with me yourself, that you may learn what manner of       Jove-begotten man am I that have come hither. Jove first begot       Minos, chief ruler in Crete, and Minos in his turn begot a son,       noble Deucalion. Deucalion begot me to be a ruler over many men       in Crete, and my ships have now brought me hither, to be the bane       of yourself, your father, and the Trojans.”

      Thus did he speak, and Deiphobus was in two minds, whether to go       back and fetch some other Trojan to help him, or to take up the       challenge single-handed. In the end, he deemed it best to go and       fetch Aeneas, whom he found standing in the rear, for he had long       been aggrieved with Priam because in spite of his brave deeds he       did not give him his due share of honour. Deiphobus went up to       him and said, “Aeneas, prince among the Trojans, if you know any       ties of kinship, help me now to defend the body of your sister’s       husband; come with me to the rescue of Alcathous, who being       husband to your sister brought you up when you were a child in       his house, and now Idomeneus has slain him.”

      With these words he moved the heart of Aeneas, and he went in       pursuit of Idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour; but       Idomeneus was not to be thus daunted as though he were a mere       child; he held his ground as a wild boar at bay upon the       mountains, who abides the coming of a great crowd of men in some       lonely place—the bristles stand upright on his back, his eyes       flash fire, and he whets his tusks in his eagerness to defend       himself against hounds and men—even so did famed Idomeneus hold       his ground and budge not at the coming of Aeneas. He cried aloud       to his comrades looking towards Ascalaphus, Aphareus, Deipyrus,       Meriones, and Antilochus, all of them brave soldiers—“Hither my       friends,” he cried, “and leave me not single-handed—I go in great       fear by fleet Aeneas, who is coming against me, and is a       redoubtable dispenser of death battle. Moreover he is in the       flower of youth when a man’s strength is greatest; if I was of       the same age as he is and in my present mind, either he or I       should soon bear away the prize of victory.”

      On this, all of them as one man stood near him, shield on       shoulder. Aeneas on the other side called to his comrades,       looking towards Deiphobus, Paris, and Agenor, who were leaders of       the Trojans along with himself, and the people followed them as       sheep follow the ram when they go down to drink after they have       been feeding, and the heart of the shepherd is glad—even so was       the heart of Aeneas gladdened when he saw his people follow him.

      Then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of       Alcathous, wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour       about their bodies rang fearfully as they took aim at one another       in the press of the fight, while the two heroes Aeneas and       Idomeneus, peers of Mars, outvied everyone in their desire to       hack at each other with sword and spear. Aeneas took aim first,       but Idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided the spear, so that       it sped from Aeneas’ strong hand in vain, and fell quivering in       the ground. Idomeneus meanwhile smote Oenomaus in the middle of       his belly, and broke the plate of his corslet, whereon his bowels       came gushing out and he clutched the earth in the palms of his       hands as he fell sprawling in the dust. Idomeneus drew his spear       out of the body, but could not strip him of the rest of his       armour for the rain of darts that were showered upon him:       moreover his strength was now beginning to fail him so that he       could no longer charge, and could neither spring forward to       recover his own weapon nor swerve aside to avoid one that was       aimed at him; therefore, though he still defended himself in       hand-to-hand fight, his heavy feet could not bear him swiftly out       of the battle. Deiphobus aimed a spear at him as he was       retreating slowly from the field, for his bitterness against him       was as fierce as ever, but again he missed him, and hit       Ascalaphus, the son of Mars; the spear went through his shoulder,       and he clutched the earth in the palms of his hands as he fell       sprawling in the dust.

      Grim Mars of awful voice did not yet know that his son had       fallen, for he was sitting on the summits of Olympus under the       golden clouds, by command of Jove, where the other gods were also       sitting, forbidden to take part in the battle. Meanwhile men       fought furiously about the body. Deiphobus tore the helmet from       off his head, but Meriones sprang upon him, and struck him on the       arm with a spear so that the visored helmet fell from his hand       and came ringing down upon the ground. Thereon Meriones sprang       upon him like a vulture, drew the spear from his shoulder, and       fell back under cover of his men. Then Polites, own brother of       Deiphobus passed his arms around his waist, and bore him away       from the battle till he got to his horses that were standing in       the rear of the fight with the chariot and their driver. These       took him towards the city groaning and in great pain, with the       blood flowing from his arm.

      The others still fought on, and the battle-cry rose to heaven       without ceasing. Aeneas sprang on Aphareus son of Caletor, and       struck him with a spear in his throat which was turned towards       him; his head fell on one side, his helmet and shield came down       along with him, and death, life’s foe, was shed around him.       Antilochus spied his chance, flew forward towards Thoon, and       wounded him as he was turning round. He laid open the vein that       runs all the way up the back to the neck; he cut this vein clean       away throughout its whole course, and Thoon fell in the dust face       upwards, stretching out his hands imploringly towards his       comrades. Antilochus sprang upon him and stripped the armour from       his shoulders, glaring round him fearfully as he did so. The       Trojans came about him on every side and struck his broad and       gleaming shield, but could not wound his body, for Neptune stood       guard over the son of Nestor, though the darts fell thickly round       him. He was never clear of the foe, but was always in the thick       of the fight; his spear was never idle; he poised and aimed it in       every direction, so eager was he to hit someone from a distance       or to fight him hand to hand.

      As he was thus aiming among the crowd, he was seen by Adamas, son       of Asius, who rushed towards him and struck him with a spear in       the middle of his shield, but Neptune made its point without       effect, for he grudged him the life of Antilochus. One half,       therefore, of the spear stuck fast like a charred stake in       Antilochus’s shield, while the other lay on the ground. Adamas       then sought shelter under cover of his men, but Meriones followed       after and hit him with a spear midway between the private parts       and the navel, where a wound is particularly painful to wretched       mortals. There did Meriones transfix him, and he writhed       convulsively about the spear as some bull whom mountain herdsmen       have bound with ropes of withes and are taking away perforce.       Even so did he move convulsively for a while, but not for very       long, till Meriones came up and drew the spear out of his body,       and his eyes were veiled in darkness.

      Helenus then struck Deipyrus with a great Thracian sword, hitting       him on the temple in close combat and tearing the helmet from his       head; the helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were       fighting on the Achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at       his feet, but the eyes of Deipyrus were closed in the darkness of       death.

      On this Menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards       Helenus, brandishing his spear; but Helenus drew his bow, and the       two attacked one another at one and the same moment, the one with       his spear, and the other with his bow and arrow. The son of Priam       hit the breastplate of Menelaus’s corslet, but the arrow glanced       from off it. As black beans or pulse come pattering down on to a       threshing-floor from the broad winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill       winds and shaken by the shovel—even so did the arrow glance off       and recoil from the shield of Menelaus, who in his turn wounded       the hand with which Helenus carried his bow; the spear went right       through his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that to his life       he retreated under cover of his men, with his hand dragging by       his side—for the spear weighed it down till Agenor drew it out       and bound the hand carefully up in a woollen sling which his       esquire had with him.

      Pisander then made straight at Menelaus—his evil destiny luring       him on to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, O       Menelaus. When the two were hard by one another the spear of the       son of Atreus turned aside and he missed his aim; Pisander then       struck the shield of brave Menelaus but could not pierce it, for       the shield stayed the spear and broke the shaft; nevertheless he       was glad and made sure of victory; forthwith, however, the son of       Atreus drew his sword and sprang upon him. Pisander then seized       the bronze battle-axe, with its long and polished handle of olive       wood that hung by his side under his shield, and the two made at       one another. Pisander struck the peak of Menelaus’s crested       helmet just under the crest itself, and Menelaus hit Pisander as       he was coming towards him, on the forehead, just at the rise of       his nose; the bones cracked and his two gore-bedrabbled eyes fell       by his feet in the dust. He fell backwards to the ground, and       Menelaus set his heel upon him, stripped him of his armour, and       vaunted over him saying, “Even thus shall you Trojans leave the       ships of the Achaeans, proud and insatiate of battle though you       be, nor shall you lack any of the disgrace and shame which you       have heaped upon myself. Cowardly she-wolves that you are, you       feared not the anger of dread Jove, avenger of violated       hospitality, who will one day destroy your city; you stole my       wedded wife and wickedly carried off much treasure when you were       her guest, and now you would fling fire upon our ships, and kill       our heroes. A day will come when, rage as you may, you shall be       stayed. O father Jove, you, who they say art above all, both gods       and men, in wisdom, and from whom all things that befall us do       proceed, how can you thus favour the Trojans—men so proud and       overweening, that they are never tired of fighting? All things       pall after a while—sleep, love, sweet song, and stately       dance—still these are things of which a man would surely have his       fill rather than of battle, whereas it is of battle that the       Trojans are insatiate.”

      So saying Menelaus stripped the blood-stained armour from the       body of Pisander, and handed it over to his men; then he again       ranged himself among those who were in the front of the fight.

      Harpalion son of King Pylaemenes then sprang upon him; he had       come to fight at Troy along with his father, but he did not go       home again. He struck the middle of Menelaus’s shield with his       spear but could not pierce it, and to save his life drew back       under cover of his men, looking round him on every side lest he       should be wounded. But Meriones aimed a bronze-tipped arrow at       him as he was leaving the field, and hit him on the right       buttock; the arrow pierced the bone through and through, and       penetrated the bladder, so he sat down where he was and breathed       his last in the arms of his comrades, stretched like a worm upon       the ground and watering the earth with the blood that flowed from       his wound. The brave Paphlagonians tended him with all due care;       they raised him into his chariot, and bore him sadly off to the       city of Troy; his father went also with him weeping bitterly, but       there was no ransom that could bring his dead son to life again.

      Paris was deeply grieved by the death of Harpalion, who was his       host when he went among the Paphlagonians; he aimed an arrow,       therefore, in order to avenge him. Now there was a certain man       named Euchenor, son of Polyidus the prophet, a brave man and       wealthy, whose home was in Corinth. This Euchenor had set sail       for Troy well knowing that it would be the death of him, for his       good old father Polyidus had often told him that he must either       stay at home and die of a terrible disease, or go with the       Achaeans and perish at the hands of the Trojans; he chose,       therefore, to avoid incurring the heavy fine the Achaeans would       have laid upon him, and at the same time to escape the pain and       suffering of disease. Paris now smote him on the jaw under his       ear, whereon the life went out of him and he was enshrouded in       the darkness of death.

      Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. But Hector       had not yet heard, and did not know that the Argives were making       havoc of his men on the left wing of the battle, where the       Achaeans ere long would have triumphed over them, so vigorously       did Neptune cheer them on and help them. He therefore held on at       the point where he had first forced his way through the gates and       the wall, after breaking through the serried ranks of Danaan       warriors. It was here that the ships of Ajax and Protesilaus were       drawn up by the sea-shore; here the wall was at its lowest, and       the fight both of man and horse raged most fiercely. The       Boeotians and the Ionians with their long tunics, the Locrians,       the men of Phthia, and the famous force of the Epeans could       hardly stay Hector as he rushed on towards the ships, nor could       they drive him from them, for he was as a wall of fire. The       chosen men of the Athenians were in the van, led by Menestheus       son of Peteos, with whom were also Pheidas, Stichius, and       stalwart Bias; Meges son of Phyleus, Amphion, and Dracius       commanded the Epeans, while Medon and staunch Podarces led the       men of Phthia. Of these, Medon was bastard son to Oileus and       brother of Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from his own       country, for he had killed the brother of his stepmother Eriopis,       the wife of Oileus; the other, Podarces, was the son of Iphiclus,       son of Phylacus. These two stood in the van of the Phthians, and       defended the ships along with the Boeotians.

      Ajax son of Oileus, never for a moment left the side of Ajax, son       of Telamon, but as two swart oxen both strain their utmost at the       plough which they are drawing in a fallow field, and the sweat       steams upwards from about the roots of their horns—nothing but       the yoke divides them as they break up the ground till they reach       the end of the field—even so did the two Ajaxes stand shoulder to       shoulder by one another. Many and brave comrades followed the son       of Telamon, to relieve him of his shield when he was overcome       with sweat and toil, but the Locrians did not follow so close       after the son of Oileus, for they could not hold their own in a       hand-to-hand fight. They had no bronze helmets with plumes of       horse-hair, neither had they shields nor ashen spears, but they       had come to Troy armed with bows, and with slings of twisted wool       from which they showered their missiles to break the ranks of the       Trojans. The others, therefore, with their heavy armour bore the       brunt of the fight with the Trojans and with Hector, while the       Locrians shot from behind, under their cover; and thus the       Trojans began to lose heart, for the arrows threw them into       confusion.

      The Trojans would now have been driven in sorry plight from the       ships and tents back to windy Ilius, had not Polydamas presently       said to Hector, “Hector, there is no persuading you to take       advice. Because heaven has so richly endowed you with the arts of       war, you think that you must therefore excel others in counsel;       but you cannot thus claim preeminence in all things. Heaven has       made one man an excellent soldier; of another it has made a       dancer or a singer and player on the lyre; while yet in another       Jove has implanted a wise understanding of which men reap fruit       to the saving of many, and he himself knows more about it than       any one; therefore I will say what I think will be best. The       fight has hemmed you in as with a circle of fire, and even now       that the Trojans are within the wall some of them stand aloof in       full armour, while others are fighting scattered and outnumbered       near the ships. Draw back, therefore, and call your chieftains       round you, that we may advise together whether to fall now upon       the ships in the hope that heaven may vouchsafe us victory, or to       beat a retreat while we can yet safely do so. I greatly fear that       the Achaeans will pay us their debt of yesterday in full, for       there is one abiding at their ships who is never weary of battle,       and who will not hold aloof much longer.”

      Thus spoke Polydamas, and his words pleased Hector well. He       sprang in full armour from his chariot and said, “Polydamas,       gather the chieftains here; I will go yonder into the fight, but       will return at once when I have given them their orders.”

      He then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a       loud cry flew through the ranks of the Trojans and their allies.       When they heard his voice they all hastened to gather round       Polydamas, the excellent son of Panthous, but Hector kept on       among the foremost, looking everywhere to find Deiphobus and       prince Helenus, Adamas son of Asius, and Asius son of Hyrtacus;       living, indeed, and scatheless he could no longer find them, for       the two last were lying by the sterns of the Achaean ships, slain       by the Argives, while the others had been also stricken and       wounded by them; but upon the left wing of the dread battle he       found Alexandrus, husband of lovely Helen, cheering his men and       urging them on to fight. He went up to him and upbraided him.       “Paris,” said he, “evil-hearted Paris, fair to see but woman-mad       and false of tongue, where are Deiphobus and King Helenus? Where       are Adamas son of Asius, and Asius son of Hyrtacus? Where too is       Othryoneus? Ilius is undone and will now surely fall!”

      Alexandrus answered, “Hector, why find fault when there is no one       to find fault with? I should hold aloof from battle on any day       rather than this, for my mother bore me with nothing of the       coward about me. From the moment when you set our men fighting       about the ships we have been staying here and doing battle with       the Danaans. Our comrades about whom you ask me are dead;       Deiphobus and King Helenus alone have left the field, wounded       both of them in the hand, but the son of Saturn saved them alive.       Now, therefore, lead on where you would have us go, and we will       follow with right goodwill; you shall not find us fail you in so       far as our strength holds out, but no man can do more than in him       lies, no matter how willing he may be.”

      With these words he satisfied his brother, and the two went       towards the part of the battle where the fight was thickest,       about Cebriones, brave Polydamas, Phalces, Orthaeus, godlike       Polyphetes, Palmys, Ascanius, and Morys son of Hippotion, who had       come from fertile Ascania on the preceding day to relieve other       troops. Then Jove urged them on to fight. They flew forth like       the blasts of some fierce wind that strike earth in the van of a       thunderstorm—they buffet the salt sea into an uproar; many and       mighty are the great waves that come crashing in one after the       other upon the shore with their arching heads all crested with       foam—even so did rank behind rank of Trojans arrayed in gleaming       armour follow their leaders onward. The way was led by Hector son       of Priam, peer of murderous Mars, with his round shield before       him—his shield of ox-hides covered with plates of bronze—and his       gleaming helmet upon his temples. He kept stepping forward under       cover of his shield in every direction, making trial of the ranks       to see if they would give way before him, but he could not daunt       the courage of the Achaeans. Ajax was the first to stride out and       challenge him. “Sir,” he cried, “draw near; why do you think thus       vainly to dismay the Argives? We Achaeans are excellent soldiers,       but the scourge of Jove has fallen heavily upon us. Your heart,       forsooth, is set on destroying our ships, but we too have hands       that can keep you at bay, and your own fair town shall be sooner       taken and sacked by ourselves. The time is near when you shall       pray Jove and all the gods in your flight, that your steeds may       be swifter than hawks as they raise the dust on the plain and       bear you back to your city.”

      As he was thus speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand, and       the host of the Achaeans shouted, for they took heart at the       omen. But Hector answered, “Ajax, braggart and false of tongue,       would that I were as sure of being son for evermore to       aegis-bearing Jove, with Queen Juno for my mother, and of being       held in like honour with Minerva and Apollo, as I am that this       day is big with the destruction of the Achaeans; and you shall       fall among them if you dare abide my spear; it shall rend your       fair body and bid you glut our hounds and birds of prey with your       fat and your flesh, as you fall by the ships of the Achaeans.”

      With these words he led the way and the others followed after       with a cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them.       The Argives on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they       forget their prowess, but stood firm against the onslaught of the       Trojan chieftains, and the cry from both the hosts rose up to       heaven and to the brightness of Jove’s presence.




BOOK XIV.


      Agamemnon proposes that the Achaeans should sail home, and is       rebuked by Ulysses—Juno beguiles Jupiter—Hector is wounded.

      Nestor was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not       escape him, and he said to the son of Aesculapius, “What, noble       Machaon, is the meaning of all this? The shouts of men fighting       by our ships grow stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore,       and sit over your wine, while fair Hecamede heats you a bath and       washes the clotted blood from off you. I will go at once to the       look-out station and see what it is all about.”

      As he spoke he took up the shield of his son Thrasymedes that was       lying in his tent, all gleaming with bronze, for Thrasymedes had       taken his father’s shield; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod       spear, and as soon as he was outside saw the disastrous rout of       the Achaeans who, now that their wall was overthrown, were flying       pell-mell before the Trojans. As when there is a heavy swell upon       the sea, but the waves are dumb—they keep their eyes on the watch       for the quarter whence the fierce winds may spring upon them, but       they stay where they are and set neither this way nor that, till       some particular wind sweeps down from heaven to determine       them—even so did the old man ponder whether to make for the crowd       of Danaans, or go in search of Agamemnon. In the end he deemed it       best to go to the son of Atreus; but meanwhile the hosts were       fighting and killing one another, and the hard bronze rattled on       their bodies, as they thrust at one another with their swords and       spears.

      The wounded kings, the son of Tydeus, Ulysses, and Agamemnon son       of Atreus, fell in with Nestor as they were coming up from their       ships—for theirs were drawn up some way from where the fighting       was going on, being on the shore itself inasmuch as they had been       beached first, while the wall had been built behind the       hindermost. The stretch of the shore, wide though it was, did not       afford room for all the ships, and the host was cramped for       space, therefore they had placed the ships in rows one behind the       other, and had filled the whole opening of the bay between the       two points that formed it. The kings, leaning on their spears,       were coming out to survey the fight, being in great anxiety, and       when old Nestor met them they were filled with dismay. Then King       Agamemnon said to him, “Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the       Achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? I fear       that what dread Hector said will come true, when he vaunted among       the Trojans saying that he would not return to Ilius till he had       fired our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it       is all coming true. Alas! others of the Achaeans, like Achilles,       are in such anger with me that they refuse to fight by the sterns       of our ships.”

      Then Nestor knight of Gerene, answered, “It is indeed as you say;       it is all coming true at this moment, and even Jove who thunders       from on high cannot prevent it. Fallen is the wall on which we       relied as an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet. The       Trojans are fighting stubbornly and without ceasing at the ships;       look where you may you cannot see from what quarter the rout of       the Achaeans is coming; they are being killed in a confused mass       and the battle-cry ascends to heaven; let us think, if counsel       can be of any use, what we had better do; but I do not advise our       going into battle ourselves, for a man cannot fight when he is       wounded.”

      And King Agamemnon answered, “Nestor, if the Trojans are indeed       fighting at the rear of our ships, and neither the wall nor the       trench has served us—over which the Danaans toiled so hard, and       which they deemed would be an impregnable bulwark both for us and       our fleet—I see it must be the will of Jove that the Achaeans       should perish ingloriously here, far from Argos. I knew when Jove       was willing to defend us, and I know now that he is raising the       Trojans to like honour with the gods, while us, on the other       hand, he has bound hand and foot. Now, therefore, let us all do       as I say; let us bring down the ships that are on the beach and       draw them into the water; let us make them fast to their       mooring-stones a little way out, against the fall of night—if       even by night the Trojans will desist from fighting; we may then       draw down the rest of the fleet. There is nothing wrong in flying       ruin even by night. It is better for a man that he should fly and       be saved than be caught and killed.”

      Ulysses looked fiercely at him and said, “Son of Atreus, what are       you talking about? Wretch, you should have commanded some other       and baser army, and not been ruler over us to whom Jove has       allotted a life of hard fighting from youth to old age, till we       every one of us perish. Is it thus that you would quit the city       of Troy, to win which we have suffered so much hardship? Hold       your peace, lest some other of the Achaeans hear you say what no       man who knows how to give good counsel, no king over so great a       host as that of the Argives should ever have let fall from his       lips. I despise your judgement utterly for what you have been       saying. Would you, then, have us draw down our ships into the       water while the battle is raging, and thus play further into the       hands of the conquering Trojans? It would be ruin; the Achaeans       will not go on fighting when they see the ships being drawn into       the water, but will cease attacking and keep turning their eyes       towards them; your counsel, therefore, sir captain, would be our       destruction.”

      Agamemnon answered, “Ulysses, your rebuke has stung me to the       heart. I am not, however, ordering the Achaeans to draw their       ships into the sea whether they will or no. Someone, it may be,       old or young, can offer us better counsel which I shall rejoice       to hear.”

      Then said Diomed, “Such an one is at hand; he is not far to seek,       if you will listen to me and not resent my speaking though I am       younger than any of you. I am by lineage son to a noble sire,       Tydeus, who lies buried at Thebes. For Portheus had three noble       sons, two of whom, Agrius and Melas, abode in Pleuron and rocky       Calydon. The third was the knight Oeneus, my father’s father, and       he was the most valiant of them all. Oeneus remained in his own       country, but my father (as Jove and the other gods ordained it)       migrated to Argos. He married into the family of Adrastus, and       his house was one of great abundance, for he had large estates of       rich corn-growing land, with much orchard ground as well, and he       had many sheep; moreover he excelled all the Argives in the use       of the spear. You must yourselves have heard whether these things       are true or no; therefore when I say well despise not my words as       though I were a coward or of ignoble birth. I say, then, let us       go to the fight as we needs must, wounded though we be. When       there, we may keep out of the battle and beyond the range of the       spears lest we get fresh wounds in addition to what we have       already, but we can spur on others, who have been indulging their       spleen and holding aloof from battle hitherto.”

      Thus did he speak; whereon they did even as he had said and set       out, King Agamemnon leading the way.

      Meanwhile Neptune had kept no blind look-out, and came up to them       in the semblance of an old man. He took Agamemnon’s right hand in       his own and said, “Son of Atreus, I take it Achilles is glad now       that he sees the Achaeans routed and slain, for he is utterly       without remorse—may he come to a bad end and heaven confound him.       As for yourself, the blessed gods are not yet so bitterly angry       with you but that the princes and counsellors of the Trojans       shall again raise the dust upon the plain, and you shall see them       flying from the ships and tents towards their city.”

      With this he raised a mighty cry of battle, and sped forward to       the plain. The voice that came from his deep chest was as that of       nine or ten thousand men when they are shouting in the thick of a       fight, and it put fresh courage into the hearts of the Achaeans       to wage war and do battle without ceasing.

      Juno of the golden throne looked down as she stood upon a peak of       Olympus and her heart was gladdened at the sight of him who was       at once her brother and her brother-in-law, hurrying hither and       thither amid the fighting. Then she turned her eyes to Jove as he       sat on the topmost crests of many-fountained Ida, and loathed       him. She set herself to think how she might hoodwink him, and in       the end she deemed that it would be best for her to go to Ida and       array herself in rich attire, in the hope that Jove might become       enamoured of her, and wish to embrace her. While he was thus       engaged a sweet and careless sleep might be made to steal over       his eyes and senses.

      She went, therefore, to the room which her son Vulcan had made       her, and the doors of which he had cunningly fastened by means of       a secret key so that no other god could open them. Here she       entered and closed the doors behind her. She cleansed all the       dirt from her fair body with ambrosia, then she anointed herself       with olive oil, ambrosial, very soft, and scented specially for       herself—if it were so much as shaken in the bronze-floored house       of Jove, the scent pervaded the universe of heaven and earth.       With this she anointed her delicate skin, and then she plaited       the fair ambrosial locks that flowed in a stream of golden       tresses from her immortal head. She put on the wondrous robe       which Minerva had worked for her with consummate art, and had       embroidered with manifold devices; she fastened it about her       bosom with golden clasps, and she girded herself with a girdle       that had a hundred tassels: then she fastened her earrings, three       brilliant pendants that glistened most beautifully, through the       pierced lobes of her ears, and threw a lovely new veil over her       head. She bound her sandals on to her feet, and when she had       arrayed herself perfectly to her satisfaction, she left her room       and called Venus to come aside and speak to her. “My dear child,”       said she, “will you do what I am going to ask of you, or will you       refuse me because you are angry at my being on the Danaan side,       while you are on the Trojan?”

      Jove’s daughter Venus answered, “Juno, august queen of goddesses,       daughter of mighty Saturn, say what you want, and I will do it       for you at once, if I can, and if it can be done at all.”

      Then Juno told her a lying tale and said, “I want you to endow me       with some of those fascinating charms, the spells of which bring       all things mortal and immortal to your feet. I am going to the       world’s end to visit Oceanus (from whom all we gods proceed) and       mother Tethys: they received me in their house, took care of me,       and brought me up, having taken me over from Rhaea when Jove       imprisoned great Saturn in the depths that are under earth and       sea. I must go and see them that I may make peace between them;       they have been quarrelling, and are so angry that they have not       slept with one another this long while; if I can bring them round       and restore them to one another’s embraces, they will be grateful       to me and love me for ever afterwards.”

      Thereon laughter-loving Venus said, “I cannot and must not refuse       you, for you sleep in the arms of Jove who is our king.”

      As she spoke she loosed from her bosom the curiously embroidered       girdle into which all her charms had been wrought—love, desire,       and that sweet flattery which steals the judgement even of the       most prudent. She gave the girdle to Juno and said, “Take this       girdle wherein all my charms reside and lay it in your bosom. If       you will wear it I promise you that your errand, be it what it       may, will not be bootless.”

      When she heard this Juno smiled, and still smiling she laid the       girdle in her bosom.

      Venus now went back into the house of Jove, while Juno darted       down from the summits of Olympus. She passed over Pieria and fair       Emathia, and went on and on till she came to the snowy ranges of       the Thracian horsemen, over whose topmost crests she sped without       ever setting foot to ground. When she came to Athos she went on       over the waves of the sea till she reached Lemnos, the city of       noble Thoas. There she met Sleep, own brother to Death, and       caught him by the hand, saying, “Sleep, you who lord it alike       over mortals and immortals, if you ever did me a service in times       past, do one for me now, and I shall be grateful to you ever       after. Close Jove’s keen eyes for me in slumber while I hold him       clasped in my embrace, and I will give you a beautiful golden       seat, that can never fall to pieces; my clubfooted son Vulcan       shall make it for you, and he shall give it a footstool for you       to rest your fair feet upon when you are at table.”

      Then Sleep answered, “Juno, great queen of goddesses, daughter of       mighty Saturn, I would lull any other of the gods to sleep       without compunction, not even excepting the waters of Oceanus       from whom all of them proceed, but I dare not go near Jove, nor       send him to sleep unless he bids me. I have had one lesson       already through doing what you asked me, on the day when Jove’s       mighty son Hercules set sail from Ilius after having sacked the       city of the Trojans. At your bidding I suffused my sweet self       over the mind of aegis-bearing Jove, and laid him to rest;       meanwhile you hatched a plot against Hercules, and set the blasts       of the angry winds beating upon the sea, till you took him to the       goodly city of Cos, away from all his friends. Jove was furious       when he awoke, and began hurling the gods about all over the       house; he was looking more particularly for myself, and would       have flung me down through space into the sea where I should       never have been heard of any more, had not Night who cows both       men and gods protected me. I fled to her and Jove left off       looking for me in spite of his being so angry, for he did not       dare do anything to displease Night. And now you are again asking       me to do something on which I cannot venture.”

      And Juno said, “Sleep, why do you take such notions as those into       your head? Do you think Jove will be as anxious to help the       Trojans, as he was about his own son? Come, I will marry you to       one of the youngest of the Graces, and she shall be your       own—Pasithea, whom you have always wanted to marry.”

      Sleep was pleased when he heard this, and answered, “Then swear       it to me by the dread waters of the river Styx; lay one hand on       the bounteous earth, and the other on the sheen of the sea, so       that all the gods who dwell down below with Saturn may be our       witnesses, and see that you really do give me one of the youngest       of the Graces—Pasithea, whom I have always wanted to marry.”

      Juno did as he had said. She swore, and invoked all the gods of       the nether world, who are called Titans, to witness. When she had       completed her oath, the two enshrouded themselves in a thick mist       and sped lightly forward, leaving Lemnos and Imbrus behind them.       Presently they reached many-fountained Ida, mother of wild       beasts, and Lectum where they left the sea to go on by land, and       the tops of the trees of the forest soughed under the going of       their feet. Here Sleep halted, and ere Jove caught sight of him       he climbed a lofty pine-tree—the tallest that reared its head       towards heaven on all Ida. He hid himself behind the branches and       sat there in the semblance of the sweet-singing bird that haunts       the mountains and is called Chalcis by the gods, but men call it       Cymindis. Juno then went to Gargarus, the topmost peak of Ida,       and Jove, driver of the clouds, set eyes upon her. As soon as he       did so he became inflamed with the same passionate desire for her       that he had felt when they had first enjoyed each other’s       embraces, and slept with one another without their dear parents       knowing anything about it. He went up to her and said, “What do       you want that you have come hither from Olympus—and that too with       neither chariot nor horses to convey you?”

      Then Juno told him a lying tale and said, “I am going to the       world’s end, to visit Oceanus, from whom all we gods proceed, and       mother Tethys; they received me into their house, took care of       me, and brought me up. I must go and see them that I may make       peace between them: they have been quarrelling, and are so angry       that they have not slept with one another this long time. The       horses that will take me over land and sea are stationed on the       lowermost spurs of many-fountained Ida, and I have come here from       Olympus on purpose to consult you. I was afraid you might be       angry with me later on, if I went to the house of Oceanus without       letting you know.”

      And Jove said, “Juno, you can choose some other time for paying       your visit to Oceanus—for the present let us devote ourselves to       love and to the enjoyment of one another. Never yet have I been       so overpowered by passion neither for goddess nor mortal woman as       I am at this moment for yourself—not even when I was in love with       the wife of Ixion who bore me Pirithous, peer of gods in counsel,       nor yet with Danae the daintily-ancled daughter of Acrisius, who       bore me the famed hero Perseus. Then there was the daughter of       Phoenix, who bore me Minos and Rhadamanthus: there was Semele,       and Alcmena in Thebes by whom I begot my lion-hearted son       Hercules, while Semele became mother to Bacchus the comforter of       mankind. There was queen Ceres again, and lovely Leto, and       yourself—but with none of these was I ever so much enamoured as I       now am with you.”

      Juno again answered him with a lying tale. “Most dread son of       Saturn,” she exclaimed, “what are you talking about? Would you       have us enjoy one another here on the top of Mount Ida, where       everything can be seen? What if one of the ever-living gods       should see us sleeping together, and tell the others? It would be       such a scandal that when I had risen from your embraces I could       never show myself inside your house again; but if you are so       minded, there is a room which your son Vulcan has made me, and he       has given it good strong doors; if you would so have it, let us       go thither and lie down.”

      And Jove answered, “Juno, you need not be afraid that either god       or man will see you, for I will enshroud both of us in such a       dense golden cloud, that the very sun for all his bright piercing       beams shall not see through it.”

      With this the son of Saturn caught his wife in his embrace;       whereon the earth sprouted them a cushion of young grass, with       dew-bespangled lotus, crocus, and hyacinth, so soft and thick       that it raised them well above the ground. Here they laid       themselves down and overhead they were covered by a fair cloud of       gold, from which there fell glittering dew-drops.

      Thus, then, did the sire of all things repose peacefully on the       crest of Ida, overcome at once by sleep and love, and he held his       spouse in his arms. Meanwhile Sleep made off to the ships of the       Achaeans, to tell earth-encircling Neptune, lord of the       earthquake. When he had found him he said, “Now, Neptune, you can       help the Danaans with a will, and give them victory though it be       only for a short time while Jove is still sleeping. I have sent       him into a sweet slumber, and Juno has beguiled him into going to       bed with her.”

      Sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind,       leaving Neptune more eager than ever to help the Danaans. He       darted forward among the first ranks and shouted saying,       “Argives, shall we let Hector son of Priam have the triumph of       taking our ships and covering himself with glory? This is what he       says that he shall now do, seeing that Achilles is still in       dudgeon at his ship; we shall get on very well without him if we       keep each other in heart and stand by one another. Now,       therefore, let us all do as I say. Let us each take the best and       largest shield we can lay hold of, put on our helmets, and sally       forth with our longest spears in our hands; I will lead you on,       and Hector son of Priam, rage as he may, will not dare to hold       out against us. If any good staunch soldier has only a small       shield, let him hand it over to a worse man, and take a larger       one for himself.”

      Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The son of       Tydeus, Ulysses, and Agamemnon, wounded though they were, set the       others in array, and went about everywhere effecting the       exchanges of armour; the most valiant took the best armour, and       gave the worse to the worse man. When they had donned their       bronze armour they marched on with Neptune at their head. In his       strong hand he grasped his terrible sword, keen of edge and       flashing like lightning; woe to him who comes across it in the       day of battle; all men quake for fear and keep away from it.

      Hector on the other side set the Trojans in array. Thereon       Neptune and Hector waged fierce war on one another—Hector on the       Trojan and Neptune on the Argive side. Mighty was the uproar as       the two forces met; the sea came rolling in towards the ships and       tents of the Achaeans, but waves do not thunder on the shore more       loudly when driven before the blast of Boreas, nor do the flames       of a forest fire roar more fiercely when it is well alight upon       the mountains, nor does the wind bellow with ruder music as it       tears on through the tops of when it is blowing its hardest, than       the terrible shout which the Trojans and Achaeans raised as they       sprang upon one another.

      Hector first aimed his spear at Ajax, who was turned full towards       him, nor did he miss his aim. The spear struck him where two       bands passed over his chest—the band of his shield and that of       his silver-studded sword—and these protected his body. Hector was       angry that his spear should have been hurled in vain, and       withdrew under cover of his men. As he was thus retreating, Ajax       son of Telamon, struck him with a stone, of which there were many       lying about under the men’s feet as they fought—brought there to       give support to the ships’ sides as they lay on the shore. Ajax       caught up one of them and struck Hector above the rim of his       shield close to his neck; the blow made him spin round like a top       and reel in all directions. As an oak falls headlong when       uprooted by the lightning flash of father Jove, and there is a       terrible smell of brimstone—no man can help being dismayed if he       is standing near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing—even       so did Hector fall to earth and bite the dust. His spear fell       from his hand, but his shield and helmet were made fast about his       body, and his bronze armour rang about him.

      The sons of the Achaeans came running with a loud cry towards       him, hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on       the Trojans, but none of them could wound him before he was       surrounded and covered by the princes Polydamas, Aeneas, Agenor,       Sarpedon captain of the Lycians, and noble Glaucus. Of the       others, too, there was not one who was unmindful of him, and they       held their round shields over him to cover him. His comrades then       lifted him off the ground and bore him away from the battle to       the place where his horses stood waiting for him at the rear of       the fight with their driver and the chariot; these then took him       towards the city groaning and in great pain. When they reached       the ford of the fair stream of Xanthus, begotten of Immortal       Jove, they took him from off his chariot and laid him down on the       ground; they poured water over him, and as they did so he       breathed again and opened his eyes. Then kneeling on his knees he       vomited blood, but soon fell back on to the ground, and his eyes       were again closed in darkness for he was still stunned by the       blow.

      When the Argives saw Hector leaving the field, they took heart       and set upon the Trojans yet more furiously. Ajax fleet son of       Oileus began by springing on Satnius son of Enops, and wounding       him with his spear: a fair naiad nymph had borne him to Enops as       he was herding cattle by the banks of the river Satnioeis. The       son of Oileus came up to him and struck him in the flank so that       he fell, and a fierce fight between Trojans and Danaans raged       round his body. Polydamas son of Panthous drew near to avenge       him, and wounded Prothoenor son of Areilycus on the right       shoulder; the terrible spear went right through his shoulder, and       he clutched the earth as he fell in the dust. Polydamas vaunted       loudly over him saying, “Again I take it that the spear has not       sped in vain from the strong hand of the son of Panthous; an       Argive has caught it in his body, and it will serve him for a       staff as he goes down into the house of Hades.”

      The Argives were maddened by this boasting. Ajax son of Telamon       was more angry than any, for the man had fallen close beside him;       so he aimed at Polydamas as he was retreating, but Polydamas       saved himself by swerving aside and the spear struck Archelochus       son of Antenor, for heaven counselled his destruction; it struck       him where the head springs from the neck at the top joint of the       spine, and severed both the tendons at the back of the head. His       head, mouth, and nostrils reached the ground long before his legs       and knees could do so, and Ajax shouted to Polydamas saying,       “Think, Polydamas, and tell me truly whether this man is not as       well worth killing as Prothoenor was: he seems rich, and of rich       family, a brother, it may be, or son of the knight Antenor, for       he is very like him.”

      But he knew well who it was, and the Trojans were greatly       angered. Acamas then bestrode his brother’s body and wounded       Promachus the Boeotian with his spear, for he was trying to drag       his brother’s body away. Acamas vaunted loudly over him saying,       “Argive archers, braggarts that you are, toil and suffering shall       not be for us only, but some of you too shall fall here as well       as ourselves. See how Promachus now sleeps, vanquished by my       spear; payment for my brother’s blood has not been long delayed;       a man, therefore, may well be thankful if he leaves a kinsman in       his house behind him to avenge his fall.”

      His taunts infuriated the Argives, and Peneleos was more enraged       than any of them. He sprang towards Acamas, but Acamas did not       stand his ground, and he killed Ilioneus son of the rich       flock-master Phorbas, whom Mercury had favoured and endowed with       greater wealth than any other of the Trojans. Ilioneus was his       only son, and Peneleos now wounded him in the eye under his       eyebrows, tearing the eye-ball from its socket: the spear went       right through the eye into the nape of the neck, and he fell,       stretching out both hands before him. Peneleos then drew his       sword and smote him on the neck, so that both head and helmet       came tumbling down to the ground with the spear still sticking in       the eye; he then held up the head, as though it had been a       poppy-head, and showed it to the Trojans, vaunting over them as       he did so. “Trojans,” he cried, “bid the father and mother of       noble Ilioneus make moan for him in their house, for the wife       also of Promachus son of Alegenor will never be gladdened by the       coming of her dear husband—when we Argives return with our ships       from Troy.”

      As he spoke fear fell upon them, and every man looked round about       to see whither he might fly for safety.

      Tell me now, O Muses that dwell on Olympus, who was the first of       the Argives to bear away blood-stained spoils after Neptune lord       of the earthquake had turned the fortune of war. Ajax son of       Telamon was first to wound Hyrtius son of Gyrtius, captain of the       staunch Mysians. Antilochus killed Phalces and Mermerus, while       Meriones slew Morys and Hippotion, Teucer also killed Prothoon       and Periphetes. The son of Atreus then wounded Hyperenor shepherd       of his people, in the flank, and the bronze point made his       entrails gush out as it tore in among them; on this his life came       hurrying out of him at the place where he had been wounded, and       his eyes were closed in darkness. Ajax son of Oileus killed more       than any other, for there was no man so fleet as he to pursue       flying foes when Jove had spread panic among them.




BOOK XV.


      Jove awakes, tells Apollo to heal Hector, and the Trojans again       become victorious.

      But when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set       stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the Danaans, the       Trojans made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale       with fear. Jove now woke on the crests of Ida, where he was lying       with golden-throned Juno by his side, and starting to his feet he       saw the Trojans and Achaeans, the one thrown into confusion, and       the others driving them pell-mell before them with King Neptune       in their midst. He saw Hector lying on the ground with his       comrades gathered round him, gasping for breath, wandering in       mind and vomiting blood, for it was not the feeblest of the       Achaeans who struck him.

      The sire of gods and men had pity on him, and looked fiercely on       Juno. “I see, Juno,” said he, “you mischief-making trickster,       that your cunning has stayed Hector from fighting and has caused       the rout of his host. I am in half a mind to thrash you, in which       case you will be the first to reap the fruits of your scurvy       knavery. Do you not remember how once upon a time I had you       hanged? I fastened two anvils on to your feet, and bound your       hands in a chain of gold which none might break, and you hung in       mid-air among the clouds. All the gods in Olympus were in a fury,       but they could not reach you to set you free; when I caught any       one of them I gripped him and hurled him from the heavenly       threshold till he came fainting down to earth; yet even this did       not relieve my mind from the incessant anxiety which I felt about       noble Hercules whom you and Boreas had spitefully conveyed beyond       the seas to Cos, after suborning the tempests; but I rescued him,       and notwithstanding all his mighty labours I brought him back       again to Argos. I would remind you of this that you may learn to       leave off being so deceitful, and discover how much you are       likely to gain by the embraces out of which you have come here to       trick me.”

      Juno trembled as he spoke, and said, “May heaven above and earth       below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—and this       is the most solemn oath that a blessed god can take—nay, I swear       also by your own almighty head and by our bridal bed—things over       which I could never possibly perjure myself—that Neptune is not       punishing Hector and the Trojans and helping the Achaeans through       any doing of mine; it is all of his own mere motion because he       was sorry to see the Achaeans hard pressed at their ships: if I       were advising him, I should tell him to do as you bid him.”

      The sire of gods and men smiled and answered, “If you, Juno, were       always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, Neptune,       like it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of       thinking. If, then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you       say, go among the rank and file of the gods, and tell Iris and       Apollo lord of the bow, that I want them—Iris, that she may go to       the Achaean host and tell Neptune to leave off fighting and go       home, and Apollo, that he may send Hector again into battle and       give him fresh strength; he will thus forget his present       sufferings, and drive the Achaeans back in confusion till they       fall among the ships of Achilles son of Peleus. Achilles will       then send his comrade Patroclus into battle, and Hector will kill       him in front of Ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among       them my own noble son Sarpedon. Achilles will kill Hector to       avenge Patroclus, and from that time I will bring it about that       the Achaeans shall persistently drive the Trojans back till they       fulfil the counsels of Minerva and take Ilius. But I will not       stay my anger, nor permit any god to help the Danaans till I have       accomplished the desire of the son of Peleus, according to the       promise I made by bowing my head on the day when Thetis touched       my knees and besought me to give him honour.”

      Juno heeded his words and went from the heights of Ida to great       Olympus. Swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over       vast continents, and he says to himself, “Now I will be here, or       there,” and he would have all manner of things—even so swiftly       did Juno wing her way till she came to high Olympus and went in       among the gods who were gathered in the house of Jove. When they       saw her they all of them came up to her, and held out their cups       to her by way of greeting. She let the others be, but took the       cup offered her by lovely Themis, who was first to come running       up to her. “Juno,” said she, “why are you here? And you seem       troubled—has your husband the son of Saturn been frightening       you?”

      And Juno answered, “Themis, do not ask me about it. You know what       a proud and cruel disposition my husband has. Lead the gods to       table, where you and all the immortals can hear the wicked       designs which he has avowed. Many a one, mortal and immortal,       will be angered by them, however peaceably he may be feasting       now.”

      On this Juno sat down, and the gods were troubled throughout the       house of Jove. Laughter sat on her lips but her brow was furrowed       with care, and she spoke up in a rage. “Fools that we are,” she       cried, “to be thus madly angry with Jove; we keep on wanting to       go up to him and stay him by force or by persuasion, but he sits       aloof and cares for nobody, for he knows that he is much stronger       than any other of the immortals. Make the best, therefore, of       whatever ills he may choose to send each one of you; Mars, I take       it, has had a taste of them already, for his son Ascalaphus has       fallen in battle—the man whom of all others he loved most dearly       and whose father he owns himself to be.”

      When he heard this Mars smote his two sturdy thighs with the flat       of his hands, and said in anger, “Do not blame me, you gods that       dwell in heaven, if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge       the death of my son, even though it end in my being struck by       Jove’s lightning and lying in blood and dust among the corpses.”

      As he spoke he gave orders to yoke his horses Panic and Rout,       while he put on his armour. On this, Jove would have been roused       to still more fierce and implacable enmity against the other       immortals, had not Minerva, alarmed for the safety of the gods,       sprung from her seat and hurried outside. She tore the helmet       from his head and the shield from his shoulders, and she took the       bronze spear from his strong hand and set it on one side; then       she said to Mars, “Madman, you are undone; you have ears that       hear not, or you have lost all judgement and understanding; have       you not heard what Juno has said on coming straight from the       presence of Olympian Jove? Do you wish to go through all kinds of       suffering before you are brought back sick and sorry to Olympus,       after having caused infinite mischief to all us others? Jove       would instantly leave the Trojans and Achaeans to themselves; he       would come to Olympus to punish us, and would grip us up one       after another, guilty or not guilty. Therefore lay aside your       anger for the death of your son; better men than he have either       been killed already or will fall hereafter, and one cannot       protect every one’s whole family.”

      With these words she took Mars back to his seat. Meanwhile Juno       called Apollo outside, with Iris the messenger of the gods.       “Jove,” she said to them, “desires you to go to him at once on       Mt. Ida; when you have seen him you are to do as he may then bid       you.”

      Thereon Juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while Iris       and Apollo made all haste on their way. When they reached       many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, they found Jove       seated on topmost Gargarus with a fragrant cloud encircling his       head as with a diadem. They stood before his presence, and he was       pleased with them for having been so quick in obeying the orders       his wife had given them.

      He spoke to Iris first. “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, tell King       Neptune what I now bid you—and tell him true. Bid him leave off       fighting, and either join the company of the gods, or go down       into the sea. If he takes no heed and disobeys me, let him       consider well whether he is strong enough to hold his own against       me if I attack him. I am older and much stronger than he is; yet       he is not afraid to set himself up as on a level with myself, of       whom all the other gods stand in awe.”

      Iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the cold hail or       snow-flakes that fly from out the clouds before the blast of       Boreas, even so did she wing her way till she came close up to       the great shaker of the earth. Then she said, “I have come, O       dark-haired king that holds the world in his embrace, to bring       you a message from Jove. He bids you leave off fighting, and       either join the company of the gods or go down into the sea; if,       however, you take no heed and disobey him, he says he will come       down here and fight you. He would have you keep out of his reach,       for he is older and much stronger than you are, and yet you are       not afraid to set yourself up as on a level with himself, of whom       all the other gods stand in awe.”

      Neptune was very angry and said, “Great heavens! strong as Jove       may be, he has said more than he can do if he has threatened       violence against me, who am of like honour with himself. We were       three brothers whom Rhea bore to Saturn—Jove, myself, and Hades       who rules the world below. Heaven and earth were divided into       three parts, and each of us was to have an equal share. When we       cast lots, it fell to me to have my dwelling in the sea for       evermore; Hades took the darkness of the realms under the earth,       while air and sky and clouds were the portion that fell to Jove;       but earth and great Olympus are the common property of all.       Therefore I will not walk as Jove would have me. For all his       strength, let him keep to his own third share and be contented       without threatening to lay hands upon me as though I were nobody.       Let him keep his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters,       who must perforce obey him.”

      Iris fleet as the wind then answered, “Am I really, Neptune, to       take this daring and unyielding message to Jove, or will you       reconsider your answer? Sensible people are open to argument, and       you know that the Erinyes always range themselves on the side of       the older person.”

      Neptune answered, “Goddess Iris, your words have been spoken in       season. It is well when a messenger shows so much discretion.       Nevertheless it cuts me to the very heart that any one should       rebuke so angrily another who is his own peer, and of like empire       with himself. Now, however, I will give way in spite of my       displeasure; furthermore let me tell you, and I mean what I       say—if contrary to the desire of myself, Minerva driver of the       spoil, Juno, Mercury, and King Vulcan, Jove spares steep Ilius,       and will not let the Achaeans have the great triumph of sacking       it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable       resentment.”

      Neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely       did the Achaeans miss him. Then Jove said to Apollo, “Go, dear       Phoebus, to Hector, for Neptune who holds the earth in his       embrace has now gone down under the sea to avoid the severity of       my displeasure. Had he not done so those gods who are below with       Saturn would have come to hear of the fight between us. It is       better for both of us that he should have curbed his anger and       kept out of my reach, for I should have had much trouble with       him. Take, then, your tasselled aegis, and shake it furiously, so       as to set the Achaean heroes in a panic; take, moreover, brave       Hector, O Far-Darter, into your own care, and rouse him to deeds       of daring, till the Achaeans are sent flying back to their ships       and to the Hellespont. From that point I will think it well over,       how the Achaeans may have a respite from their troubles.”

      Apollo obeyed his father’s saying, and left the crests of Ida,       flying like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. He       found Hector no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for       he had just come to himself again. He knew those who were about       him, and the sweat and hard breathing had left him from the       moment when the will of aegis-bearing Jove had revived him.       Apollo stood beside him and said, “Hector son of Priam, why are       you so faint, and why are you here away from the others? Has any       mishap befallen you?”

      Hector in a weak voice answered, “And which, kind sir, of the       gods are you, who now ask me thus? Do you not know that Ajax       struck me on the chest with a stone as I was killing his comrades       at the ships of the Achaeans, and compelled me to leave off       fighting? I made sure that this very day I should breathe my last       and go down into the house of Hades.”

      Then King Apollo said to him, “Take heart; the son of Saturn has       sent you a mighty helper from Ida to stand by you and defend you,       even me, Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who have been       guardian hitherto not only of yourself but of your city. Now,       therefore, order your horsemen to drive their chariots to the       ships in great multitudes. I will go before your horses to smooth       the way for them, and will turn the Achaeans in flight.”

      As he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his       people. And as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and       gallops gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont       to take his bath in the river—he tosses his head, and his mane       streams over his shoulders as in all the pride of his strength he       flies full speed to the pastures where the mares are feeding—even       so Hector, when he heard what the god said, urged his horsemen       on, and sped forward as fast as his limbs could take him. As       country peasants set their hounds on to a homed stag or wild       goat—he has taken shelter under rock or thicket, and they cannot       find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts have roused       stands in their path, and they are in no further humour for the       chase—even so the Achaeans were still charging on in a body,       using their swords and spears pointed at both ends, but when they       saw Hector going about among his men they were afraid, and their       hearts fell down into their feet.

      Then spoke Thoas son of Andraemon, leader of the Aetolians, a man       who could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in close       fight, while few could surpass him in debate when opinions were       divided. He then with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them       thus: “What, in heaven’s name, do I now see? Is it not Hector       come to life again? Every one made sure he had been killed by       Ajax son of Telamon, but it seems that one of the gods has again       rescued him. He has killed many of us Danaans already, and I take       it will yet do so, for the hand of Jove must be with him or he       would never dare show himself so masterful in the forefront of       the battle. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say; let us order       the main body of our forces to fall back upon the ships, but let       those of us who profess to be the flower of the army stand firm,       and see whether we cannot hold Hector back at the point of our       spears as soon as he comes near us; I conceive that he will then       think better of it before he tries to charge into the press of       the Danaans.”

      Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. Those who       were about Ajax and King Idomeneus, the followers moreover of       Teucer, Meriones, and Meges peer of Mars called all their best       men about them and sustained the fight against Hector and the       Trojans, but the main body fell back upon the ships of the       Achaeans.

      The Trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with Hector striding       on at their head. Before him went Phoebus Apollo shrouded in       cloud about his shoulders. He bore aloft the terrible aegis with       its shaggy fringe, which Vulcan the smith had given Jove to       strike terror into the hearts of men. With this in his hand he       led on the Trojans.

      The Argives held together and stood their ground. The cry of       battle rose high from either side, and the arrows flew from the       bowstrings. Many a spear sped from strong hands and fastened in       the bodies of many a valiant warrior, while others fell to earth       midway, before they could taste of man’s fair flesh and glut       themselves with blood. So long as Phoebus Apollo held his aegis       quietly and without shaking it, the weapons on either side took       effect and the people fell, but when he shook it straight in the       face of the Danaans and raised his mighty battle-cry their hearts       fainted within them and they forgot their former prowess. As when       two wild beasts spring in the dead of night on a herd of cattle       or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman is not there—even so       were the Danaans struck helpless, for Apollo filled them with       panic and gave victory to Hector and the Trojans.

      The fight then became more scattered and they killed one another       where they best could. Hector killed Stichius and Arcesilaus, the       one, leader of the Boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade       of Menestheus. Aeneas killed Medon and Iasus. The first was       bastard son to Oileus, and brother to Ajax, but he lived in       Phylace away from his own country, for he had killed a man, a       kinsman of his stepmother Eriopis whom Oileus had married. Iasus       had become a leader of the Athenians, and was son of Sphelus the       son of Boucolos. Polydamas killed Mecisteus, and Polites Echius,       in the front of the battle, while Agenor slew Clonius. Paris       struck Deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as       he was flying among the foremost, and the point of the spear went       clean through him.

      While they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the       Achaeans were flying pell-mell to the trench and the set stakes,       and were forced back within their wall. Hector then cried out to       the Trojans, “Forward to the ships, and let the spoils be. If I       see any man keeping back on the other side the wall away from the       ships I will have him killed: his kinsmen and kinswomen shall not       give him his dues of fire, but dogs shall tear him in pieces in       front of our city.”

      As he spoke he laid his whip about his horses’ shoulders and       called to the Trojans throughout their ranks; the Trojans shouted       with a cry that rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck       with his own. Phoebus Apollo went before, and kicked down the       banks of the deep trench into its middle so as to make a great       broad bridge, as broad as the throw of a spear when a man is       trying his strength. The Trojan battalions poured over the       bridge, and Apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. He       kicked down the wall of the Achaeans as easily as a child who       playing on the sea-shore has built a house of sand and then kicks       it down again and destroys it—even so did you, O Apollo, shed       toil and trouble upon the Argives, filling them with panic and       confusion.

      Thus then were the Achaeans hemmed in at their ships, calling out       to one another and raising their hands with loud cries every man       to heaven. Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans,       lifted up his hands to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed       more fervently than any of them. “Father Jove,” said he, “if ever       any one in wheat-growing Argos burned you fat thigh-bones of       sheep or heifer and prayed that he might return safely home,       whereon you bowed your head to him in assent, bear it in mind       now, and suffer not the Trojans to triumph thus over the       Achaeans.”

      All-counselling Jove thundered loudly in answer to the prayer of       the aged son of Neleus. When they heard Jove thunder they flung       themselves yet more fiercely on the Achaeans. As a wave breaking       over the bulwarks of a ship when the sea runs high before a       gale—for it is the force of the wind that makes the waves so       great—even so did the Trojans spring over the wall with a shout,       and drive their chariots onwards. The two sides fought with their       double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand encounter-the Trojans from       their chariots, and the Achaeans climbing up into their ships and       wielding the long pikes that were lying on the decks ready for       use in a sea-fight, jointed and shod with bronze.

      Now Patroclus, so long as the Achaeans and Trojans were fighting       about the wall, but were not yet within it and at the ships,       remained sitting in the tent of good Eurypylus, entertaining him       with his conversation and spreading herbs over his wound to ease       his pain. When, however, he saw the Trojans swarming through the       breach in the wall, while the Achaeans were clamouring and struck       with panic, he cried aloud, and smote his two thighs with the       flat of his hands. “Eurypylus,” said he in his dismay, “I know       you want me badly, but I cannot stay with you any longer, for       there is hard fighting going on; a servant shall take care of you       now, for I must make all speed to Achilles, and induce him to       fight if I can; who knows but with heaven’s help I may persuade       him. A man does well to listen to the advice of a friend.”

      When he had thus spoken he went his way. The Achaeans stood firm       and resisted the attack of the Trojans, yet though these were       fewer in number, they could not drive them back from the ships,       neither could the Trojans break the Achaean ranks and make their       way in among the tents and ships. As a carpenter’s line gives a       true edge to a piece of ship’s timber, in the hand of some       skilled workman whom Minerva has instructed in all kinds of       useful arts—even so level was the issue of the fight between the       two sides, as they fought some round one and some round another.

      Hector made straight for Ajax, and the two fought fiercely about       the same ship. Hector could not force Ajax back and fire the       ship, nor yet could Ajax drive Hector from the spot to which       heaven had brought him.

      Then Ajax struck Caletor son of Clytius in the chest with a spear       as he was bringing fire towards the ship. He fell heavily to the       ground and the torch dropped from his hand. When Hector saw his       cousin fallen in front of the ship he shouted to the Trojans and       Lycians saying, “Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in close       fight, bate not a jot, but rescue the son of Clytius lest the       Achaeans strip him of his armour now that he has fallen.”

      He then aimed a spear at Ajax, and missed him, but he hit       Lycophron a follower of Ajax, who came from Cythera, but was       living with Ajax inasmuch as he had killed a man among the       Cythereans. Hector’s spear struck him on the head below the ear,       and he fell headlong from the ship’s prow on to the ground with       no life left in him. Ajax shook with rage and said to his       brother, “Teucer, my good fellow, our trusty comrade the son of       Mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from Cythera and whom       we honoured as much as our own parents. Hector has just killed       him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which Phoebus       Apollo gave you.”

      Teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver       in his hands. Forthwith he showered his arrows on the Trojans,       and hit Cleitus the son of Pisenor, comrade of Polydamas the       noble son of Panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was       attending to his horses; he was in the middle of the very       thickest part of the fight, doing good service to Hector and the       Trojans, but evil had now come upon him, and not one of those who       were fain to do so could avert it, for the arrow struck him on       the back of the neck. He fell from his chariot and his horses       shook the empty car as they swerved aside. King Polydamas saw       what had happened, and was the first to come up to the horses; he       gave them in charge to Astynous son of Protiaon, and ordered him       to look on, and to keep the horses near at hand. He then went       back and took his place in the front ranks.

      Teucer then aimed another arrow at Hector, and there would have       been no more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and killed       him then and there: Jove, however, who kept watch over Hector,       had his eyes on Teucer, and deprived him of his triumph, by       breaking his bowstring for him just as he was drawing it and       about to take his aim; on this the arrow went astray and the bow       fell from his hands. Teucer shook with anger and said to his       brother, “Alas, see how heaven thwarts us in all we do; it has       broken my bowstring and snatched the bow from my hand, though I       strung it this self-same morning that it might serve me for many       an arrow.”

      Ajax son of Telamon answered, “My good fellow, let your bow and       your arrows be, for Jove has made them useless in order to spite       the Danaans. Take your spear, lay your shield upon your shoulder,       and both fight the Trojans yourself and urge others to do so.       They may be successful for the moment but if we fight as we ought       they will find it a hard matter to take the ships.”

      Teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. He hung a       shield four hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely       head he set his helmet well wrought with a crest of horse-hair       that nodded menacingly above it; he grasped his redoubtable       bronze-shod spear, and forthwith he was by the side of Ajax.

      When Hector saw that Teucer’s bow was of no more use to him, he       shouted out to the Trojans and Lycians, “Trojans, Lycians, and       Dardanians good in close fight, be men, my friends, and show your       mettle here at the ships, for I see the weapon of one of their       chieftains made useless by the hand of Jove. It is easy to see       when Jove is helping people and means to help them still further,       or again when he is bringing them down and will do nothing for       them; he is now on our side, and is going against the Argives.       Therefore swarm round the ships and fight. If any of you is       struck by spear or sword and loses his life, let him die; he dies       with honour who dies fighting for his country; and he will leave       his wife and children safe behind him, with his house and       allotment unplundered if only the Achaeans can be driven back to       their own land, they and their ships.”

      With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Ajax on the       other side exhorted his comrades saying, “Shame on you Argives,       we are now utterly undone, unless we can save ourselves by       driving the enemy from our ships. Do you think, if Hector takes       them, that you will be able to get home by land? Can you not hear       him cheering on his whole host to fire our fleet, and bidding       them remember that they are not at a dance but in battle? Our       only course is to fight them with might and main; we had better       chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and       without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than       ourselves.”

      With these words he put life and soul into them all. Hector then       killed Schedius son of Perimedes, leader of the Phoceans, and       Ajax killed Laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to Antenor.       Polydamas killed Otus of Cyllene a comrade of the son of Phyleus       and chief of the proud Epeans. When Meges saw this he sprang upon       him, but Polydamas crouched down, and he missed him, for Apollo       would not suffer the son of Panthous to fall in battle; but the       spear hit Croesmus in the middle of his chest, whereon he fell       heavily to the ground, and Meges stripped him of his armour. At       that moment the valiant soldier Dolops son of Lampus sprang upon       Lampus was son of Laomedon and noted for his valour, while his       son Dolops was versed in all the ways of war. He then struck the       middle of the son of Phyleus’ shield with his spear, setting on       him at close quarters, but his good corslet made with plates of       metal saved him; Phyleus had brought it from Ephyra and the river       Selleis, where his host, King Euphetes, had given it him to wear       in battle and protect him. It now served to save the life of his       son. Then Meges struck the topmost crest of Dolops’s bronze       helmet with his spear and tore away its plume of horse-hair, so       that all newly dyed with scarlet as it was it tumbled down into       the dust. While he was still fighting and confident of victory,       Menelaus came up to help Meges, and got by the side of Dolops       unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder, from behind,       and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his chest,       whereon he fell headlong. The two then made towards him to strip       him of his armour, but Hector called on all his brothers for       help, and he especially upbraided brave Melanippus son of       Hiketaon, who erewhile used to pasture his herds of cattle in       Percote before the war broke out; but when the ships of the       Danaans came, he went back to Ilius, where he was eminent among       the Trojans, and lived near Priam who treated him as one of his       own sons. Hector now rebuked him and said, “Why, Melanippus, are       we thus remiss? do you take no note of the death of your kinsman,       and do you not see how they are trying to take Dolops’s armour?       Follow me; there must be no fighting the Argives from a distance       now, but we must do so in close combat till either we kill them       or they take the high wall of Ilius and slay her people.”

      He led on as he spoke, and the hero Melanippus followed after.       Meanwhile Ajax son of Telamon was cheering on the Argives. “My       friends,” he cried, “be men, and fear dishonour; quit yourselves       in battle so as to win respect from one another. Men who respect       each other’s good opinion are less likely to be killed than those       who do not, but in flight there is neither gain nor glory.”

      Thus did he exhort men who were already bent upon driving back       the Trojans. They laid his words to heart and hedged the ships as       with a wall of bronze, while Jove urged on the Trojans. Menelaus       of the loud battle-cry urged Antilochus on. “Antilochus,” said       he, “you are young and there is none of the Achaeans more fleet       of foot or more valiant than you are. See if you cannot spring       upon some Trojan and kill him.”

      He hurried away when he had thus spurred Antilochus, who at once       darted out from the front ranks and aimed a spear, after looking       carefully round him. The Trojans fell back as he threw, and the       dart did not speed from his hand without effect, for it struck       Melanippus the proud son of Hiketaon in the breast by the nipple       as he was coming forward, and his armour rang rattling round him       as he fell heavily to the ground. Antilochus sprang upon him as a       dog springs on a fawn which a hunter has hit as it was breaking       away from its covert, and killed it. Even so, O Melanippus, did       stalwart Antilochus spring upon you to strip you of your armour;       but noble Hector marked him, and came running up to him through       the thick of the battle. Antilochus, brave soldier though he was,       would not stay to face him, but fled like some savage creature       which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed a       dog or a man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can       be gathered to attack it. Even so did the son of Nestor fly, and       the Trojans and Hector with a cry that rent the air showered       their weapons after him; nor did he turn round and stay his       flight till he had reached his comrades.

      The Trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the       ships in fulfilment of the behests of Jove who kept spurring them       on to new deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the       Argives and defeated them by encouraging the Trojans. For he       meant giving glory to Hector son of Priam, and letting him throw       fire upon the ships, till he had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer       that Thetis had made him; Jove, therefore, bided his time till he       should see the glare of a blazing ship. From that hour he was       about so to order that the Trojans should be driven back from the       ships and to vouchsafe glory to the Achaeans. With this purpose       he inspired Hector son of Priam, who was eager enough already, to       assail the ships. His fury was as that of Mars, or as when a fire       is raging in the glades of some dense forest upon the mountains;       he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared under his terrible       eyebrows, and his helmet quivered on his temples by reason of       the fury with which he fought. Jove from heaven was with him, and       though he was but one against many, vouchsafed him victory and       glory; for he was doomed to an early death, and already Pallas       Minerva was hurrying on the hour of his destruction at the hands       of the son of Peleus. Now, however, he kept trying to break the       ranks of the enemy wherever he could see them thickest, and in       the goodliest armour; but do what he might he could not break       through them, for they stood as a tower foursquare, or as some       high cliff rising from the grey sea that braves the anger of the       gale, and of the waves that thunder up against it. He fell upon       them like flames of fire from every quarter. As when a wave,       raised mountain high by wind and storm, breaks over a ship and       covers it deep in foam, the fierce winds roar against the mast,       the hearts of the sailors fail them for fear, and they are saved       but by a very little from destruction—even so were the hearts of       the Achaeans fainting within them. Or as a savage lion attacking       a herd of cows while they are feeding by thousands in the       low-lying meadows by some wide-watered shore—the herdsman is at       his wit’s end how to protect his herd and keeps going about now       in the van and now in the rear of his cattle, while the lion       springs into the thick of them and fastens on a cow so that they       all tremble for fear—even so were the Achaeans utterly       panic-stricken by Hector and father Jove. Nevertheless Hector       only killed Periphetes of Mycenae; he was son of Copreus who was       wont to take the orders of King Eurystheus to mighty Hercules,       but the son was a far better man than the father in every way; he       was fleet of foot, a valiant warrior, and in understanding ranked       among the foremost men of Mycenae. He it was who then afforded       Hector a triumph, for as he was turning back he stumbled against       the rim of his shield which reached his feet, and served to keep       the javelins off him. He tripped against this and fell face       upward, his helmet ringing loudly about his head as he did so.       Hector saw him fall and ran up to him; he then thrust a spear       into his chest, and killed him close to his own comrades. These,       for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were themselves       terribly afraid of Hector.

      They had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had       been drawn up first were on every side of them, but the Trojans       came pouring after them. The Argives were driven back from the       first row of ships, but they made a stand by their tents without       being broken up and scattered; shame and fear restrained them.       They kept shouting incessantly to one another, and Nestor of       Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, was loudest in       imploring every man by his parents, and beseeching him to stand       firm.

      “Be men, my friends,” he cried, “and respect one another’s good       opinion. Think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your       property, and your parents whether these be alive or dead. On       their behalf though they are not here, I implore you to stand       firm, and not to turn in flight.”

      With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Minerva       lifted the thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much light       fell upon them, alike on the side of the ships and on that where       the fight was raging. They could see Hector and all his men, both       those in the rear who were taking no part in the battle, and       those who were fighting by the ships.

      Ajax could not bring himself to retreat along with the rest, but       strode from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands       twelve cubits long and jointed with rings. As a man skilled in       feats of horsemanship couples four horses together and comes       tearing full speed along the public way from the country into       some large town—many both men and women marvel as they see him       for he keeps all the time changing his horse, springing from one       to another without ever missing his feet while the horses are at       a gallop—even so did Ajax go striding from one ship’s deck to       another, and his voice went up into the heavens. He kept on       shouting his orders to the Danaans and exhorting them to defend       their ships and tents; neither did Hector remain within the main       body of the Trojan warriors, but as a dun eagle swoops down upon       a flock of wild-fowl feeding near a river—geese, it may be, or       cranes, or long-necked swans—even so did Hector make straight for       a dark-prowed ship, rushing right towards it; for Jove with his       mighty hand impelled him forward, and roused his people to follow       him.

      And now the battle again raged furiously at the ships. You would       have thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so       fiercely did they fight; and this was the mind in which they       were—the Achaeans did not believe they should escape destruction       but thought themselves doomed, while there was not a Trojan but       his heart beat high with the hope of firing the ships and putting       the Achaean heroes to the sword.

      Thus were the two sides minded. Then Hector seized the stern of       the good ship that had brought Protesilaus to Troy, but never       bore him back to his native land. Round this ship there raged a       close hand-to-hand fight between Danaans and Trojans. They did       not fight at a distance with bows and javelins, but with one mind       hacked at one another in close combat with their mighty swords       and spears pointed at both ends; they fought moreover with keen       battle-axes and with hatchets. Many a good stout blade hilted and       scabbarded with iron, fell from hand or shoulder as they fought,       and the earth ran red with blood. Hector, when he had seized the       ship, would not loose his hold but held on to its curved stern       and shouted to the Trojans, “Bring fire, and raise the battle-cry       all of you with a single voice. Now has Jove vouchsafed us a day       that will pay us for all the rest; this day we shall take the       ships which came hither against heaven’s will, and which have       caused us such infinite suffering through the cowardice of our       councillors, who when I would have done battle at the ships held       me back and forbade the host to follow me; if Jove did then       indeed warp our judgements, himself now commands me and cheers me       on.”

      As he spoke thus the Trojans sprang yet more fiercely on the       Achaeans, and Ajax no longer held his ground, for he was overcome       by the darts that were flung at him, and made sure that he was       doomed. Therefore he left the raised deck at the stern, and       stepped back on to the seven-foot bench of the oarsmen. Here he       stood on the look-out, and with his spear held back any Trojan       whom he saw bringing fire to the ships. All the time he kept on       shouting at the top of his voice and exhorting the Danaans. “My       friends,” he cried, “Danaan heroes, servants of Mars, be men my       friends, and fight with might and with main. Can we hope to find       helpers hereafter, or a wall to shield us more surely than the       one we have? There is no strong city within reach, whence we may       draw fresh forces to turn the scales in our favour. We are on the       plain of the armed Trojans with the sea behind us, and far from       our own country. Our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our       hands and in hard fighting.”

      As he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and       when any Trojan made towards the ships with fire at Hector’s       bidding, he would be on the look-out for him, and drive at him       with his long spear. Twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand       fight before the ships.




BOOK XVI.


      Fire being now thrown on the ship of Protesilaus, Patroclus       fights in the armour of Achilles—He drives the Trojans back, but       is in the end killed by Euphorbus and Hector.

      Thus did they fight about the ship of Protesilaus. Then Patroclus       drew near to Achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from       some spring whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high       precipice. When Achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for       him and said, “Why, Patroclus, do you stand there weeping like       some silly child that comes running to her mother, and begs to be       taken up and carried—she catches hold of her mother’s dress to       stay her though she is in a hurry, and looks tearfully up until       her mother carries her—even such tears, Patroclus, are you now       shedding. Have you anything to say to the Myrmidons or to myself?       or have you had news from Phthia which you alone know? They tell       me Menoetius son of Actor is still alive, as also Peleus son of       Aeacus, among the Myrmidons—men whose loss we two should bitterly       deplore; or are you grieving about the Argives and the way in       which they are being killed at the ships, through their own       high-handed doings? Do not hide anything from me but tell me that       both of us may know about it.”

      Then, O knight Patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered,       “Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, do       not be angry, but I weep for the disaster that has now befallen       the Argives. All those who have been their champions so far are       lying at the ships, wounded by sword or spear. Brave Diomed son       of Tydeus has been hit with a spear, while famed Ulysses and       Agamemnon have received sword-wounds; Eurypylus again has been       struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries are       attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are       you still, O Achilles, so inexorable? May it never be my lot to       nurse such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own       good name. Who in future story will speak well of you unless you       now save the Argives from ruin? You know no pity; knight Peleus       was not your father nor Thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore       you and the sheer cliffs begot you, so cruel and remorseless are       you. If however you are kept back through knowledge of some       oracle, or if your mother Thetis has told you something from the       mouth of Jove, at least send me and the Myrmidons with me, if I       may bring deliverance to the Danaans. Let me moreover wear your       armour; the Trojans may thus mistake me for you and quit the       field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the Achaeans may have       breathing time—which while they are fighting may hardly be. We       who are fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and       tents to their own city.”

      He knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own       destruction. Achilles was deeply moved and answered, “What, noble       Patroclus, are you saying? I know no prophesyings which I am       heeding, nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of       Jove, but I am cut to the very heart that one of my own rank       should dare to rob me because he is more powerful than I am.       This, after all that I have gone through, is more than I can       endure. The girl whom the sons of the Achaeans chose for me, whom       I won as the fruit of my spear on having sacked a city—her has       King Agamemnon taken from me as though I were some common       vagrant. Still, let bygones be bygones: no man may keep his anger       for ever; I said I would not relent till battle and the cry of       war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird my armour       about your shoulders, and lead the Myrmidons to battle, for the       dark cloud of Trojans has burst furiously over our fleet; the       Argives are driven back on to the beach, cooped within a narrow       space, and the whole people of Troy has taken heart to sally out       against them, because they see not the visor of my helmet       gleaming near them. Had they seen this, there would not have been       a creek nor grip that had not been filled with their dead as they       fled back again. And so it would have been, if only King       Agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. As it is the Trojans have beset       our host. Diomed son of Tydeus no longer wields his spear to       defend the Danaans, neither have I heard the voice of the son of       Atreus coming from his hated head, whereas that of murderous       Hector rings in my cars as he gives orders to the Trojans, who       triumph over the Achaeans and fill the whole plain with their cry       of battle. But even so, Patroclus, fall upon them and save the       fleet, lest the Trojans fire it and prevent us from being able to       return. Do, however, as I now bid you, that you may win me great       honour from all the Danaans, and that they may restore the girl       to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. When you       have driven the Trojans from the ships, come back again. Though       Juno’s thundering husband should put triumph within your reach,       do not fight the Trojans further in my absence, or you will rob       me of glory that should be mine. And do not for lust of battle go       on killing the Trojans nor lead the Achaeans on to Ilius, lest       one of the ever-living gods from Olympus attack you—for Phoebus       Apollo loves them well: return when you have freed the ships from       peril, and let others wage war upon the plain. Would, by father       Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that not a single man of all the       Trojans might be left alive, nor yet of the Argives, but that we       two might be alone left to tear aside the mantle that veils the       brow of Troy.”

      Thus did they converse. But Ajax could no longer hold his ground       for the shower of darts that rained upon him; the will of Jove       and the javelins of the Trojans were too much for him; the helmet       that gleamed about his temples rang with the continuous clatter       of the missiles that kept pouring on to it and on to the       cheek-pieces that protected his face. Moreover his left shoulder       was tired with having held his shield so long, yet for all this,       let fly at him as they would, they could not make him give       ground. He could hardly draw his breath, the sweat rained from       every pore of his body, he had not a moment’s respite, and on all       sides he was beset by danger upon danger.

      And now, tell me, O Muses that hold your mansions on Olympus, how       fire was thrown upon the ships of the Achaeans. Hector came close       up and let drive with his great sword at the ashen spear of Ajax.       He cut it clean in two just behind where the point was fastened       on to the shaft of the spear. Ajax, therefore, had now nothing       but a headless spear, while the bronze point flew some way off       and came ringing down on to the ground. Ajax knew the hand of       heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that Jove had now left       him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for the Trojans.       Therefore he drew back, and the Trojans flung fire upon the ship       which was at once wrapped in flame.

      The fire was now flaring about the ship’s stern, whereon Achilles       smote his two thighs and said to Patroclus, “Up, noble knight,       for I see the glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they       destroy our ships, and there be no way by which we may retreat.       Gird on your armour at once while I call our people together.”

      As he spoke Patroclus put on his armour. First he greaved his       legs with greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of       silver; after this he donned the cuirass of the son of Aeacus,       richly inlaid and studded. He hung his silver-studded sword of       bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On his       comely head he set his helmet, well wrought, with a crest of       horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it. He grasped two       redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but he did not take the       spear of noble Achilles, so stout and strong, for none other of       the Achaeans could wield it, though Achilles could do so easily.       This was the ashen spear from Mount Pelion, which Chiron had cut       upon a mountain top and had given to Peleus, wherewith to deal       out death among heroes. He bade Automedon yoke his horses with       all speed, for he was the man whom he held in honour next after       Achilles, and on whose support in battle he could rely most       firmly. Automedon therefore yoked the fleet horses Xanthus and       Balius, steeds that could fly like the wind: these were they whom       the harpy Podarge bore to the west wind, as she was grazing in a       meadow by the waters of the river Oceanus. In the side traces he       set the noble horse Pedasus, whom Achilles had brought away with       him when he sacked the city of Eetion, and who, mortal steed       though he was, could take his place along with those that were       immortal.

      Meanwhile Achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and       bade his Myrmidons put on their armour. Even as fierce ravening       wolves that are feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed       upon the mountains, and their jaws are red with blood—they go in       a pack to lap water from the clear spring with their long thin       tongues; and they reek of blood and slaughter; they know not what       fear is, for it is hunger drives them—even so did the leaders and       counsellors of the Myrmidons gather round the good squire of the       fleet descendant of Aeacus, and among them stood Achilles himself       cheering on both men and horses.

      Fifty ships had noble Achilles brought to Troy, and in each there       was a crew of fifty oarsmen. Over these he set five captains whom       he could trust, while he was himself commander over them all.       Menesthius of the gleaming corslet, son to the river Spercheius       that streams from heaven, was captain of the first company. Fair       Polydora daughter of Peleus bore him to ever-flowing Spercheius—a       woman mated with a god—but he was called son of Borus son of       Perieres, with whom his mother was living as his wedded wife, and       who gave great wealth to gain her. The second company was led by       noble Eudorus, son to an unwedded woman. Polymele, daughter of       Phylas the graceful dancer, bore him; the mighty slayer of Argos       was enamoured of her as he saw her among the singing women at a       dance held in honour of Diana the rushing huntress of the golden       arrows; he therefore—Mercury, giver of all good—went with her       into an upper chamber, and lay with her in secret, whereon she       bore him a noble son Eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in       fight valiant. When Ilithuia goddess of the pains of childbirth       brought him to the light of day, and he saw the face of the sun,       mighty Echecles son of Actor took the mother to wife, and gave       great wealth to gain her, but her father Phylas brought the child       up, and took care of him, doting as fondly upon him as though he       were his own son. The third company was led by Pisander son of       Maemalus, the finest spearman among all the Myrmidons next to       Achilles’ own comrade Patroclus. The old knight Phoenix was       captain of the fourth company, and Alcimedon, noble son of       Laerceus of the fifth.

      When Achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with       their captains, he charged them straitly saying, “Myrmidons,       remember your threats against the Trojans while you were at the       ships in the time of my anger, and you were all complaining of       me. ‘Cruel son of Peleus,’ you would say, ‘your mother must have       suckled you on gall, so ruthless are you. You keep us here at the       ships against our will; if you are so relentless it were better       we went home over the sea.’ Often have you gathered and thus       chided with me. The hour is now come for those high feats of arms       that you have so long been pining for, therefore keep high hearts       each one of you to do battle with the Trojans.”

      With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they       serried their companies yet more closely when they heard the       words of their king. As the stones which a builder sets in the       wall of some high house which is to give shelter from the       winds—even so closely were the helmets and bossed shields set       against one another. Shield pressed on shield, helm on helm, and       man on man; so close were they that the horse-hair plumes on the       gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each other as they bent       their heads.

      In front of them all two men put on their armour—Patroclus and       Automedon—two men, with but one mind to lead the Myrmidons. Then       Achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong       chest which silver-footed Thetis had given him to take on board       ship, and which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out       the cold, and good thick rugs. In this chest he had a cup of rare       workmanship, from which no man but himself might drink, nor would       he make offering from it to any other god save only to father       Jove. He took the cup from the chest and cleansed it with       sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and after he had       washed his hands he drew wine. Then he stood in the middle of the       court and prayed, looking towards heaven, and making his       drink-offering of wine; nor was he unseen of Jove whose joy is in       thunder. “King Jove,” he cried, “lord of Dodona, god of the       Pelasgi, who dwellest afar, you who hold wintry Dodona in your       sway, where your prophets the Selli dwell around you with their       feet unwashed and their couches made upon the ground—if you heard       me when I prayed to you aforetime, and did me honour while you       sent disaster on the Achaeans, vouchsafe me now the fulfilment of       yet this further prayer. I shall stay here where my ships are       lying, but I shall send my comrade into battle at the head of       many Myrmidons. Grant, O all-seeing Jove, that victory may go       with him; put your courage into his heart that Hector may learn       whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether his       might is only then so indomitable when I myself enter the turmoil       of war. Afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of       battle from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with       his armour and his comrades, fighters in close combat.”

      Thus did he pray, and all-counselling Jove heard his prayer. Part       of it he did indeed vouchsafe him—but not the whole. He granted       that Patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships,       but refused to let him come safely out of the fight.

      When he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, Achilles       went inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest.

      Then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the       fierce fight that raged between the Trojans and Achaeans.

      Meanwhile the armed band that was about Patroclus marched on till       they sprang high in hope upon the Trojans. They came swarming out       like wasps whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly       children love to tease, whereon any one who happens to be passing       may get stung—or again, if a wayfarer going along the road vexes       them by accident, every wasp will come flying out in a fury to       defend his little ones—even with such rage and courage did the       Myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their cry of battle rose       heavenwards. Patroclus called out to his men at the top of his       voice, “Myrmidons, followers of Achilles son of Peleus, be men my       friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory       for the son of Peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships       of the Argives—he, and his close fighting followers. The son of       Atreus King Agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no       respect to the bravest of the Achaeans.”

      With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they       fell in a body upon the Trojans. The ships rang again with the       cry which the Achaeans raised, and when the Trojans saw the brave       son of Menoetius and his squire all gleaming in their armour,       they were daunted and their battalions were thrown into       confusion, for they thought the fleet son of Peleus must now have       put aside his anger, and have been reconciled to Agamemnon; every       one, therefore, looked round about to see whither he might fly       for safety.

      Patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where       men were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of       Protesilaus. He hit Pyraechmes who had led his Paeonian horsemen       from the Amydon and the broad waters of the river Axius; the       spear struck him on the right shoulder, and with a groan he fell       backwards in the dust; on this his men were thrown into       confusion, for by killing their leader, who was the finest       soldier among them, Patroclus struck panic into them all. He thus       drove them from the ship and quenched the fire that was then       blazing—leaving the half-burnt ship to lie where it was. The       Trojans were now driven back with a shout that rent the skies,       while the Danaans poured after them from their ships, shouting       also without ceasing. As when Jove, gatherer of the       thunder-cloud, spreads a dense canopy on the top of some lofty       mountain, and all the peaks, the jutting headlands, and forest       glades show out in the great light that flashes from the bursting       heavens, even so when the Danaans had now driven back the fire       from their ships, they took breath for a little while; but the       fury of the fight was not yet over, for the Trojans were not       driven back in utter rout, but still gave battle, and were ousted       from their ground only by sheer fighting.

      The fight then became more scattered, and the chieftains killed       one another when and how they could. The valiant son of Menoetius       first drove his spear into the thigh of Areilycus just as he was       turning round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone       so that he fell forward. Meanwhile Menelaus struck Thoas in the       chest, where it was exposed near the rim of his shield, and he       fell dead. The son of Phyleus saw Amphiclus about to attack him,       and ere he could do so took aim at the upper part of his thigh,       where the muscles are thicker than in any other part; the spear       tore through all the sinews of the leg, and his eyes were closed       in darkness. Of the sons of Nestor one, Antilochus, speared       Atymnius, driving the point of the spear through his throat, and       down he fell. Maris then sprang on Antilochus in hand-to-hand       fight to avenge his brother, and bestrode the body spear in hand;       but valiant Thrasymedes was too quick for him, and in a moment       had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow; his       aim was true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root       of his arm, and tore them right down to the bone, so he fell       heavily to the ground and his eyes were closed in darkness. Thus       did these two noble comrades of Sarpedon go down to Erebus slain       by the two sons of Nestor; they were the warrior sons of       Amisodorus, who had reared the invincible Chimaera, to the bane       of many. Ajax son of Oileus sprang on Cleobulus and took him       alive as he was entangled in the crush; but he killed him then       and there by a sword-blow on the neck. The sword reeked with his       blood, while dark death and the strong hand of fate gripped him       and closed his eyes.

      Peneleos and Lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed       each other with their spears. They had both thrown without       effect, so now they drew their swords. Lycon struck the plumed       crest of Peneleos’ helmet but his sword broke at the hilt, while       Peneleos smote Lycon on the neck under the ear. The blade sank so       deep that the head was held on by nothing but the skin, and there       was no more life left in him. Meriones gave chase to Acamas on       foot and caught him up just as he was about to mount his chariot;       he drove a spear through his right shoulder so that he fell       headlong from the car, and his eyes were closed in darkness.       Idomeneus speared Erymas in the mouth; the bronze point of the       spear went clean through it beneath the brain, crashing in among       the white bones and smashing them up. His teeth were all of them       knocked out and the blood came gushing in a stream from both his       eyes; it also came gurgling up from his mouth and nostrils, and       the darkness of death enfolded him round about.

      Thus did these chieftains of the Danaans each of them kill his       man. As ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them       when they are alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the       main flock through the carelessness of the shepherd—and when the       wolves see this they pounce upon them at once because they cannot       defend themselves—even so did the Danaans now fall on the       Trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries in their panic and had no       more fight left in them.

      Meanwhile great Ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into Hector,       but Hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well       under cover of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the       whizzing of the arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. He well       knew that the fortunes of the day had changed, but still stood       his ground and tried to protect his comrades.

      As when a cloud goes up into heaven from Olympus, rising out of a       clear sky when Jove is brewing a gale—even with such panic       stricken rout did the Trojans now fly, and there was no order in       their going. Hector’s fleet horses bore him and his armour out of       the fight, and he left the Trojan host penned in by the deep       trench against their will. Many a yoke of horses snapped the pole       of their chariots in the trench and left their master’s car       behind them. Patroclus gave chase, calling impetuously on the       Danaans and full of fury against the Trojans, who, being now no       longer in a body, filled all the ways with their cries of panic       and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of dust they       raised, and the horses strained every nerve in their flight from       the tents and ships towards the city.

      Patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men       flying in confusion, cheering on his men the while. Chariots were       being smashed in all directions, and many a man came tumbling       down from his own car to fall beneath the wheels of that of       Patroclus, whose immortal steeds, given by the gods to Peleus,       sprang over the trench at a bound as they sped onward. He was       intent on trying to get near Hector, for he had set his heart on       spearing him, but Hector’s horses were now hurrying him away. As       the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day       when Jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked       judgement in their courts, and driving justice therefrom without       heed to the decrees of heaven—all the rivers run full and the       torrents tear many a new channel as they roar headlong from the       mountains to the dark sea, and it fares ill with the works of       men—even such was the stress and strain of the Trojan horses in       their flight.

      Patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and       drove them back to the ships. They were doing their best to reach       the city, but he would not let them, and bore down on them       between the river and the ships and wall. Many a fallen comrade       did he then avenge. First he hit Pronous with a spear on the       chest where it was exposed near the rim of his shield, and he       fell heavily to the ground. Next he sprang on Thestor son of       Enops, who was sitting all huddled up in his chariot, for he had       lost his head and the reins had been torn out of his hands.       Patroclus went up to him and drove a spear into his right jaw; he       thus hooked him by the teeth and the spear pulled him over the       rim of his car, as one who sits at the end of some jutting rock       and draws a strong fish out of the sea with a hook and a       line—even so with his spear did he pull Thestor all gaping from       his chariot; he then threw him down on his face and he died while       falling. On this, as Erylaus was on coming to attack him, he       struck him full on the head with a stone, and his brains were all       battered inside his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to the       ground and the pangs of death took hold upon him. Then he laid       low, one after the other, Erymas, Amphoterus, Epaltes,       Tlepolemus, Echius son of Damastor, Pyris, Ipheus, Euippus and       Polymelus son of Argeas.

      Now when Sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled       tunics, being overcome by Patroclus son of Menoetius, he rebuked       the Lycians saying. “Shame on you, where are you flying to? Show       your mettle; I will myself meet this man in fight and learn who       it is that is so masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has       stretched many a brave man upon the ground.”

      He sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and Patroclus, when he       saw this, leaped on to the ground also. The two then rushed at       one another with loud cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned       vultures that scream and tear at one another in some high       mountain fastness.

      The son of scheming Saturn looked down upon them in pity and said       to Juno who was his wife and sister, “Alas, that it should be the       lot of Sarpedon whom I love so dearly to perish by the hand of       Patroclus. I am in two minds whether to catch him up out of the       fight and set him down safe and sound in the fertile land of       Lycia, or to let him now fall by the hand of the son of       Menoetius.”

      And Juno answered, “Most dread son of Saturn, what is this that       you are saying? Would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has       long been fated, out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we       shall not all of us be of your mind. I say further, and lay my       saying to your heart, that if you send Sarpedon safely to his own       home, some other of the gods will be also wanting to escort his       son out of battle, for there are many sons of gods fighting round       the city of Troy, and you will make every one jealous. If,       however, you are fond of him and pity him, let him indeed fall by       the hand of Patroclus, but as soon as the life is gone out of       him, send Death and sweet Sleep to bear him off the field and       take him to the broad lands of Lycia, where his brothers and his       kinsmen will bury him with mound and pillar, in due honour to the       dead.”

      The sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood       upon the earth in honour of his son whom Patroclus was about to       kill on the rich plain of Troy far from his home.

      When they were now come close to one another Patroclus struck       Thrasydemus, the brave squire of Sarpedon, in the lower part of       the belly, and killed him. Sarpedon then aimed a spear at       Patroclus and missed him, but he struck the horse Pedasus in the       right shoulder, and it screamed aloud as it lay, groaning in the       dust until the life went out of it. The other two horses began to       plunge; the pole of the chariot cracked and they got entangled in       the reins through the fall of the horse that was yoked along with       them; but Automedon knew what to do; without the loss of a moment       he drew the keen blade that hung by his sturdy thigh and cut the       third horse adrift; whereon the other two righted themselves, and       pulling hard at the reins again went together into battle.

      Sarpedon now took a second aim at Patroclus, and again missed       him, the point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without       hitting him. Patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped       not from his hand in vain, for he hit Sarpedon just where the       midriff surrounds the ever-beating heart. He fell like some oak       or silver poplar or tall pine to which woodmen have laid their       axes upon the mountains to make timber for ship-building—even so       did he lie stretched at full length in front of his chariot and       horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained dust. As when       a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and fastens on       a great black bull which dies bellowing in its clutches—even so       did the leader of the Lycian warriors struggle in death as he       fell by the hand of Patroclus. He called on his trusty comrade       and said, “Glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth all       your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit       yourself like a valiant soldier. First go about among the Lycian       captains and bid them fight for Sarpedon; then yourself also do       battle to save my armour from being taken. My name will haunt you       henceforth and for ever if the Achaeans rob me of my armour now       that I have fallen at their ships. Do your very utmost and call       all my people together.”

      Death closed his eyes as he spoke. Patroclus planted his heel on       his breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses       came out along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and       Sarpedon’s soul at the same time. Hard by the Myrmidons held his       snorting steeds, who were wild with panic at finding themselves       deserted by their lords.

      Glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what Sarpedon said,       for he could not help him. He had to support his arm with his       other hand, being in great pain through the wound which Teucer’s       arrow had given him when Teucer was defending the wall as he,       Glaucus, was assailing it. Therefore he prayed to far-darting       Apollo saying, “Hear me O king from your seat, may be in the rich       land of Lycia, or may be in Troy, for in all places you can hear       the prayer of one who is in distress, as I now am. I have a       grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain, there is no       staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my       hurt, so that I cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and       fight them, though our prince, Jove’s son Sarpedon, is slain.       Jove defended not his son, do you, therefore, O king, heal me of       my wound, ease my pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the       Lycians and to fight along with them round the body of him who       has fallen.”

      Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He eased his pain,       staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new       strength. Glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the       mighty god had answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went       among the Lycian captains, and bade them come to fight about the       body of Sarpedon. From these he strode on among the Trojans to       Polydamas son of Panthous and Agenor; he then went in search of       Aeneas and Hector, and when he had found them he said, “Hector,       you have utterly forgotten your allies, who languish here for       your sake far from friends and home while you do nothing to       support them. Sarpedon leader of the Lycian warriors has       fallen—he who was at once the right and might of Lycia; Mars has       laid him low by the spear of Patroclus. Stand by him, my friends,       and suffer not the Myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to       treat his body with contumely in revenge for all the Danaans whom       we have speared at the ships.”

      As he spoke the Trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable       grief; for Sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the       main stays of their city, both as having much people with him,       and himself the foremost among them all. Led by Hector, who was       infuriated by the fall of Sarpedon, they made instantly for the       Danaans with all their might, while the undaunted spirit of       Patroclus son of Menoetius cheered on the Achaeans. First he       spoke to the two Ajaxes, men who needed no bidding. “Ajaxes,”       said he, “may it now please you to show yourselves the men you       have always been, or even better—Sarpedon is fallen—he who was       first to overleap the wall of the Achaeans; let us take the body       and outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders, and       kill his comrades if they try to rescue his body.”

      He spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides,       therefore, the Trojans and Lycians on the one hand, and the       Myrmidons and Achaeans on the other, strengthened their       battalions, and fought desperately about the body of Sarpedon,       shouting fiercely the while. Mighty was the din of their armour       as they came together, and Jove shed a thick darkness over the       fight, to increase the toil of the battle over the body of his       son.

      At first the Trojans made some headway against the Achaeans, for       one of the best men among the Myrmidons was killed, Epeigeus, son       of noble Agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of       Budeum; but presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his       own, he took refuge with Peleus and Thetis, who sent him to Ilius       the land of noble steeds to fight the Trojans under Achilles.       Hector now struck him on the head with a stone just as he had       caught hold of the body, and his brains inside his helmet were       all battered in, so that he fell face foremost upon the body of       Sarpedon, and there died. Patroclus was enraged by the death of       his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a       hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. Even so       swiftly, O noble knight Patroclus, did you make straight for the       Lycians and Trojans to avenge your comrade. Forthwith he struck       Sthenelaus the son of Ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and       broke the tendons that join it to the head and spine. On this       Hector and the front rank of his men gave ground. As far as a man       can throw a javelin when competing for some prize, or even in       battle—so far did the Trojans now retreat before the Achaeans.       Glaucus, captain of the Lycians, was the first to rally them, by       killing Bathycles son of Chalcon who lived in Hellas and was the       richest man among the Myrmidons. Glaucus turned round suddenly,       just as Bathycles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of       him, and drove his spear right into the middle of his chest,       whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and the fall of so good a       man filled the Achaeans with dismay, while the Trojans were       exultant, and came up in a body round the corpse. Nevertheless       the Achaeans, mindful of their prowess, bore straight down upon       them.

      Meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the Trojans, Laogonus       son of Onetor, who was priest of Jove of Mt. Ida, and was       honoured by the people as though he were a god. Meriones struck       him under the jaw and ear, so that life went out of him and the       darkness of death laid hold upon him. Aeneas then aimed a spear       at Meriones, hoping to hit him under the shield as he was       advancing, but Meriones saw it coming and stooped forward to       avoid it, whereon the spear flew past him and the point stuck in       the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till Mars robbed       it of its force. The spear, therefore, sped from Aeneas’s hand in       vain and fell quivering to the ground. Aeneas was angry and said,       “Meriones, you are a good dancer, but if I had hit you my spear       would soon have made an end of you.”

      And Meriones answered, “Aeneas, for all your bravery, you will       not be able to make an end of every one who comes against you.       You are only a mortal like myself, and if I were to hit you in       the middle of your shield with my spear, however strong and       self-confident you may be, I should soon vanquish you, and you       would yield your life to Hades of the noble steeds.”

      On this the son of Menoetius rebuked him and said, “Meriones,       hero though you be, you should not speak thus; taunting speeches,       my good friend, will not make the Trojans draw away from the dead       body; some of them must go under ground first; blows for battle,       and words for council; fight, therefore, and say nothing.”

      He led the way as he spoke and the hero went forward with him. As       the sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the       mountains—and the thud of their axes is heard afar—even such a       din now rose from earth-clash of bronze armour and of good       ox-hide shields, as men smote each other with their swords and       spears pointed at both ends. A man had need of good eyesight now       to know Sarpedon, so covered was he from head to foot with spears       and blood and dust. Men swarmed about the body, as flies that       buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are brimming       with milk—even so did they gather round Sarpedon; nor did Jove       turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept       looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill       Patroclus, and considering whether Hector should be allowed to       end him now in the fight round the body of Sarpedon, and strip       him of his armour, or whether he should let him give yet further       trouble to the Trojans. In the end, he deemed it best that the       brave squire of Achilles son of Peleus should drive Hector and       the Trojans back towards the city and take the lives of many.       First, therefore, he made Hector turn fainthearted, whereon he       mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the other Trojans fly also,       for he saw that the scales of Jove had turned against him.       Neither would the brave Lycians stand firm; they were dismayed       when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap of       corpses—for when the son of Saturn made the fight wax hot many       had fallen above him. The Achaeans, therefore stripped the       gleaming armour from his shoulders and the brave son of Menoetius       gave it to his men to take to the ships. Then Jove lord of the       storm-cloud said to Apollo, “Dear Phoebus, go, I pray you, and       take Sarpedon out of range of the weapons; cleanse the black       blood from off him, and then bear him a long way off where you       may wash him in the river, anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe       him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the arms of the       two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who will carry him       straightway to the rich land of Lycia, where his brothers and       kinsmen will inter him, and will raise both mound and pillar to       his memory, in due honour to the dead.”

      Thus he spoke. Apollo obeyed his father’s saying, and came down       from the heights of Ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he       took Sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a       long way off, where he washed him in the river, anointed him with       ambrosia and clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he       committed him to the arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and       Sleep, who presently set him down in the rich land of Lycia.

      Meanwhile Patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to       Automedon, pursued the Trojans and Lycians in the pride and       foolishness of his heart. Had he but obeyed the bidding of the       son of Peleus, he would have escaped death and have been       scatheless; but the counsels of Jove pass man’s understanding; he       will put even a brave man to flight and snatch victory from his       grasp, or again he will set him on to fight, as he now did when       he put a high spirit into the heart of Patroclus.

      Who then first, and who last, was slain by you, O Patroclus, when       the gods had now called you to meet your doom? First Adrestus,       Autonous, Echeclus, Perimus the son of Megas, Epistor and       Melanippus; after these he killed Elasus, Mulius, and Pylartes.       These he slew, but the rest saved themselves by flight.

      The sons of the Achaeans would now have taken Troy by the hands       of Patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not       Phoebus Apollo taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his       purpose and to aid the Trojans. Thrice did Patroclus charge at an       angle of the high wall, and thrice did Apollo beat him back,       striking his shield with his own immortal hands. When Patroclus       was coming on like a god for yet a fourth time, Apollo shouted to       him with an awful voice and said, “Draw back, noble Patroclus, it       is not your lot to sack the city of the Trojan chieftains, nor       yet will it be that of Achilles who is a far better man than you       are.” On hearing this, Patroclus withdrew to some distance and       avoided the anger of Apollo.

      Meanwhile Hector was waiting with his horses inside the Scaean       gates, in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or       to call the army inside the gates. As he was thus doubting       Phoebus Apollo drew near him in the likeness of a young and lusty       warrior Asius, who was Hector’s uncle, being own brother to       Hecuba, and son of Dymas who lived in Phrygia by the waters of       the river Sangarius; in his likeness Jove’s son Apollo now spoke       to Hector saying, “Hector, why have you left off fighting? It is       ill done of you. If I were as much better a man than you, as I am       worse, you should soon rue your slackness. Drive straight towards       Patroclus, if so be that Apollo may grant you a triumph over him,       and you may rule him.”

      With this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and Hector bade       Cebriones drive again into the fight. Apollo passed in among       them, and struck panic into the Argives, while he gave triumph to       Hector and the Trojans. Hector let the other Danaans alone and       killed no man, but drove straight at Patroclus. Patroclus then       sprang from his chariot to the ground, with a spear in his left       hand, and in his right a jagged stone as large as his hand could       hold. He stood still and threw it, nor did it go far without       hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for the stone struck       Cebriones, Hector’s charioteer, a bastard son of Priam, as he       held the reins in his hands. The stone hit him on the forehead       and drove his brows into his head for the bone was smashed, and       his eyes fell to the ground at his feet. He dropped dead from his       chariot as though he were diving, and there was no more life left       in him. Over him did you then vaunt, O knight Patroclus, saying,       “Bless my heart, how active he is, and how well he dives. If we       had been at sea this fellow would have dived from the ship’s side       and brought up as many oysters as the whole crew could stomach,       even in rough water, for he has dived beautifully off his chariot       on to the ground. It seems, then, that there are divers also       among the Trojans.”

      As he spoke he flung himself on Cebriones with the spring, as it       were, of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself       struck in the chest, and his courage is his own bane—even so       furiously, O Patroclus, did you then spring upon Cebriones.       Hector sprang also from his chariot to the ground. The pair then       fought over the body of Cebriones. As two lions fight fiercely on       some high mountain over the body of a stag that they have killed,       even so did these two mighty warriors, Patroclus son of Menoetius       and brave Hector, hack and hew at one another over the corpse of       Cebriones. Hector would not let him go when he had once got him       by the head, while Patroclus kept fast hold of his feet, and a       fierce fight raged between the other Danaans and Trojans. As the       east and south wind buffet one another when they beat upon some       dense forest on the mountains—there is beech and ash and       spreading cornel; the top of the trees roar as they beat on one       another, and one can hear the boughs cracking and breaking—even       so did the Trojans and Achaeans spring upon one another and lay       about each other, and neither side would give way. Many a pointed       spear fell to ground and many a winged arrow sped from its       bowstring about the body of Cebriones; many a great stone,       moreover, beat on many a shield as they fought around his body,       but there he lay in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and       hugely, heedless of his driving now.

      So long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven the weapons of       either side were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he       went down towards the time when men loose their oxen, the       Achaeans proved to be beyond all forecast stronger, so that they       drew Cebriones out of range of the darts and tumult of the       Trojans, and stripped the armour from his shoulders. Then       Patroclus sprang like Mars with fierce intent and a terrific       shout upon the Trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but as       he was coming on like a god for a time, then, O Patroclus, was       the hour of your end approaching, for Phoebus fought you in fell       earnest. Patroclus did not see him as he moved about in the       crush, for he was enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god       struck him from behind on his back and his broad shoulders with       the flat of his hand, so that his eyes turned dizzy. Phoebus       Apollo beat the helmet from off his head, and it rolled rattling       off under the horses’ feet, where its horse-hair plumes were all       begrimed with dust and blood. Never indeed had that helmet fared       so before, for it had served to protect the head and comely       forehead of the godlike hero Achilles. Now, however, Zeus       delivered it over to be worn by Hector. Nevertheless the end of       Hector also was near. The bronze-shod spear, so great and so       strong, was broken in the hand of Patroclus, while his shield       that covered him from head to foot fell to the ground as did also       the band that held it, and Apollo undid the fastenings of his       corslet.

      On this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he       stood as one dazed; whereon Euphorbus son of Panthous a       Dardanian, the best spearman of his time, as also the finest       horseman and fleetest runner, came behind him and struck him in       the back with a spear, midway between the shoulders. This man as       soon as ever he had come up with his chariot had dismounted       twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of war—he it       was, O knight Patroclus, that first drove a weapon into you, but       he did not quite overpower you. Euphorbus then ran back into the       crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of the wound; he would       not stand firm and wait for Patroclus, unarmed though he now was,       to attack him; but Patroclus unnerved, alike by the blow the god       had given him and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of       his men in fear for his life. Hector on this, seeing him to be       wounded and giving ground, forced his way through the ranks, and       when close up with him struck him in the lower part of the belly       with a spear, driving the bronze point right through it, so that       he fell heavily to the ground to the great grief of the Achaeans.       As when a lion has fought some fierce wild boar and worsted       him—the two fight furiously upon the mountains over some little       fountain at which they would both drink, and the lion has beaten       the boar till he can hardly breathe—even so did Hector son of       Priam take the life of the brave son of Menoetius who had killed       so many, striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him       the while. “Patroclus,” said he, “you deemed that you should sack       our city, rob our Trojan women of their freedom, and carry them       off in your ships to your own country. Fool; Hector and his fleet       horses were ever straining their utmost to defend them. I am       foremost of all the Trojan warriors to stave the day of bondage       from off them; as for you, vultures shall devour you here. Poor       wretch, Achilles with all his bravery availed you nothing; and       yet I ween when you left him he charged you straitly saying,       ‘Come not back to the ships, knight Patroclus, till you have rent       the blood-stained shirt of murderous Hector about his body.’ Thus       I ween did he charge you, and your fool’s heart answered him       ‘yea’ within you.”

      Then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, O knight       Patroclus: “Hector, vaunt as you will, for Jove the son of Saturn       and Apollo have vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have       vanquished me so easily, and they who have stripped the armour       from my shoulders; had twenty such men as you attacked me, all of       them would have fallen before my spear. Fate and the son of Leto       have overpowered me, and among mortal men Euphorbus; you are       yourself third only in the killing of me. I say further, and lay       my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a little       season; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and       they will lay you low by the hand of Achilles son of Aeacus.”

      When he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul       left his body and flitted down to the house of Hades, mourning       its sad fate and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its       manhood. Dead though he was, Hector still spoke to him saying,       “Patroclus, why should you thus foretell my doom? Who knows but       Achilles, son of lovely Thetis, may be smitten by my spear and       die before me?”

      As he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his       foot upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back.       He then went spear in hand after Automedon, squire of the fleet       descendant of Aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the       immortal steeds which the gods had given as a rich gift to Peleus       bore him swiftly from the field.




BOOK XVII.


      The fight around the body of Patroclus.

      Brave Menelaus son of Atreus now came to know that Patroclus had       fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full       armour to bestride him. As a cow stands lowing over her first       calf, even so did yellow-haired Menelaus bestride Patroclus. He       held his round shield and his spear in front of him, resolute to       kill any who should dare face him. But the son of Panthous had       also noted the body, and came up to Menelaus saying, “Menelaus,       son of Atreus, draw back, leave the body, and let the       blood-stained spoils be. I was first of the Trojans and their       brave allies to drive my spear into Patroclus, let me, therefore,       have my full glory among the Trojans, or I will take aim and kill       you.”

      To this Menelaus answered in great anger “By father Jove,       boasting is an ill thing. The pard is not more bold, nor the lion       nor savage wild boar, which is fiercest and most dauntless of all       creatures, than are the proud sons of Panthous. Yet Hyperenor did       not see out the days of his youth when he made light of me and       withstood me, deeming