[ATH-iliad  —  part 5 of 5, continuation of part 4]
============================================================

Bury me with       all speed that I may pass the gates of Hades; the ghosts, vain       shadows of men that can labour no more, drive me away from them;       they will not yet suffer me to join those that are beyond the       river, and I wander all desolate by the wide gates of the house       of Hades. Give me now your hand I pray you, for when you have       once given me my dues of fire, never shall I again come forth out       of the house of Hades. Nevermore shall we sit apart and take       sweet counsel among the living; the cruel fate which was my       birth-right has yawned its wide jaws around me—nay, you too       Achilles, peer of gods, are doomed to die beneath the wall of the       noble Trojans.

      “One prayer more will I make you, if you will grant it; let not       my bones be laid apart from yours, Achilles, but with them; even       as we were brought up together in your own home, what time       Menoetius brought me to you as a child from Opoeis because by a       sad spite I had killed the son of Amphidamas—not of set purpose,       but in childish quarrel over the dice. The knight Peleus took me       into his house, entreated me kindly, and named me to be your       squire; therefore let our bones lie in but a single urn, the       two-handled golden vase given to you by your mother.”

      And Achilles answered, “Why, true heart, are you come hither to       lay these charges upon me? I will of my own self do all as you       have bidden me. Draw closer to me, let us once more throw our       arms around one another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of       our sorrows.”

      He opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped       him in them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a       vapour, gibbering and whining into the earth. Achilles sprang to       his feet, smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, “Of a       truth even in the house of Hades there are ghosts and phantoms       that have no life in them; all night long the sad spirit of       Patroclus has hovered over head making piteous moan, telling me       what I am to do for him, and looking wondrously like himself.”

      Thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning       about the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. Then       King Agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to       bring wood, and Meriones, squire to Idomeneus, was in charge over       them. They went out with woodmen’s axes and strong ropes in their       hands, and before them went the mules. Up hill and down dale did       they go, by straight ways and crooked, and when they reached the       heights of many-fountained Ida, they laid their axes to the roots       of many a tall branching oak that came thundering down as they       felled it. They split the trees and bound them behind the mules,       which then wended their way as they best could through the thick       brushwood on to the plain. All who had been cutting wood bore       logs, for so Meriones squire to Idomeneus had bidden them, and       they threw them down in a line upon the sea-shore at the place       where Achilles would make a mighty monument for Patroclus and for       himself.

      When they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole       ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but Achilles       ordered his brave Myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke       each man his horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour       and mounted each his chariot—they and their charioteers with       them. The chariots went before, and they that were on foot       followed as a cloud in their tens of thousands after. In the       midst of them his comrades bore Patroclus and covered him with       the locks of their hair which they cut off and threw upon his       body. Last came Achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so noble       a comrade was he taking to the house of Hades.

      When they came to the place of which Achilles had told them they       laid the body down and built up the wood. Achilles then bethought       him of another matter. He went a space away from the pyre, and       cut off the yellow lock which he had let grow for the river       Spercheius. He looked all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and       said, “Spercheius, in vain did my father Peleus vow to you that       when I returned home to my loved native land I should cut off       this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb; fifty she-goats was I to       sacrifice to you there at your springs, where is your grove and       your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings. Thus did my father vow,       but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that I       shall see my home no more, I give this lock as a keepsake to the       hero Patroclus.”

      As he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade,       and all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation.       The sun would have gone down upon their mourning had not Achilles       presently said to Agamemnon, “Son of Atreus, for it is to you       that the people will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a       time to cease from mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre       and set about getting their dinners: we, to whom the dead is       dearest, will see to what is wanted here, and let the other       princes also stay by me.”

      When King Agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their       ships, but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built       a pyre a hundred feet this way and that; then they laid the dead       all sorrowfully upon the top of it. They flayed and dressed many       fat sheep and oxen before the pyre, and Achilles took fat from       all of them and wrapped the body therein from head to foot,       heaping the flayed carcases all round it. Against the bier he       leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents; four proud horses       did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning the while he did so. The       dead hero had had house-dogs; two of them did Achilles slay and       threw upon the pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble       Trojans to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full       of bitterness and fury. Then he committed all to the resistless       and devouring might of the fire; he groaned aloud and called on       his dead comrade by name. “Fare well,” he cried, “Patroclus, even       in the house of Hades; I am now doing all that I have promised       you. Twelve brave sons of noble Trojans shall the flames consume       along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall devour the flesh       of Hector son of Priam.”

      Thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of       Hector, for Jove’s daughter Venus kept them off him night and       day, and anointed him with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh       might not be torn when Achilles was dragging him about. Phoebus       Apollo moreover sent a dark cloud from heaven to earth, which       gave shade to the whole place where Hector lay, that the heat of       the sun might not parch his body.

      Now the pyre about dead Patroclus would not kindle. Achilles       therefore bethought him of another matter; he went apart and       prayed to the two winds Boreas and Zephyrus vowing them goodly       offerings. He made them many drink-offerings from the golden cup       and besought them to come and help him that the wood might make       haste to kindle and the dead bodies be consumed. Fleet Iris heard       him praying and started off to fetch the winds. They were holding       high feast in the house of boisterous Zephyrus when Iris came       running up to the stone threshold of the house and stood there,       but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her and       each of them called her to him, but Iris would not sit down. “I       cannot stay,” she said, “I must go back to the streams of Oceanus       and the land of the Ethiopians who are offering hecatombs to the       immortals, and I would have my share; but Achilles prays that       Boreas and shrill Zephyrus will come to him, and he vows them       goodly offerings; he would have you blow upon the pyre of       Patroclus for whom all the Achaeans are lamenting.”

      With this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that       rent the air and swept the clouds before them. They blew on and       on until they came to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath       them, but when they reached Troy they fell upon the pyre till the       mighty flames roared under the blast that they blew. All night       long did they blow hard and beat upon the fire, and all night       long did Achilles grasp his double cup, drawing wine from a       mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon the spirit of dead       Patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until the earth was       drenched. As a father mourns when he is burning the bones of his       bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents,       even so did Achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade,       pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation.

      At length as the Morning Star was beginning to herald the light       which saffron-mantled Dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the       flames fell and the fire began to die. The winds then went home       beyond the Thracian sea, which roared and boiled as they swept       over it. The son of Peleus now turned away from the pyre and lay       down, overcome with toil, till he fell into a sweet slumber.       Presently they who were about the son of Atreus drew near in a       body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of their coming. He       sat upright and said, “Son of Atreus, and all other princes of       the Achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere upon the fire and       quench it; let us then gather the bones of Patroclus son of       Menoetius, singling them out with care; they are easily found,       for they lie in the middle of the pyre, while all else, both men       and horses, has been thrown in a heap and burned at the outer       edge. We will lay the bones in a golden urn, in two layers of       fat, against the time when I shall myself go down into the house       of Hades. As for the barrow, labour not to raise a great one now,       but such as is reasonable. Afterwards, let those Achaeans who may       be left at the ships when I am gone, build it both broad and       high.”

      Thus he spoke and they obeyed the word of the son of Peleus.       First they poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and       quenched the fire. With many tears they singled out the whitened       bones of their loved comrade and laid them within a golden urn in       two layers of fat: they then covered the urn with a linen cloth       and took it inside the tent. They marked off the circle where the       barrow should be, made a foundation for it about the pyre, and       forthwith heaped up the earth. When they had thus raised a mound       they were going away, but Achilles stayed the people and made       them sit in assembly. He brought prizes from the ships—cauldrons,       tripods, horses and mules, noble oxen, women with fair girdles,       and swart iron.

      The first prize he offered was for the chariot races—a woman       skilled in all useful arts, and a three-legged cauldron that had       ears for handles, and would hold twenty-two measures. This was       for the man who came in first. For the second there was a       six-year old mare, unbroken, and in foal to a he-ass; the third       was to have a goodly cauldron that had never yet been on the       fire; it was still bright as when it left the maker, and would       hold four measures. The fourth prize was two talents of gold, and       the fifth a two-handled urn as yet unsoiled by smoke. Then he       stood up and spoke among the Argives saying—

      “Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, these are the prizes that       lie waiting the winners of the chariot races. At any other time I       should carry off the first prize and take it to my own tent; you       know how far my steeds excel all others—for they are immortal;       Neptune gave them to my father Peleus, who in his turn gave them       to myself; but I shall hold aloof, I and my steeds that have lost       their brave and kind driver, who many a time has washed them in       clear water and anointed their manes with oil. See how they stand       weeping here, with their manes trailing on the ground in the       extremity of their sorrow. But do you others set yourselves in       order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in his horses       and in the strength of his chariot.”

      Thus spoke the son of Peleus and the drivers of chariots       bestirred themselves. First among them all uprose Eumelus, king       of men, son of Admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. Next to       him rose mighty Diomed son of Tydeus; he yoked the Trojan horses       which he had taken from Aeneas, when Apollo bore him out of the       fight. Next to him, yellow-haired Menelaus son of Atreus rose and       yoked his fleet horses, Agamemnon’s mare Aethe, and his own horse       Podargus. The mare had been given to Agamemnon by Echepolus son       of Anchises, that he might not have to follow him to Ilius, but       might stay at home and take his ease; for Jove had endowed him       with great wealth and he lived in spacious Sicyon. This mare, all       eager for the race, did Menelaus put under the yoke.

      Fourth in order Antilochus, son to noble Nestor son of Neleus,       made ready his horses. These were bred in Pylos, and his father       came up to him to give him good advice of which, however, he       stood in but little need. “Antilochus,” said Nestor, “you are       young, but Jove and Neptune have loved you well, and have made       you an excellent horseman. I need not therefore say much by way       of instruction. You are skilful at wheeling your horses round the       post, but the horses themselves are very slow, and it is this       that will, I fear, mar your chances. The other drivers know less       than you do, but their horses are fleeter; therefore, my dear       son, see if you cannot hit upon some artifice whereby you may       insure that the prize shall not slip through your fingers. The       woodman does more by skill than by brute force; by skill the       pilot guides his storm-tossed barque over the sea, and so by       skill one driver can beat another. If a man go wide in rounding       this way and that, whereas a man who knows what he is doing may       have worse horses, but he will keep them well in hand when he       sees the doubling-post; he knows the precise moment at which to       pull the rein, and keeps his eye well on the man in front of him.       I will give you this certain token which cannot escape your       notice. There is a stump of a dead tree—oak or pine as it may       be—some six feet above the ground, and not yet rotted away by       rain; it stands at the fork of the road; it has two white stones       set one on each side, and there is a clear course all round it.       It may have been a monument to some one long since dead, or it       may have been used as a doubling-post in days gone by; now,       however, it has been fixed on by Achilles as the mark round which       the chariots shall turn; hug it as close as you can, but as you       stand in your chariot lean over a little to the left; urge on       your right-hand horse with voice and lash, and give him a loose       rein, but let the left-hand horse keep so close in, that the nave       of your wheel shall almost graze the post; but mind the stone, or       you will wound your horses and break your chariot in pieces,       which would be sport for others but confusion for yourself.       Therefore, my dear son, mind well what you are about, for if you       can be first to round the post there is no chance of any one       giving you the go-by later, not even though you had Adrestus’s       horse Arion behind you—a horse which is of divine race—or those       of Laomedon, which are the noblest in this country.”

      When Nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in       his place, and fifth in order Meriones got ready his horses. They       then all mounted their chariots and cast lots. Achilles shook the       helmet, and the lot of Antilochus son of Nestor fell out first;       next came that of King Eumelus, and after his, those of Menelaus       son of Atreus and of Meriones. The last place fell to the lot of       Diomed son of Tydeus, who was the best man of them all. They took       their places in line; Achilles showed them the doubling-post       round which they were to turn, some way off upon the plain; here       he stationed his father’s follower Phoenix as umpire, to note the       running, and report truly.

      At the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck       them with the reins, and shouted at them with all their might.       They flew full speed over the plain away from the ships, the dust       rose from under them as it were a cloud or whirlwind, and their       manes were all flying in the wind. At one moment the chariots       seemed to touch the ground, and then again they bounded into the       air; the drivers stood erect, and their hearts beat fast and       furious in their lust of victory. Each kept calling on his       horses, and the horses scoured the plain amid the clouds of dust       that they raised.

      It was when they were doing the last part of the course on their       way back towards the sea that their pace was strained to the       utmost and it was seen what each could do. The horses of the       descendant of Pheres now took the lead, and close behind them       came the Trojan stallions of Diomed. They seemed as if about to       mount Eumelus’s chariot, and he could feel their warm breath on       his back and on his broad shoulders, for their heads were close       to him as they flew over the course. Diomed would have now passed       him, or there would have been a dead heat, but Phoebus Apollo to       spite him made him drop his whip. Tears of anger fell from his       eyes as he saw the mares going on faster than ever, while his own       horses lost ground through his having no whip. Minerva saw the       trick which Apollo had played the son of Tydeus, so she brought       him his whip and put spirit into his horses; moreover she went       after the son of Admetus in a rage and broke his yoke for him;       the mares went one to one side of the course, and the other to       the other, and the pole was broken against the ground. Eumelus       was thrown from his chariot close to the wheel; his elbows,       mouth, and nostrils were all torn, and his forehead was bruised       above his eyebrows; his eyes filled with tears and he could find       no utterance. But the son of Tydeus turned his horses aside and       shot far ahead, for Minerva put fresh strength into them and       covered Diomed himself with glory.

      Menelaus son of Atreus came next behind him, but Antilochus       called to his father’s horses. “On with you both,” he cried, “and       do your very utmost. I do not bid you try to beat the steeds of       the son of Tydeus, for Minerva has put running into them, and has       covered Diomed with glory; but you must overtake the horses of       the son of Atreus and not be left behind, or Aethe who is so       fleet will taunt you. Why, my good fellows, are you lagging? I       tell you, and it shall surely be—Nestor will keep neither of you,       but will put both of you to the sword, if we win any the worse a       prize through your carelessness. Fly after them at your utmost       speed; I will hit on a plan for passing them in a narrow part of       the way, and it shall not fail me.”

      They feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space       went quicker. Presently Antilochus saw a narrow place where the       road had sunk. The ground was broken, for the winter’s rain had       gathered and had worn the road so that the whole place was       deepened. Menelaus was making towards it so as to get there       first, for fear of a foul, but Antilochus turned his horses out       of the way, and followed him a little on one side. The son of       Atreus was afraid and shouted out, “Antilochus, you are driving       recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow here, it       will be wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul my       chariot you may bring both of us to a mischief.”

      But Antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had       not heard him. They went side by side for about as far as a young       man can hurl a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his       strength, and then Menelaus’s mares drew behind, for he left off       driving for fear the horses should foul one another and upset the       chariots; thus, while pressing on in quest of victory, they might       both come headlong to the ground. Menelaus then upbraided       Antilochus and said, “There is no greater trickster living than       you are; go, and bad luck go with you; the Achaeans say not well       that you have understanding, and come what may you shall not bear       away the prize without sworn protest on my part.”

      Then he called on his horses and said to them, “Keep your pace,       and slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner       than yours, for they are neither of them young.”

      The horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went faster, so       that they were soon nearly up with the others.

      Meanwhile the Achaeans from their seats were watching how the       horses went, as they scoured the plain amid clouds of their own       dust. Idomeneus captain of the Cretans was first to make out the       running, for he was not in the thick of the crowd, but stood on       the most commanding part of the ground. The driver was a long way       off, but Idomeneus could hear him shouting, and could see the       foremost horse quite plainly—a chestnut with a round white star,       like the moon, on its forehead. He stood up and said among the       Argives, “My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, can       you see the running as well as I can? There seems to be another       pair in front now, and another driver; those that led off at the       start must have been disabled out on the plain. I saw them at       first making their way round the doubling-post, but now, though I       search the plain of Troy, I cannot find them. Perhaps the reins       fell from the driver’s hand so that he lost command of his horses       at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. I suppose he must       have been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while his       mares have left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. Come       up and see for yourselves, I cannot make out for certain, but the       driver seems an Aetolian by descent, ruler over the Argives,       brave Diomed the son of Tydeus.”

      Ajax the son of Oileus took him up rudely and said, “Idomeneus,       why should you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when       the mares are still so far out upon the plain? You are none of       the youngest, nor your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are       always laying down the law. You have no right to do so, for there       are better men here than you are. Eumelus’s horses are in front       now, as they always have been, and he is on the chariot holding       the reins.”

      The captain of the Cretans was angry, and answered, “Ajax you are       an excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting       in much else as well, for you have a vile temper. I will wager       you a tripod or cauldron, and Agamemnon son of Atreus shall       decide whose horses are first. You will then know to your cost.”

      Ajax son of Oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there       would have been yet further brawling between them, had not       Achilles risen in his place and said, “Cease your railing, Ajax       and Idomeneus; it is not seemly; you would be scandalised if you       saw any one else do the like: sit down and keep your eyes on the       horses; they are speeding towards the winning-post and will be       here directly. You will then both of you know whose horses are       first, and whose come after.”

      As he was speaking, the son of Tydeus came driving in, plying his       whip lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as       they flew over the course. The sand and grit rained thick on the       driver, and the chariot inlaid with gold and tin ran close behind       his fleet horses. There was little trace of wheel-marks in the       fine dust, and the horses came flying in at their utmost speed.       Diomed stayed them in the middle of the crowd, and the sweat from       their manes and chests fell in streams on to the ground.       Forthwith he sprang from his goodly chariot, and leaned his whip       against his horses’ yoke; brave Sthenelus now lost no time, but       at once brought on the prize, and gave the woman and the       ear-handled cauldron to his comrades to take away. Then he       unyoked the horses.

      Next after him came in Antilochus of the race of Neleus, who had       passed Menelaus by a trick and not by the fleetness of his       horses; but even so Menelaus came in as close behind him as the       wheel is to the horse that draws both the chariot and its master.       The end hairs of a horse’s tail touch the tyre of the wheel, and       there is never much space between wheel and horse when the       chariot is going; Menelaus was no further than this behind       Antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc’s throw       behind him. He had soon caught him up again, for Agamemnon’s mare       Aethe kept pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course       had been longer he would have passed him, and there would not       even have been a dead heat. Idomeneus’s brave squire Meriones was       about a spear’s cast behind Menelaus. His horses were slowest of       all, and he was the worst driver. Last of them all came the son       of Admetus, dragging his chariot and driving his horses on in       front. When Achilles saw him he was sorry, and stood up among the       Argives saying, “The best man is coming in last. Let us give him       a prize for it is reasonable. He shall have the second, but the       first must go to the son of Tydeus.”

      Thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his       saying, and were for doing as he had said, but Nestor’s son       Antilochus stood up and claimed his rights from the son of       Peleus. “Achilles,” said he, “I shall take it much amiss if you       do this thing; you would rob me of my prize, because you think       Eumelus’s chariot and horses were thrown out, and himself too,       good man that he is. He should have prayed duly to the immortals;       he would not have come in last if he had done so. If you are       sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents,       with bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. Take something from this       store if you would have the Achaeans speak well of you, and give       him a better prize even than that which you have now offered; but       I will not give up the mare, and he that will fight me for her,       let him come on.”

      Achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with       Antilochus, who was one of his dearest comrades. So he said—

      “Antilochus, if you would have me find Eumelus another prize, I       will give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running       all round it which I took from Asteropaeus. It will be worth much       money to him.”

      He bade his comrade Automedon bring the breastplate from his       tent, and he did so. Achilles then gave it over to Eumelus, who       received it gladly.

      But Menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with Antilochus.       An attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the Argives       keep silence: the hero then addressed them. “Antilochus,” said       he, “what is this from you who have been so far blameless? You       have made me cut a poor figure and baulked my horses by flinging       your own in front of them, though yours are much worse than mine       are; therefore, O princes and counsellors of the Argives, judge       between us and show no favour, lest one of the Achaeans say,       ‘Menelaus has got the mare through lying and corruption; his       horses were far inferior to Antilochus’s, but he has greater       weight and influence.’ Nay, I will determine the matter myself,       and no man will blame me, for I shall do what is just. Come here,       Antilochus, and stand, as our custom is, whip in hand before your       chariot and horses; lay your hand on your steeds, and swear by       earth-encircling Neptune that you did not purposely and       guilefully get in the way of my horses.”

      And Antilochus answered, “Forgive me; I am much younger, King       Menelaus, than you are; you stand higher than I do and are the       better man of the two; you know how easily young men are betrayed       into indiscretion; their tempers are more hasty and they have       less judgement; make due allowances therefore, and bear with me;       I will of my own accord give up the mare that I have won, and if       you claim any further chattel from my own possessions, I would       rather yield it to you, at once, than fall from your good graces       henceforth, and do wrong in the sight of heaven.”

      The son of Nestor then took the mare and gave her over to       Menelaus, whose anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a       field of ripening corn, and the lands are bristling with the       harvest—even so, O Menelaus, was your heart made glad within you.       He turned to Antilochus and said, “Now, Antilochus, angry though       I have been, I can give way to you of my own free will; you have       never been headstrong nor ill-disposed hitherto, but this time       your youth has got the better of your judgement; be careful how       you outwit your betters in future; no one else could have brought       me round so easily, but your good father, your brother, and       yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my behalf; I       therefore yield to your entreaty, and will give up the mare to       you, mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that I am       neither harsh nor vindictive.”

      With this he gave the mare over to Antilochus’s comrade Noemon,       and then took the cauldron. Meriones, who had come in fourth,       carried off the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the       two-handled urn, being unawarded, Achilles gave it to Nestor,       going up to him among the assembled Argives and saying, “Take       this, my good old friend, as an heirloom and memorial of the       funeral of Patroclus—for you shall see him no more among the       Argives. I give you this prize though you cannot win one; you can       now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for the       javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid       heavily upon you.”

      So saying he gave the urn over to Nestor, who received it gladly       and answered, “My son, all that you have said is true; there is       no strength now in my legs and feet, nor can I hit out with my       hands from either shoulder. Would that I were still young and       strong as when the Epeans were burying King Amarynceus in       Buprasium, and his sons offered prizes in his honour. There was       then none that could vie with me neither of the Epeans nor the       Pylians themselves nor the Aetolians. In boxing I overcame       Clytomedes son of Enops, and in wrestling, Ancaeus of Pleuron who       had come forward against me. Iphiclus was a good runner, but I       beat him, and threw farther with my spear than either Phyleus or       Polydorus. In chariot-racing alone did the two sons of Actor       surpass me by crowding their horses in front of me, for they were       angry at the way victory had gone, and at the greater part of the       prizes remaining in the place in which they had been offered.       They were twins, and the one kept on holding the reins, and       holding the reins, while the other plied the whip. Such was I       then, but now I must leave these matters to younger men; I must       bow before the weight of years, but in those days I was eminent       among heroes. And now, sir, go on with the funeral contests in       honour of your comrade: gladly do I accept this urn, and my heart       rejoices that you do not forget me but are ever mindful of my       goodwill towards you, and of the respect due to me from the       Achaeans. For all which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you       in great abundance.”

      Thereon the son of Peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks       of Nestor, went about among the concourse of the Achaeans, and       presently offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing.       He brought out a strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of       the crowd—a she-mule never yet broken, but six years old—when it       is hardest of all to break them: this was for the victor, and for       the vanquished he offered a double cup. Then he stood up and said       among the Argives, “Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, I       invite our two champion boxers to lay about them lustily and       compete for these prizes. He to whom Apollo vouchsafes the       greater endurance, and whom the Achaeans acknowledge as victor,       shall take the mule back with him to his own tent, while he that       is vanquished shall have the double cup.”

      As he spoke there stood up a champion both brave and of great       stature, a skilful boxer, Epeus, son of Panopeus. He laid his       hand on the mule and said, “Let the man who is to have the cup       come hither, for none but myself will take the mule. I am the       best boxer of all here present, and none can beat me. Is it not       enough that I should fall short of you in actual fighting? Still,       no man can be good at everything. I tell you plainly, and it       shall come true; if any man will box with me I will bruise his       body and break his bones; therefore let his friends stay here in       a body and be at hand to take him away when I have done with       him.”

      They all held their peace, and no man rose save Euryalus son of       Mecisteus, who was son of Talaus. Mecisteus went once to Thebes       after the fall of Oedipus, to attend his funeral, and he beat all       the people of Cadmus. The son of Tydeus was Euryalus’s second,       cheering him on and hoping heartily that he would win. First he       put a waistband round him and then he gave him some well-cut       thongs of ox-hide; the two men being now girt went into the       middle of the ring, and immediately fell to; heavily indeed did       they punish one another and lay about them with their brawny       fists. One could hear the horrid crashing of their jaws, and they       sweated from every pore of their skin. Presently Epeus came on       and gave Euryalus a blow on the jaw as he was looking round;       Euryalus could not keep his legs; they gave way under him in a       moment and he sprang up with a bound, as a fish leaps into the       air near some shore that is all bestrewn with sea-wrack, when       Boreas furs the top of the waves, and then falls back into deep       water. But noble Epeus caught hold of him and raised him up; his       comrades also came round him and led him from the ring, unsteady       in his gait, his head hanging on one side, and spitting great       clots of gore. They set him down in a swoon and then went to       fetch the double cup.

      The son of Peleus now brought out the prizes for the third       contest and showed them to the Argives. These were for the       painful art of wrestling. For the winner there was a great tripod       ready for setting upon the fire, and the Achaeans valued it among       themselves at twelve oxen. For the loser he brought out a woman       skilled in all manner of arts, and they valued her at four oxen.       He rose and said among the Argives, “Stand forward, you who will       essay this contest.”

      Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, and crafty       Ulysses, full of wiles, rose also. The two girded themselves and       went into the middle of the ring. They gripped each other in       their strong hands like the rafters which some master-builder       frames for the roof of a high house to keep the wind out. Their       backbones cracked as they tugged at one another with their mighty       arms—and sweat rained from them in torrents. Many a bloody weal       sprang up on their sides and shoulders, but they kept on striving       with might and main for victory and to win the tripod. Ulysses       could not throw Ajax, nor Ajax him; Ulysses was too strong for       him; but when the Achaeans began to tire of watching them, Ajax       said to Ulysses, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall either       lift me, or I you, and let Jove settle it between us.”

      He lifted him from the ground as he spoke, but Ulysses did not       forget his cunning. He hit Ajax in the hollow at back of his       knee, so that he could not keep his feet, but fell on his back       with Ulysses lying upon his chest, and all who saw it marvelled.       Then Ulysses in turn lifted Ajax and stirred him a little from       the ground but could not lift him right off it, his knee sank       under him, and the two fell side by side on the ground and were       all begrimed with dust. They now sprang towards one another and       were for wrestling yet a third time, but Achilles rose and stayed       them. “Put not each other further,” said he, “to such cruel       suffering; the victory is with both alike, take each of you an       equal prize, and let the other Achaeans now compete.”

      Thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on       their shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies.

      The son of Peleus then offered prizes for speed in running—a       mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. It would hold       six measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for       beauty; it was the work of cunning artificers in Sidon, and had       been brought into port by Phoenicians from beyond the sea, who       had made a present of it to Thoas. Eueneus son of Jason had given       it to Patroclus in ransom of Priam’s son Lycaon, and Achilles now       offered it as a prize in honour of his comrade to him who should       be the swiftest runner. For the second prize he offered a large       ox, well fattened, while for the last there was to be half a       talent of gold. He then rose and said among the Argives, “Stand       forward, you who will essay this contest.”

      Forthwith uprose fleet Ajax son of Oileus, with cunning Ulysses,       and Nestor’s son Antilochus, the fastest runner among all the       youth of his time. They stood side by side and Achilles showed       them the goal. The course was set out for them from the       starting-post, and the son of Oileus took the lead at once, with       Ulysses as close behind him as the shuttle is to a woman’s bosom       when she throws the woof across the warp and holds it close up to       her; even so close behind him was Ulysses—treading in his       footprints before the dust could settle there, and Ajax could       feel his breath on the back of his head as he ran swiftly on. The       Achaeans all shouted applause as they saw him straining his       utmost, and cheered him as he shot past them; but when they were       now nearing the end of the course Ulysses prayed inwardly to       Minerva. “Hear me,” he cried, “and help my feet, O goddess.” Thus       did he pray, and Pallas Minerva heard his prayer; she made his       hands and his feet feel light, and when the runners were at the       point of pouncing upon the prize, Ajax, through Minerva’s spite       slipped upon some offal that was lying there from the cattle       which Achilles had slaughtered in honour of Patroclus, and his       mouth and nostrils were all filled with cow dung. Ulysses       therefore carried off the mixing-bowl, for he got before Ajax and       came in first. But Ajax took the ox and stood with his hand on       one of its horns, spitting the dung out of his mouth. Then he       said to the Argives, “Alas, the goddess has spoiled my running;       she watches over Ulysses and stands by him as though she were his       own mother.” Thus did he speak and they all of them laughed       heartily.

      Antilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to       the bystanders, “You all see, my friends, that now too the gods       have shown their respect for seniority. Ajax is somewhat older       than I am, and as for Ulysses, he belongs to an earlier       generation, but he is hale in spite of his years, and no man of       the Achaeans can run against him save only Achilles.”

      He said this to pay a compliment to the son of Peleus, and       Achilles answered, “Antilochus, you shall not have praised me to       no purpose; I shall give you an additional half talent of gold.”       He then gave the half talent to Antilochus, who received it       gladly.

      Then the son of Peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield       that had been borne by Sarpedon, and were taken from him by       Patroclus. He stood up and said among the Argives, “We bid two       champions put on their armour, take their keen blades, and make       trial of one another in the presence of the multitude; whichever       of them can first wound the flesh of the other, cut through his       armour, and draw blood, to him will I give this goodly Thracian       sword inlaid with silver, which I took from Asteropaeus, but the       armour let both hold in partnership, and I will give each of them       a hearty meal in my own tent.”

      Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, as also mighty       Diomed son of Tydeus. When they had put on their armour each on       his own side of the ring, they both went into the middle eager to       engage, and with fire flashing from their eyes. The Achaeans       marvelled as they beheld them, and when the two were now close up       with one another, thrice did they spring forward and thrice try       to strike each other in close combat. Ajax pierced Diomed’s round       shield, but did not draw blood, for the cuirass beneath the       shield protected him; thereon the son of Tydeus from over his       huge shield kept aiming continually at Ajax’s neck with the point       of his spear, and the Achaeans alarmed for his safety bade them       leave off fighting and divide the prize between them. Achilles       then gave the great sword to the son of Tydeus, with its       scabbard, and the leathern belt with which to hang it.

      Achilles next offered the massive iron quoit which mighty Eetion       had erewhile been used to hurl, until Achilles had slain him and       carried it off in his ships along with other spoils. He stood up       and said among the Argives, “Stand forward, you who would essay       this contest. He who wins it will have a store of iron that will       last him five years as they go rolling round, and if his fair       fields lie far from a town his shepherd or ploughman will not       have to make a journey to buy iron, for he will have a stock of       it on his own premises.”

      Then uprose the two mighty men Polypoetes and Leonteus, with Ajax       son of Telamon and noble Epeus. They stood up one after the other       and Epeus took the quoit, whirled it, and flung it from him,       which set all the Achaeans laughing. After him threw Leonteus of       the race of Mars. Ajax son of Telamon threw third, and sent the       quoit beyond any mark that had been made yet, but when mighty       Polypoetes took the quoit he hurled it as though it had been a       stockman’s stick which he sends flying about among his cattle       when he is driving them, so far did his throw out-distance those       of the others. All who saw it roared applause, and his comrades       carried the prize for him and set it on board his ship.

      Achilles next offered a prize of iron for archery—ten       double-edged axes and ten with single edges: he set up a ship’s       mast, some way off upon the sands, and with a fine string tied a       pigeon to it by the foot; this was what they were to aim at.       “Whoever,” he said, “can hit the pigeon shall have all the axes       and take them away with him; he who hits the string without       hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and shall have the       single-edged axes.”

      Then uprose King Teucer, and Meriones the stalwart squire of       Idomeneus rose also, They cast lots in a bronze helmet and the       lot of Teucer fell first. He let fly with his arrow forthwith,       but he did not promise hecatombs of firstling lambs to King       Apollo, and missed his bird, for Apollo foiled his aim; but he       hit the string with which the bird was tied, near its foot; the       arrow cut the string clean through so that it hung down towards       the ground, while the bird flew up into the sky, and the Achaeans       shouted applause. Meriones, who had his arrow ready while Teucer       was aiming, snatched the bow out of his hand, and at once       promised that he would sacrifice a hecatomb of firstling lambs to       Apollo lord of the bow; then espying the pigeon high up under the       clouds, he hit her in the middle of the wing as she was circling       upwards; the arrow went clean through the wing and fixed itself       in the ground at Meriones’ feet, but the bird perched on the       ship’s mast hanging her head and with all her feathers drooping;       the life went out of her, and she fell heavily from the mast.       Meriones, therefore, took all ten double-edged axes, while Teucer       bore off the single-edged ones to his ships.

      Then the son of Peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had       never been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a       pattern of flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up—to       wit the son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, and Meriones,       stalwart squire of Idomeneus. But Achilles spoke saying, “Son of       Atreus, we know how far you excel all others both in power and in       throwing the javelin; take the cauldron back with you to your       ships, but if it so please you, let us give the spear to       Meriones; this at least is what I should myself wish.”

      King Agamemnon assented. So he gave the bronze spear to Meriones,       and handed the goodly cauldron to Talthybius his esquire.




BOOK XXIV.


      Priam ransoms the body of Hector—Hector’s funeral.

      The assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to       his own ship. There they made ready their supper, and then       bethought them of the blessed boon of sleep; but Achilles still       wept for thinking of his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all       things bow, could take no hold upon him. This way and that did he       turn as he yearned after the might and manfulness of Patroclus;       he thought of all they had done together, and all they had gone       through both on the field of battle and on the waves of the weary       sea. As he dwelt on these things he wept bitterly and lay now on       his side, now on his back, and now face downwards, till at last       he rose and went out as one distraught to wander upon the       sea-shore. Then, when he saw dawn breaking over beach and sea, he       yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body of Hector       behind it that he might drag it about. Thrice did he drag it       round the tomb of the son of Menoetius, and then went back into       his tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its       face downwards. But Apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured,       for he pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he       shielded him with his golden aegis continually, that he might       take no hurt while Achilles was dragging him.

      Thus shamefully did Achilles in his fury dishonour Hector; but       the blessed gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged       Mercury, slayer of Argus, to steal the body. All were of this       mind save only Juno, Neptune, and Jove’s grey-eyed daughter, who       persisted in the hate which they had ever borne towards Ilius       with Priam and his people; for they forgave not the wrong done       them by Alexandrus in disdaining the goddesses who came to him       when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring her who had offered       him a wanton to his ruin.

      When, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come,       Phoebus Apollo spoke among the immortals saying, “You gods ought       to be ashamed of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. Did       not Hector burn you thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished       goats? And now dare you not rescue even his dead body, for his       wife to look upon, with his mother and child, his father Priam,       and his people, who would forthwith commit him to the flames, and       give him his due funeral rites? So, then, you would all be on the       side of mad Achilles, who knows neither right nor ruth? He is       like some savage lion that in the pride of his great strength and       daring springs upon men’s flocks and gorges on them. Even so has       Achilles flung aside all pity, and all that conscience which at       once so greatly banes yet greatly boons him that will heed it. A       man may lose one far dearer than Achilles has lost—a son, it may       be, or a brother born from his own mother’s womb; yet when he has       mourned him and wept over him he will let him bide, for it takes       much sorrow to kill a man; whereas Achilles, now that he has       slain noble Hector, drags him behind his chariot round the tomb       of his comrade. It were better of him, and for him, that he       should not do so, for brave though he be we gods may take it ill       that he should vent his fury upon dead clay.”

      Juno spoke up in a rage. “This were well,” she cried, “O lord of       the silver bow, if you would give like honour to Hector and to       Achilles; but Hector was mortal and suckled at a woman’s breast,       whereas Achilles is the offspring of a goddess whom I myself       reared and brought up. I married her to Peleus, who is above       measure dear to the immortals; you gods came all of you to her       wedding; you feasted along with them yourself and brought your       lyre—false, and fond of low company, that you have ever been.”

      Then said Jove, “Juno, be not so bitter. Their honour shall not       be equal, but of all that dwell in Ilius, Hector was dearest to       the gods, as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me.       Never was my altar stinted of its dues, nor of the       drink-offerings and savour of sacrifice which we claim of right.       I shall therefore permit the body of mighty Hector to be stolen;       and yet this may hardly be without Achilles coming to know it,       for his mother keeps night and day beside him. Let some one of       you, therefore, send Thetis to me, and I will impart my counsel       to her, namely that Achilles is to accept a ransom from Priam,       and give up the body.”

      On this Iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message.       Down she plunged into the dark sea midway between Samos and rocky       Imbrus; the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank       into the bottom as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is       sped to carry death to fishes. She found Thetis sitting in a       great cave with the other sea-goddesses gathered round her; there       she sat in the midst of them weeping for her noble son who was to       fall far from his own land, on the rich plains of Troy. Iris went       up to her and said, “Rise Thetis; Jove, whose counsels fail not,       bids you come to him.” And Thetis answered, “Why does the mighty       god so bid me? I am in great grief, and shrink from going in and       out among the immortals. Still, I will go, and the word that he       may speak shall not be spoken in vain.”

      The goddess took her dark veil, than which there can be no robe       more sombre, and went forth with fleet Iris leading the way       before her. The waves of the sea opened them a path, and when       they reached the shore they flew up into the heavens, where they       found the all-seeing son of Saturn with the blessed gods that       live for ever assembled near him. Minerva gave up her seat to       her, and she sat down by the side of father Jove. Juno then       placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her in words       of comfort, whereon Thetis drank and gave her back the cup; and       the sire of gods and men was the first to speak.

      “So, goddess,” said he, “for all your sorrow, and the grief that       I well know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to       Olympus, and I will tell you why I have sent for you. This nine       days past the immortals have been quarrelling about Achilles       waster of cities and the body of Hector. The gods would have       Mercury slayer of Argus steal the body, but in furtherance of our       peace and amity henceforward, I will concede such honour to your       son as I will now tell you. Go, then, to the host and lay these       commands upon him; say that the gods are angry with him, and that       I am myself more angry than them all, in that he keeps Hector at       the ships and will not give him up. He may thus fear me and let       the body go. At the same time I will send Iris to great Priam to       bid him go to the ships of the Achaeans, and ransom his son,       taking with him such gifts for Achilles as may give him       satisfaction.”

      Silver-footed Thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith       down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus. She went to       her son’s tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his       trusty comrades round him were busy preparing their morning meal,       for which they had killed a great woolly sheep. His mother sat       down beside him and caressed him with her hand saying, “My son,       how long will you keep on thus grieving and making moan? You are       gnawing at your own heart, and think neither of food nor of       woman’s embraces; and yet these too were well, for you have no       long time to live, and death with the strong hand of fate are       already close beside you. Now, therefore, heed what I say, for I       come as a messenger from Jove; he says that the gods are angry       with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you keep       Hector at the ships and will not give him up. Therefore let him       go, and accept a ransom for his body.”

      And Achilles answered, “So be it. If Olympian Jove of his own       motion thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the       body away.”

      Thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long       discourse with one another. Meanwhile the son of Saturn sent Iris       to the strong city of Ilius. “Go,” said he, “fleet Iris, from the       mansions of Olympus, and tell King Priam in Ilius, that he is to       go to the ships of the Achaeans and free the body of his dear       son. He is to take such gifts with him as shall give satisfaction       to Achilles, and he is to go alone, with no other Trojan, save       only some honoured servant who may drive his mules and waggon,       and bring back the body of him whom noble Achilles has slain. Let       him have no thought nor fear of death in his heart, for we will       send the slayer of Argus to escort him, and bring him within the       tent of Achilles. Achilles will not kill him nor let another do       so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he will       entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy.”

      On this Iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her       message. She went to Priam’s house, and found weeping and       lamentation therein. His sons were seated round their father in       the outer courtyard, and their raiment was wet with tears: the       old man sat in the midst of them with his mantle wrapped close       about his body, and his head and neck all covered with the filth       which he had clutched as he lay grovelling in the mire. His       daughters and his sons’ wives went wailing about the house, as       they thought of the many and brave men who lay dead, slain by the       Argives. The messenger of Jove stood by Priam and spoke softly to       him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. “Take heart,” she       said, “Priam offspring of Dardanus, take heart and fear not. I       bring no evil tidings, but am minded well towards you. I come as       a messenger from Jove, who though he be not near, takes thought       for you and pities you. The lord of Olympus bids you go and       ransom noble Hector, and take with you such gifts as shall give       satisfaction to Achilles. You are to go alone, with no Trojan,       save only some honoured servant who may drive your mules and       waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom noble       Achilles has slain. You are to have no thought, nor fear of       death, for Jove will send the slayer of Argus to escort you. When       he has brought you within Achilles’ tent, Achilles will not kill       you nor let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and       sin not, and he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable       courtesy.”

      Iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and Priam told his       sons to get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the       waggon fast upon the top of its bed. Then he went down into his       fragrant store-room, high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where       his many treasures were kept, and he called Hecuba his wife.       “Wife,” said he, “a messenger has come to me from Olympus, and       has told me to go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom my dear       son, taking with me such gifts as shall give satisfaction to       Achilles. What think you of this matter? for my own part I am       greatly moved to pass through the camps of the Achaeans and go to       their ships.”

      His wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, “Alas, what has       become of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both       among strangers and your own people? How can you venture alone to       the ships of the Achaeans, and look into the face of him who has       slain so many of your brave sons? You must have iron courage, for       if the cruel savage sees you and lays hold on you, he will know       neither respect nor pity. Let us then weep Hector from afar here       in our own house, for when I gave him birth the threads of       overruling fate were spun for him that dogs should eat his flesh       far from his parents, in the house of that terrible man on whose       liver I would fain fasten and devour it. Thus would I avenge my       son, who showed no cowardice when Achilles slew him, and thought       neither of flight nor of avoiding battle as he stood in defence       of Trojan men and Trojan women.”

      Then Priam said, “I would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as       a bird of ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. Had it       been some mortal man who had sent me some prophet or priest who       divines from sacrifice—I should have deemed him false and have       given him no heed; but now I have heard the goddess and seen her       face to face, therefore I will go and her saying shall not be in       vain. If it be my fate to die at the ships of the Achaeans even       so would I have it; let Achilles slay me, if I may but first have       taken my son in my arms and mourned him to my heart’s       comforting.”

      So saying he lifted the lids of his chests, and took out twelve       goodly vestments. He took also twelve cloaks of single fold,       twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts.       He weighed out ten talents of gold, and brought moreover two       burnished tripods, four cauldrons, and a very beautiful cup which       the Thracians had given him when he had gone to them on an       embassy; it was very precious, but he grudged not even this, so       eager was he to ransom the body of his son. Then he chased all       the Trojans from the court and rebuked them with words of anger.       “Out,” he cried, “shame and disgrace to me that you are. Have you       no grief in your own homes that you are come to plague me here?       Is it a small thing, think you, that the son of Saturn has sent       this sorrow upon me, to lose the bravest of my sons? Nay, you       shall prove it in person, for now he is gone the Achaeans will       have easier work in killing you. As for me, let me go down within       the house of Hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting       of the city.”

      He drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the       old man sped them. Then he called to his sons, upbraiding       Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon, Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites of the       loud battle-cry, Deiphobus, Hippothous, and Dius. These nine did       the old man call near him. “Come to me at once,” he cried,       “worthless sons who do me shame; would that you had all been       killed at the ships rather than Hector. Miserable man that I am,       I have had the bravest sons in all Troy—noble Nestor, Troilus the       dauntless charioteer, and Hector who was a god among men, so that       one would have thought he was son to an immortal—yet there is not       one of them left. Mars has slain them and those of whom I am       ashamed are alone left me. Liars, and light of foot, heroes of       the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own people, why do       you not get a waggon ready for me at once, and put all these       things upon it that I may set out on my way?”

      Thus did he speak, and they feared the rebuke of their father.       They brought out a strong mule-waggon, newly made, and set the       body of the waggon fast on its bed. They took the mule-yoke from       the peg on which it hung, a yoke of boxwood with a knob on the       top of it and rings for the reins to go through. Then they       brought a yoke-band eleven cubits long, to bind the yoke to the       pole; they bound it on at the far end of the pole, and put the       ring over the upright pin making it fast with three turns of the       band on either side the knob, and bending the thong of the yoke       beneath it. This done, they brought from the store-chamber the       rich ransom that was to purchase the body of Hector, and they set       it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked the strong       harness-mules which the Mysians had on a time given as a goodly       present to Priam; but for Priam himself they yoked horses which       the old king had bred, and kept for his own use.

      Thus heedfully did Priam and his servant see to the yolking of       their cars at the palace. Then Hecuba came to them all sorrowful,       with a golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might       make a drink-offering before they set out. She stood in front of       the horses and said, “Take this, make a drink-offering to father       Jove, and since you are minded to go to the ships in spite of me,       pray that you may come safely back from the hands of your       enemies. Pray to the son of Saturn lord of the whirlwind, who       sits on Ida and looks down over all Troy, pray him to send his       swift messenger on your right hand, the bird of omen which is       strongest and most dear to him of all birds, that you may see it       with your own eyes and trust it as you go forth to the ships of       the Danaans. If all-seeing Jove will not send you this messenger,       however set upon it you may be, I would not have you go to the       ships of the Argives.”

      And Priam answered, “Wife, I will do as you desire me; it is well       to lift hands in prayer to Jove, if so be he may have mercy upon       me.”

      With this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over       his hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. He       washed his hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the       drink-offering and prayed, standing in the middle of the       courtyard and turning his eyes to heaven. “Father Jove,” he said,       “that rulest from Ida, most glorious and most great, grant that I       may be received kindly and compassionately in the tents of       Achilles; and send your swift messenger upon my right hand, the       bird of omen which is strongest and most dear to you of all       birds, that I may see it with my own eyes and trust it as I go       forth to the ships of the Danaans.”

      So did he pray, and Jove the lord of counsel heard his prayer.       Forthwith he sent an eagle, the most unerring portent of all       birds that fly, the dusky hunter that men also call the Black       Eagle. His wings were spread abroad on either side as wide as the       well-made and well-bolted door of a rich man’s chamber. He came       to them flying over the city upon their right hands, and when       they saw him they were glad and their hearts took comfort within       them. The old man made haste to mount his chariot, and drove out       through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the       outer court. Before him went the mules drawing the four-wheeled       waggon, and driven by wise Idaeus; behind these were the horses,       which the old man lashed with his whip and drove swiftly through       the city, while his friends followed after, wailing and lamenting       for him as though he were on his road to death. As soon as they       had come down from the city and had reached the plain, his sons       and sons-in-law who had followed him went back to Ilius.

      But Priam and Idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not       escape the ken of all-seeing Jove, who looked down upon the old       man and pitied him; then he spoke to his son Mercury and said,       “Mercury, for it is you who are the most disposed to escort men       on their way, and to hear those whom you will hear, go, and so       conduct Priam to the ships of the Achaeans that no other of the       Danaans shall see him nor take note of him until he reach the son       of Peleus.”

      Thus he spoke and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus,       did as he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden       sandals with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea;       he took the wand with which he seals men’s eyes in sleep, or       wakes them just as he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand       till he came to Troy and to the Hellespont. To look at, he was       like a young man of noble birth in the hey-day of his youth and       beauty with the down just coming upon his face.

      Now when Priam and Idaeus had driven past the great tomb of       Ilius, they stayed their mules and horses that they might drink       in the river, for the shades of night were falling, when,       therefore, Idaeus saw Mercury standing near them he said to       Priam, “Take heed, descendant of Dardanus; here is matter which       demands consideration. I see a man who I think will presently       fall upon us; let us fly with our horses, or at least embrace his       knees and implore him to take compassion upon us?”

      When he heard this the old man’s heart failed him, and he was in       great fear; he stayed where he was as one dazed, and the hair       stood on end over his whole body; but the bringer of good luck       came up to him and took him by the hand, saying, “Whither,       father, are you thus driving your mules and horses in the dead of       night when other men are asleep? Are you not afraid of the fierce       Achaeans who are hard by you, so cruel and relentless? Should       some one of them see you bearing so much treasure through the       darkness of the flying night, what would not your state then be?       You are no longer young, and he who is with you is too old to       protect you from those who would attack you. For myself, I will       do you no harm, and I will defend you from any one else, for you       remind me of my own father.”

      And Priam answered, “It is indeed as you say, my dear son;       nevertheless some god has held his hand over me, in that he has       sent such a wayfarer as yourself to meet me so opportunely; you       are so comely in mien and figure, and your judgement is so       excellent that you must come of blessed parents.”

      Then said the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, “Sir, all that       you have said is right; but tell me and tell me true, are you       taking this rich treasure to send it to a foreign people where it       may be safe, or are you all leaving strong Ilius in dismay now       that your son has fallen who was the bravest man among you and       was never lacking in battle with the Achaeans?”

      And Priam said, “Who are you, my friend, and who are your       parents, that you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy       son?”

      The slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, answered him, “Sir, you       would prove me, that you question me about noble Hector. Many a       time have I set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the       Argives to their ships and putting them to the sword. We stood       still and marvelled, for Achilles in his anger with the son of       Atreus suffered us not to fight. I am his squire, and came with       him in the same ship. I am a Myrmidon, and my father’s name is       Polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as you are; he has       six sons besides myself, and I am the seventh. We cast lots, and       it fell upon me to sail hither with Achilles. I am now come from       the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the Achaeans will       set battle in array about the city. They chafe at doing nothing,       and are so eager that their princes cannot hold them back.”

      Then answered Priam, “If you are indeed the squire of Achilles       son of Peleus, tell me now the whole truth. Is my son still at       the ships, or has Achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him       to his hounds?”

      “Sir,” replied the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, “neither       hounds nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying       at the tents by the ship of Achilles, and though it is now twelve       days that he has lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the       worms eaten him although they feed on warriors. At daybreak       Achilles drags him cruelly round the sepulchre of his dear       comrade, but it does him no hurt. You should come yourself and       see how he lies fresh as dew, with the blood all washed away, and       his wounds every one of them closed though many pierced him with       their spears. Such care have the blessed gods taken of your brave       son, for he was dear to them beyond all measure.”

      The old man was comforted as he heard him and said, “My son, see       what a good thing it is to have made due offerings to the       immortals; for as sure as that he was born my son never forgot       the gods that hold Olympus, and now they requite it to him even       in death. Accept therefore at my hands this goodly chalice; guard       me and with heaven’s help guide me till I come to the tent of the       son of Peleus.”

      Then answered the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, “Sir, you       are tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move       me, for you are offering me presents without the knowledge of       Achilles whom I fear and hold it great guilt to defraud, lest       some evil presently befall me; but as your guide I would go with       you even to Argos itself, and would guard you so carefully       whether by sea or land, that no one should attack you through       making light of him who was with you.”

      The bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and       seizing the whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the       mules and horses. When they reached the trench and the wall that       was before the ships, those who were on guard had just been       getting their suppers, and the slayer of Argus threw them all       into a deep sleep. Then he drew back the bolts to open the gates,       and took Priam inside with the treasure he had upon his waggon.       Ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of Peleus for       which the Myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built for       their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse       tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round       it they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set       close together. The gate was barred with a single bolt of pine       which it took three men to force into its place, and three to       draw back so as to open the gate, but Achilles could draw it by       himself. Mercury opened the gate for the old man, and brought in       the treasure that he was taking with him for the son of Peleus.       Then he sprang from the chariot on to the ground and said, “Sir,       it is I, immortal Mercury, that am come with you, for my father       sent me to escort you. I will now leave you, and will not enter       into the presence of Achilles, for it might anger him that a god       should befriend mortal men thus openly. Go you within, and       embrace the knees of the son of Peleus: beseech him by his       father, his lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him.”

      With these words Mercury went back to high Olympus. Priam sprang       from his chariot to the ground, leaving Idaeus where he was, in       charge of the mules and horses. The old man went straight into       the house where Achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. There       he found him with his men seated at a distance from him: only       two, the hero Automedon, and Alcimus of the race of Mars, were       busy in attendance about his person, for he had but just done       eating and drinking, and the table was still there. King Priam       entered without their seeing him, and going right up to Achilles       he clasped his knees and kissed the dread murderous hands that       had slain so many of his sons.

      As when some cruel spite has befallen a man that he should have       killed some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man’s       protection in a land of strangers, and all marvel who see him,       even so did Achilles marvel as he beheld Priam. The others looked       one to another and marvelled also, but Priam besought Achilles       saying, “Think of your father, O Achilles like unto the gods, who       is such even as I am, on the sad threshold of old age. It may be       that those who dwell near him harass him, and there is none to       keep war and ruin from him. Yet when he hears of you being still       alive, he is glad, and his days are full of hope that he shall       see his dear son come home to him from Troy; but I, wretched man       that I am, had the bravest in all Troy for my sons, and there is       not one of them left. I had fifty sons when the Achaeans came       here; nineteen of them were from a single womb, and the others       were borne to me by the women of my household. The greater part       of them has fierce Mars laid low, and Hector, him who was alone       left, him who was the guardian of the city and ourselves, him       have you lately slain; therefore I am now come to the ships of       the Achaeans to ransom his body from you with a great ransom.       Fear, O Achilles, the wrath of heaven; think on your own father       and have compassion upon me, who am the more pitiable, for I have       steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled himself before me,       and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew my son.”

      Thus spoke Priam, and the heart of Achilles yearned as he       bethought him of his father. He took the old man’s hand and moved       him gently away. The two wept bitterly—Priam, as he lay at       Achilles’ feet, weeping for Hector, and Achilles now for his       father and now for Patroclus, till the house was filled with       their lamentation. But when Achilles was now sated with grief and       had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he left his seat       and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white hair       and beard; then he said, “Unhappy man, you have indeed been       greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to the ships       of the Achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain so       many of your brave sons? You must have iron courage: sit now upon       this seat, and for all our grief we will hide our sorrows in our       hearts, for weeping will not avail us. The immortals know no       care, yet the lot they spin for man is full of sorrow; on the       floor of Jove’s palace there stand two urns, the one filled with       evil gifts, and the other with good ones. He for whom Jove the       lord of thunder mixes the gifts he sends, will meet now with good       and now with evil fortune; but he to whom Jove sends none but       evil gifts will be pointed at by the finger of scorn, the hand of       famine will pursue him to the ends of the world, and he will go       up and down the face of the earth, respected neither by gods nor       men. Even so did it befall Peleus; the gods endowed him with all       good things from his birth upwards, for he reigned over the       Myrmidons excelling all men in prosperity and wealth, and mortal       though he was they gave him a goddess for his bride. But even on       him too did heaven send misfortune, for there is no race of royal       children born to him in his house, save one son who is doomed to       die all untimely; nor may I take care of him now that he is       growing old, for I must stay here at Troy to be the bane of you       and your children. And you too, O Priam, I have heard that you       were aforetime happy. They say that in wealth and plenitude of       offspring you surpassed all that is in Lesbos, the realm of Makar       to the northward, Phrygia that is more inland, and those that       dwell upon the great Hellespont; but from the day when the       dwellers in heaven sent this evil upon you, war and slaughter       have been about your city continually. Bear up against it, and       let there be some intervals in your sorrow. Mourn as you may for       your brave son, you will take nothing by it. You cannot raise him       from the dead, ere you do so yet another sorrow shall befall       you.”

      And Priam answered, “O king, bid me not be seated, while Hector       is still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great       ransom which I have brought you, and give him to me at once that       I may look upon him. May you prosper with the ransom and reach       your own land in safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live       and to look upon the light of the sun.”

      Achilles looked at him sternly and said, “Vex me, sir, no longer;       I am of myself minded to give up the body of Hector. My mother,       daughter of the old man of the sea, came to me from Jove to bid       me deliver it to you. Moreover I know well, O Priam, and you       cannot hide it, that some god has brought you to the ships of the       Achaeans, for else, no man however strong and in his prime would       dare to come to our host; he could neither pass our guard unseen,       nor draw the bolt of my gates thus easily; therefore, provoke me       no further, lest I sin against the word of Jove, and suffer you       not, suppliant though you are, within my tents.”

      The old man feared him and obeyed. Then the son of Peleus sprang       like a lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with       him went his two squires Automedon and Alcimus who were closer to       him than any others of his comrades now that Patroclus was no       more. These unyoked the horses and mules, and bade Priam’s herald       and attendant be seated within the house. They lifted the ransom       for Hector’s body from the waggon, but they left two mantles and       a goodly shirt, that Achilles might wrap the body in them when he       gave it to be taken home. Then he called to his servants and       ordered them to wash the body and anoint it, but he first took it       to a place where Priam should not see it, lest if he did so, he       should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and enrage       Achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word of       Jove. When the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and       had wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, Achilles himself       lifted it on to a bier, and he and his men then laid it on the       waggon. He cried aloud as he did so and called on the name of his       dear comrade, “Be not angry with me, Patroclus,” he said, “if you       hear even in the house of Hades that I have given Hector to his       father for a ransom. It has been no unworthy one, and I will       share it equitably with you.”

      Achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the       richly inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was       at right angles to the one against which Priam was sitting.       “Sir,” he said, “your son is now laid upon his bier and is       ransomed according to desire; you shall look upon him when you       take him away at daybreak; for the present let us prepare our       supper. Even lovely Niobe had to think about eating, though her       twelve children—six daughters and six lusty sons—had been all       slain in her house. Apollo killed the sons with arrows from his       silver bow, to punish Niobe, and Diana slew the daughters,       because Niobe had vaunted herself against Leto; she said Leto had       borne two children only, whereas she had herself borne       many—whereon the two killed the many. Nine days did they lie       weltering, and there was none to bury them, for the son of Saturn       turned the people into stone; but on the tenth day the gods in       heaven themselves buried them, and Niobe then took food, being       worn out with weeping. They say that somewhere among the rocks on       the mountain pastures of Sipylus, where the nymphs live that       haunt the river Achelous, there, they say, she lives in stone and       still nurses the sorrows sent upon her by the hand of heaven.       Therefore, noble sir, let us two now take food; you can weep for       your dear son hereafter as you are bearing him back to Ilius—and       many a tear will he cost you.”

      With this Achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of       silvery whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all       in due order. They cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces,       spitted them, and drew them off again when they were well       roasted. Automedon brought bread in fair baskets and served it       round the table, while Achilles dealt out the meat, and they laid       their hands on the good things that were before them. As soon as       they had had enough to eat and drink, Priam, descendant of       Dardanus, marvelled at the strength and beauty of Achilles for he       was as a god to see, and Achilles marvelled at Priam as he       listened to him and looked upon his noble presence. When they had       gazed their fill Priam spoke first. “And now, O king,” he said,       “take me to my couch that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed       boon of sleep. Never once have my eyes been closed from the day       your hands took the life of my son; I have grovelled without       ceasing in the mire of my stable-yard, making moan and brooding       over my countless sorrows. Now, moreover, I have eaten bread and       drunk wine; hitherto I have tasted nothing.”

      As he spoke Achilles told his men and the women servants to set       beds in the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with       good red rugs, and spread coverlets on the top of them with       woollen cloaks for Priam and Idaeus to wear. So the maids went       out carrying a torch and got the two beds ready in all haste.       Then Achilles said laughingly to Priam, “Dear sir, you shall lie       outside, lest some counsellor of those who in due course keep       coming to advise with me should see you here in the darkness of       the flying night, and tell it to Agamemnon. This might cause       delay in the delivery of the body. And now tell me and tell me       true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral rites of       noble Hector? Tell me, that I may hold aloof from war and       restrain the host.”

      And Priam answered, “Since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble       son with all due rites, do thus, Achilles, and I shall be       grateful. You know how we are pent up within our city; it is far       for us to fetch wood from the mountain, and the people live in       fear. Nine days, therefore, will we mourn Hector in my house; on       the tenth day we will bury him and there shall be a public feast       in his honour; on the eleventh we will build a mound over his       ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we will fight.”

      And Achilles answered, “All, King Priam, shall be as you have       said. I will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have       named.”

      As he spoke he laid his hand on the old man’s right wrist, in       token that he should have no fear; thus then did Priam and his       attendant sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while       Achilles lay in an inner room of the house, with fair Briseis by       his side.

      And now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the       livelong night, but upon Mercury alone, the bringer of good luck,       sleep could take no hold for he was thinking all the time how to       get King Priam away from the ships without his being seen by the       strong force of sentinels. He hovered therefore over Priam’s head       and said, “Sir, now that Achilles has spared your life, you seem       to have no fear about sleeping in the thick of your foes. You       have paid a great ransom, and have received the body of your son;       were you still alive and a prisoner the sons whom you have left       at home would have to give three times as much to free you; and       so it would be if Agamemnon and the other Achaeans were to know       of your being here.”

      When he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant.       Mercury then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them quickly       through the host so that no man perceived them. When they came to       the ford of eddying Xanthus, begotten of immortal Jove, Mercury       went back to high Olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to       break over all the land. Priam and Idaeus then drove on toward       the city lamenting and making moan, and the mules drew the body       of Hector. No one neither man nor woman saw them, till Cassandra,       fair as golden Venus standing on Pergamus, caught sight of her       dear father in his chariot, and his servant that was the city’s       herald with him. Then she saw him that was lying upon the bier,       drawn by the mules, and with a loud cry she went about the city       saying, “Come hither Trojans, men and women, and look on Hector;       if ever you rejoiced to see him coming from battle when he was       alive, look now on him that was the glory of our city and all our       people.”

      At this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a       sorrow had possessed them. Hard by the gates they met Priam as he       was bringing in the body. Hector’s wife and his mother were the       first to mourn him: they flew towards the waggon and laid their       hands upon his head, while the crowd stood weeping round them.       They would have stayed before the gates, weeping and lamenting       the livelong day to the going down of the sun, had not Priam       spoken to them from the chariot and said, “Make way for the mules       to pass you. Afterwards when I have taken the body home you shall       have your fill of weeping.”

      On this the people stood asunder, and made a way for the waggon.       When they had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a       bed and seated minstrels round it to lead the dirge, whereon the       women joined in the sad music of their lament. Foremost among       them all Andromache led their wailing as she clasped the head of       mighty Hector in her embrace. “Husband,” she cried, “you have       died young, and leave me in your house a widow; he of whom we are       the ill-starred parents is still a mere child, and I fear he may       not reach manhood. Ere he can do so our city will be razed and       overthrown, for you who watched over it are no more—you who were       its saviour, the guardian of our wives and children. Our women       will be carried away captives to the ships, and I among them;       while you, my child, who will be with me will be put to some       unseemly tasks, working for a cruel master. Or, may be, some       Achaean will hurl you (O miserable death) from our walls, to       avenge some brother, son, or father whom Hector slew; many of       them have indeed bitten the dust at his hands, for your father’s       hand in battle was no light one. Therefore do the people mourn       him. You have left, O Hector, sorrow unutterable to your parents,       and my own grief is greatest of all, for you did not stretch       forth your arms and embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me       any words that might have lived with me in my tears night and day       for evermore.”

      Bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her       lament. Hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. “Hector,”       she cried, “dearest to me of all my children. So long as you were       alive the gods loved you well, and even in death they have not       been utterly unmindful of you; for when Achilles took any other       of my sons, he would sell him beyond the seas, to Samos Imbrus or       rugged Lemnos; and when he had slain you too with his sword, many       a time did he drag you round the sepulchre of his comrade—though       this could not give him life—yet here you lie all fresh as dew,       and comely as one whom Apollo has slain with his painless       shafts.”

      Thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and       then Helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation.       “Hector,” said she, “dearest of all my brothers-in-law—for I am       wife to Alexandrus who brought me hither to Troy—would that I had       died ere he did so—twenty years are come and gone since I left my       home and came from over the sea, but I have never heard one word       of insult or unkindness from you. When another would chide with       me, as it might be one of your brothers or sisters or of your       brothers’ wives, or my mother-in-law—for Priam was as kind to me       as though he were my own father—you would rebuke and check them       with words of gentleness and goodwill. Therefore my tears flow       both for you and for my unhappy self, for there is no one else in       Troy who is kind to me, but all shrink and shudder as they go by       me.”

      She wept as she spoke and the vast crowd that was gathered round       her joined in her lament. Then King Priam spoke to them saying,       “Bring wood, O Trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush       of the Argives, for Achilles when he dismissed me from the ships       gave me his word that they should not attack us until the morning       of the twelfth day.”

      Forthwith they yoked their oxen and mules and gathered together       before the city. Nine days long did they bring in great heaps of       wood, and on the morning of the tenth day with many tears they       took brave Hector forth, laid his dead body upon the summit of       the pile, and set the fire thereto. Then when the child of       morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared on the eleventh day, the       people again assembled, round the pyre of mighty Hector. When       they were got together, they first quenched the fire with wine       wherever it was burning, and then his brothers and comrades with       many a bitter tear gathered his white bones, wrapped them in soft       robes of purple, and laid them in a golden urn, which they placed       in a grave and covered over with large stones set close together.       Then they built a barrow hurriedly over it keeping guard on every       side lest the Achaeans should attack them before they had       finished. When they had heaped up the barrow they went back again       into the city, and being well assembled they held high feast in       the house of Priam their king.

      Thus, then, did they celebrate the funeral of Hector tamer of       horses.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms     of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online     at www.gutenberg.org. If you     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from         the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in         Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg         Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™         works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of         receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free         distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516, Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


