[BHD-cuchulain  —  part 4 of 5, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

in  Fergus's  hand,  and  Fergus  gave  it  a  great  welcome.  "  Come  out  now  into  the  battle,  Fergus,"  said  Maeve,  •'  and  spare  no  one  to-day,  unless  it  might  be  some  very  dear  friend." 

Then  Fergus  and  Maeve  and  Ailell  went  out  into  the  battle,  and  three  times  they  made  the  army  of  Ulster  go  back  before  them.  And  when  Conchubar  heard  his  people  were  being  driven  back,  he  called  out  to  the  household  of  the  Red  Branch  :  "  Let  you  hold  the  place  I  am  in  now,  till  I  go  see  who  has  turned  back  our  men  against  us  three  times  on  the  north  side." 

And  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch  called  back  to  him  :  "  We  will  do  that,  and  unless  the  sky  should  fall  on  us,  or  the  earth  give  way  under  us,  we  will  not  give  up  one  inch  of  ground  before  the  men  of  Ireland  till  you  come  to  us  again,  or  till  we  get  our  death." 

Then  Conchubar  went  to  see  who  it  v/as  that  was  driving  back  his  army,  and  it  was  Fergus  he  found  before  him  ;  and  Fergus  struck  three  great  blows  on  Conchubar's  shield,  the  Ochain,  so  that  the  shield  screamed  out  loud,  and  all  the  shields  of  the  army  of  Ulster  screamed  with  it,  and  the  three  great  waves  of  Ireland  answered  it. 

Then  Fergus  said  :  "  Who  is  it  is  holding  his  shield  against  me  ? "  And  Conchubar  knew  then  who  was  before  him,  and  he  cried  out :  "  It  is  the  man,  Fergus,  that  is  greater  and  more  comely  and  younger  and  better  than  yourself,  the  man  whose  father  and  mother  were  better 


FERGUS'S  THREE  BLOWS    265 

than  your  own  ;  the  man  that  put  to  death  the  three  great  candles  of  the  valour  of  the  Gael,  the  three  pros-  perous sons  of  Usnach,  in  spite  of  your  guarantee  and  your  protection  ;  the  man  that  banished  you  out  of  your  own  country  ;  the  man  that  made  your  house  a  dwelling-  place  for  deer  and  foxes  ;  the  man  that  never  left  you  so  much  as  the  breadth  of  your  foot  of  land  in  Ulster ;  the  man  that  drove  you  to  the  entertainment  of  a  woman ;  and  the  man  that  will  drive  you  back  to-day  in  the  presence  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  Conchubar,  son  of  Fachtna  Fathach,  High  King  of  Ulster,  the  High  King  of  Ireland." 

When  Fergus  heard  that,  he  took  his  sword,  the  Caladcholg,  in  his  two  hands,  and  he  was  swinging  it  over  his  head,  that  it  seemed  to  have  the  size  and  appearance  of  a  rainbow,  and  he  was  about  to  give  his  three  great  strokes  on  the  men  of  Ulster. 

But  Conchubar's  son,  Cormac  Conloingeas,  saw  what  he  was  doing,  and  he  made  a  rush  at  Fergus,  and  put  his  arms  about  his  knees,  and  he  said  :  "  Do  not  put  out  your  great  strength,  my  master  Fergus,  to  destroy  the  whole  army  of  Ulster."  "  Let  me  go,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  I  will  not  live  through  the  day  unless  I  strike  my  three  blows  on  the  men  of  Ulster."  But  Cormac  Conloingeas  would  not  leave  off  from  asking  him,  and  then  he  said :  "  Tell  Conchubar  to  go  back  to  his  own  place  in  the  battle,  and  I  will  spare  the  army."  So  Conchubar  went  back,  and  then  Fergus  struck  his  three  blows  on  three  little  hills  that  were  near  him,  and  cut  their  tops  off,  and  they  are  called  "the  three  bare  hills  of  Meath"  to  this  day. 

But  when  Cuchulain  heard  the  scream  of  Conchubar's  shield  the  time  Fergus  struck  it,  he  called  out  to  Laeg :  "Who  has  dared  to  strike  those  three  blows  upon  the  Ochain,  and  I  still  living?"  "  It  is  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  struck  them,"  said  Laeg.  "  Where  is  the  battle  going  on  now  ? "  said  Cuchulain.     "  The  armies  are  come  as  far 


266    THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

as  Gairech,"  said  Laeg.  "  By  my  hand  of  valour,"  said  Cuchulain,  "they  will  not  have  reached  to  Ilgairech  be-  fore I  will  be  with  them."  With  that  he  put  out  all  his  strength,  and  he  broke  the  ropes  that  were  about  him,  and  threw  them  off,  and  he  scattered  the  grass  that  was  on  his  wounds  into  the  high  air.  And  the  two  mocking  women  were  there  yet,  and  he  dashed  them  one  against  the  other,  and  left  them  there  on  the  ground.  And  he  looked  for  his  arms,  but  he  could  see  none  of  them  ;  but  only  his  chariot,  that  was  broken,  was  lying  there.  And  he  took  hold  of  a  shaft  of  it,  and  rushed,  with  all  his  wounds,  straight  into  the  battle,  till  he  found  Fergus,  and  he  called  to  him  to  go  back  before  him  now,  as  he  had  promised  he  would  do.  But  Fergus  gave  him  no  answer.  Then  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Go  back,  now,  Fergus,  or  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  he  said,  "  I  will  grind  you  to  pieces  as  a  mill  grinds  the  malt."  Then  Fergus  said  :  "  Do  not  be  giving  out  threats  to  me,  for  my  army  is  well  able  for  the  army  of  Ulster."  "  You  gave  me  your  promise,  Fergus,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  to  go  back  before  me  when  we  would  meet  in  the  great  battle,  and  when  I  would  be  covered  with  wounds.  You  bound  yourself  to  that  the  time  I  went  back  before  you,  and  you  without  your  sword." 

Then  Fergus,  when  he  heard  that,  went  back  three  steps,  and  then  he  turned,  and  his  men  with  him,  and  gave  way  before  Cuchulain.  And  all  the  men  of  Ireland  turned  when  they  saw  that,  and  broke  out  of  their  ranks,  and  ran  over  the  hill  westward,  and  Cuchulain  and  the  men  of  Ulster  followed  after  them,  making  a  great  slaughter.  And  Cuchulain  came  up  with  Maeve,  and  she  called  out :  "  A  gift  to  me,  Cuchulain."  "  What  is  it  you  are  asking  of  me  ?  "  he  said.  "  Take  what  is  left  of  my  army  under  your  protection,  and  let  it  pass  over  the  great  ford  westward."  So  he  agreed  to  do  that,  and  what  was  left  of  the  army  of  Ireland  went  over  the  great 


THEENDOFTHEWAR  267 

ford  of  the  Sionnan  at  Athluain,  and  Maeve  and  Ailell  and  Fergus,  and  the  Maines,  and  the  sons  of  Magach  stopped  to  the  last,  and  drew  their  shields  of  protection  behind  the  men  of  Ireland,  till  they  had  got  back  to  Cruachan  in  Connaught,  the  place  they  set  out  from. 

It  was  mid-day  when  Cuchulain  came  into  the  battle,  and  the  sun  was  setting  when  the  last  of  them  went  over  the  ford.  And  then  Cuchulain  took  his  sword  that  Laeg  had  brought  him,  for  he  had  but  a  few  splinters  left  of  the  shaft  of  the  chariot  he  had  used  in  the  fight,  and  he  made  three  blows  at  three  rocks,  and  cut  the  tops  off  them,  for  an  insult  to  Connaught  for  ever,  the  way  if  any  one  should  speak  of  the  three  bare  hills  of  Meath,  the  three  bare  rocks  of  Athluain  would  be  there  to  give  the  answer. 

And  Fergus  was  watching  the  army  of  Ireland  going  back  over  the  ford,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  This  army  is  swept  away  to-day  ;  it  is  wandering  and  going  astray  like  a  mare  among  her  foals  that  goes  astray  in  a  strange  place,  not  knowing  what  path  to  take.  And  it  is  follow-  ing the  lead  of  a  woman,"  he  said,  "  has  brought  it  into  this  distress." 

This  then  was  the  end  of  the  battle  of  Gairech  and  Ilgairech,  and  the  end  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


XIII 

THE  TWO  BULLS 

'T'HIS,  now,  is  the  story  of  the  two  bulls,  the  Brown  of  Cuailgne,  and  the  White-horned  of  Cruachan  Ai,  and  this  is  the  way  it  was  with  them — for  they  were  not  right  bulls,  but  there  was  enchantment  on  them.  In  the  time  long-  ag-o  Bodb  was  king-  of  the  Sidhe  of  Munster,  and  it  is  in  Femen,  of  Slieve-na-man  he  was,  and  Ochall  Ochne  was  king  of  the  Sidhe  of  Connaught,  and  it  is  in  Cruachan  he  used  to  be.  They  used  at  one  time  to  be  fighting  one  against  the  other,  but  afterwards  they  made  peace,  and  were  good  friends.  Now  Bodb  had  a  swineherd,  whose  name  was  Friuch,  and  Ochall  had  a  swineherd  whose  name  was  Rucht,  and  they  were  friendly  with  one  another  the  same  as  their  masters.  And  they  had  the  knowledge  of  enchantments,  and  could  turn  themselves  to  every  shape.  And  when  there  was  a  great  plenty  of  mast  in  Munster,  the  swineherd  from  Connaught  would  bring  his  lean  swine  to  the  south,  and  in  the  same  way,  when  mast  was  plentiful  in  Connaught,  the  swineherd  would  bring  his  swine  northward,  and  would  bring  them  home  again  fat. 

But  after  a  while  some  bad  feeling  rose  up  between  the  two,  for  the  men  of  Connaught  and  the  men  of  Munster  began  to  set  them  one  against  the  other.  So  one  year  when  there  was  great  mast  in  Munster,  and  Rucht  brought  his  herd  from  Connaught,  so  soon  as  his  comrade  Friuch  had  bade  him  welcome,  he  said  :  '*  The 


THE   TWO    SWINEHERDS  269 

people  are  all  saying  your  power  is  greater  than  mine."  "  It  is  no  less  any  way,"  said  Ochall's  herd.  "  We  will  soon  know  that,"  said  Friuch.  "  I  will  put  an  enchant-  ment on  your  swine,  and  even  though  they  eat  their  share  of  mast,  they  will  not  be  fat,  like  mine  will  be."  And  so  it  happened,  he  put  an  enchantment  on  the  Connaught  swine,  and  when  Rucht  went  home  with  them  they  could  hardly  walk  at  all,  they  were  so  thin  and  so  weak,  and  all  the  people  were  laughing  at  the  state  they  were  in.  *'  It  was  a  bad  day  for  you,  you  went  to  the  South,"  they  said,  "  for  your  comrade  has  greater  power  than  what  you  have."  "  That  is  not  so,"  said  he.  "  Wait  till  it  is  our  turn  to  have  mast,  and  I  will  play  the  same  trick  on  him." 

So  the  next  year  he  did  as  he  had  said,  and  the  Munster  swine  pined  away,  so  that  every  one  said  their  power  was  the  same.  And  when  Bodb's  swineherd  went  back  home  to  Munster  with  his  lean  swine,  his  master  put  him  out  of  the  place.  And  Ochall  put  his  herd  out  of  his  place  as  well,  because  of  the  swine  coming  back  in  so  bad  a  state  from  Munster. 

One  day,  two  full  years  after  that,  the  men  of  Munster  were  gathered  together  near  Femen,  and  they  took  notice  of  two  ravens  that  were  making  a  great  cawing.  "  What  a  noise  those  birds  have  been  making  all  through  the  year  !  "  they  said.  "  They  never  stop  scolding  at  one  another."  Just  then  Findell,  Ochall's  steward  from  Cruachan,  came  towards  them  on  the  hill,  and  they  bade  him  welcome.  "  What  a  noise  those  birds  are  making  !  "  he  said ;  "  any  one  would  think  them  to  be  the  same  two  birds  we  had  in  Cruachan  last  year."  With  that,  they  saw  the  two  ravens  change  into  the  shape  of  men,  and  they  knew  them  to  be  the  two  swineherds,  and  they  bade  them  welcome.  "  It  is  not  right  you  to  welcome  us,"  said  Bodb's  swineherd,  "  for  there  will  be  many   dead   bodies   of    friends,   and    much   crying    on 


270  THETWOBULLS 

account  of  us  two."  What  has  happened  you  all  through  this  time  ?  "  they  asked.  "  Nothing  good,"  he  said.  "  Since  we  went  from  you  we  have  been  all  the  time  in  the  shape  of  birds,  and  you  saw  the  way  we  were  scold-  ing at  one  another  all  through  this  year.  And  we  were  quarrelling  in  the  same  way  the  whole  of  last  year  at  Cruachan,  and  the  men  of  the  North  and  of  the  South  have  seen  what  our  power  is.  And  now,"  he  said,  "  we  will  go  into  the  shape  of  water  beasts,  and  be  under  the  water  for  the  length  of  two  years."  And  with  that  one  of  them  went  into  the  Sionnan,  and  the  other  into  the  Suir,  and  they  were  seen  for  a  year  in  the  Suir,  and  for  a  year  in  the  Sionnan,  and  they  devouring  one  another.  And  one  day  the  men  of  Connaught  had  a  great  gathering  at  Ednecha,  on  the  Sionnan,  and  they  saw  these  two  beasts  in  the  river  ;  each  one  of  them  looked  to  be  as  big  as  the  top  of  a  hill,  and  they  made  such  a  furious  attack  on  one  another  that  fiery  swords  seemed  to  be  coming  from  their  jaws,  and  the  people  came  round  them  on  every  side.  They  came  out  of  the  Sionnan  then,  and  as  soon  as  they  touched  the  shore,  they  changed  again  into  the  shape  of  the  two  swineherds.  Ochall  bade  them  welcome.  "  Where  have  you  been  wandering?"  he  asked  them.  "Indeed  it  is  tired  we  are  with  our  wanderings,"  they  said.  "  You  saw  what  we  were  doing  before  your  eyes,  and  that  is  what  we  were  doing  through  these  two  years,  under  seas  and  waters.  And  now  we  must  take  new  shapes  on  us,  till  we  try  one  another's  strength  again."  And  with  that  they  went  away. 

It  happened  a  good  while  after  that  there  was  a  great  gathering  of  the  men  of  Connaught  at  Loch  Riach,  for  Bodb  was  coming  on  a  friendly  visit  to  Ochall.  And  Bodb  brought  a  great  troop  with  him,  the  most  splendid  ever  seen  ;  speckled  horses  they  had,  and  green  cloaks  with  silver  brooches,  and  shoes  with  clasps  of  red  bronze. 


THE   TWO   CHAMPIONS  271 

and  every  one  of  them  had  a  collar  of  gold,  with  a  stone  worth  a  newly-calved  cow  set  in  it.  When  Ochall  saw  what  grand  clothes  and  horses  they  had,  he  called  to  his  people  secretly,  and  asked  could  they  match  Bodb's  people  in  dress  and  in  horses  and  arms,  and  they  said  they  could  not.  Then  Ochall  said  :  "  That  is  a  pity,  and  our  great  name  is  lost."  But  just  then  a  troop  of  men  were  seen  coming  from  the  North,  and  black  horses  with  them,  that  you  would  think  had  been  cast  up  by  the  sea,  and  bridle-bits  of  gold  in  their  mouths.  And  the  men  had  black-grey  cloaks,  and  a  gold  brooch  at  the  breast  of  each,  and  a  white  tunic  with  crimson  stripes,  and  fifty  coils  of  bright  gold  round  every  man.  And  every  man  of  them  had  black  hair,  as  smooth  as  if  a  cow  had  licked  it.  And  they  stopped  a  little  way  off,  and  then  the  men  of  Connaught  stood  up  and  gave  up  their  place  to  them.  There  was  a  Druid  from  Britain  there,  and  when  he  saw  them  make  way  he  said  :  "  From  this  out,  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,  the  Connaught  men  will  be  under  the  yoke,  attending  on  hounds  and  on  sons  of  kings  and  queens  for  ever." 

Then  after  they  had  been  feasting  for  a  while,  Bodb  asked  could  any  Connaught  man  be  found  that  would  fight  against  his  champion  Rinn,  that  was  with  him,  and  that  had  a  great  name,  but  no  one  knew  where  he  came  from.  And  at  first  there  could  no  one  be  found,  but  then  a  strange  champion  came  out  from  among  the  men  of  Connaught,  and  he  said,  "  I  will  go  against  him."  "  That  is  no  welcome  news,"  said  Rinn.  Then  they  fought  against  one  another  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  and  before  the  end  of  that  time  the  two  armies  began  to  join  into  the  fight,  and  a  troop  came  from  Leinster  and  joined  with  Bodb,  and  another  troop  came  from  Meath  and  joined  with  Ochall.  And  four  kings  were  killed  there,  and  Ochall  among  them,  and  then  Bodb  went  back  to  Slieve-na-man.     But  as  to  the 


272  THETWOBULLS 

two  champions,  they  were  seen  no  more,  and  it  was  known  they  were  the  two  swineherds.  After  that  they  were  for  two  years  with  the  appearance  of  shadows,  threatening  one  another,  the  way  that  many  people  died  of  fright  after  seeing  them. 

And  after  that,  they  were  in  the  shape  of  eels,  and  one  went  into  the  river  Cruind,  in  Cuailgne ;  and  after  a  while  a  cow  belonging  to  Daire,  son  of  Fachna,  drank  it  down.  And  the  other  went  into  the  Spring  of  Uaran  Garad,  in  Connaught  ;  and  one  day  Maeve  went  out  to  the  spring,  and  a  small  bronze  vessel  in  her  hand,  and  she  dipped  it  in  the  water,  and  the  little  eel  went  into  it,  and  every  colour  was  to  be  seen  on  him.  And  she  was  a  long  time  looking  at  him,  she  thought  the  colours  so  beautiful.  Then  the  water  went  away,  and  the  eel  was  alone  in  the  vessel.  "  It  is  a  pity  you  cannot  speak  to  me,"  said  Maeve.  "  What  is  it  you  want  to  know  ?  "  said  the  eel.  "  I  would  like  to  know  what  way  it  is  with  you  in  that  shape  of  a  beast,"  she  said  ;  "  and  I  would  like  to  know  what  will  happen  me  after  I  get  the  sway  over  Connaught."  "  Indeed  it  is  a  tormented  beast  I  am,"  he  said,  "  and  it  is  in  many  shapes  I  have  been.  And  as  to  yourself,"  he  said,  "  handsome  as  you  are,  you  should  take  a  good  man  to  be  with  you  in  your  sway."  "  I  have  no  wish,"  said  Maeve,  "  to  let  a  man  of  Connaught  get  the  upper  hand  over  me,"  and  with  that  she  went  home  again. 

But  she  married  Ailell  after  that,  and  as  for  the  eel,  he  was  swallowed  down  by  one  of  Maeve's  cows  that  came  to  drink  at  the  spring. 

And  it  was  from  that  cow,  and  from  the  cow  that  belonged  to  Daire,  son  of  Fachna,  the  two  bulls  were  born,  the  White-horned  and  the  Brown.  They  were  the  finest  ever  seen  in  Ireland,  and  gold  and  silver  were  put  on  their  horns  by  the  men  of  Ulster  and  Connaught.  In   Connaught  no  bull  dared  bellow  before  the  White- 


THE   MEETING   OF   THE   BULLS    273 

horned,  and  in  Ulster  no  bull  dared  bellow  before  the  Brown. 

As  to  the  Brown,  he  that  had  been  Friuch,  the  Munster  swineherd,  his  lowing  when  he  would  be  coming  home  every  evening  to  his  yard  was  good  music  to  the  people  of  the  whole  of  Cuailgne.  And  wherever  he  was,  neither  Bocanachs  nor  Bananachs  nor  witches  of  the  valley,  could  come  into  the  one  place  with  him.  And  it  was  on  account  of  him  the  great  war  broke  out. 

Now,  when  Maeve  saw  at  Ilgaireth  that  the  battle  was  going  against  her,  she  sent  eight  of  her  own  messengers  to  bring  away  the  Brown  Bull,  and  his  heifers.  "  For  whoever  goes  back  or  does  not  go  back,"  she  said, "  the  Brown  Bull  must  go  to  Cruachan." 

Now  when  the  Brown  Bull  came  into  Connaught,  and  saw  the  beautiful  trackless  country  before  him,  he  let  three  great  loud  bellowings  out  of  him.  As  soon  as  the  White-horned  heard  that,  he  set  out  for  the  place  those  bellowings  came  from,  with  his  head  high  in  the  air. 

Then  Maeve  said  that  the  men  of  her  army  must  not  go  to  their  homes  till  they  would  see  the  fight  between  the  two  bulls. 

And  they  all  said  some  one  must  be  put  to  watch  the  fight,  and  to  give  a  fair  report  of  it  afterwards.  And  it  is  what  they  agreed,  that  Bricriu  should  be  sent  to  watch  it,  because  he  had  not  taken  any  side  in  the  war ;  for  he  had  been  through  the  whole  length  of  it  under  care  of  physicians  at  Cruachan,  with  the  dint  of  the  wound  he  got  the  day  he  vexed  Fergus,  and  that  Fergus  drove  the  chess-men  into  his  head.  "  I  will  go  willingly,"  said  Bricriu.  So  he  went  out  and  took  his  place  in  a  gap,  where  he  could  have  a  good  view  of  the  fight. 

As  soon  as  the  bulls  caught  sight  of  one  another  they  pawed  the  earth  so  furiously  that  they  sent  the  sods   flying,   and   their   eyes   were   like  balls  of  fire  in 

S 


2/4  THETWOBULLS 

their  heads ;  they  locked  their  horns  together,  and  they  ploughed  up  the  ground  under  them  and  trampled  it,  and  they  were  trying  to  crush  and  to  destroy  one  another  through  the  whole  length  of  the  day. 

And  once  the  White-horned  went  back  a  little  way  and  made  a  rush  at  the  Brown,  and  got  his  horn  into  his  side,  and  he  gave  out  a  great  bellow,  and  they  rushed  both  together  through  the  gap  where  Bricriu  was,  the  way  he  was  trodden  into  the  earth  under  their  feet.  And  that  is  how  Bricriu  of  the  bitter  tongue,  son  of  Cairbre,  got  his  death. 

Then  when  the  night  was  coming  on,  Cormac  Conloingeas  took  hold  of  a  spear-shaft,  and  he  laid  three  great  strokes  on  the  Brown  Bull  from  head  to  tail,  and  he  said  :  "  This  is  a  great  treasure  to  be  boast-  ing of,  that  cannot  get  the  better  of  a  calf  of  his  own  age."  When  the  Brown  Bull  heard  that  insult,  great  fury  came  on  him,  and  he  turned  on  the  White-horned  again.  And  all  through  the  night  the  men  of  Ireland  were  listening  to  the  sound  of  their  bellowing,  and  they  going  here  and  there,  all  through  the  country. 

On  the  morrow,  they  saw  the  Brown  Bull  coming  over  Cruachan  from  the  west,  and  he  carrying  what  was  left  of  the  White-horned  on  his  horns.  Then  Maeve's  sons,  the  Maines,  rose  up  to  make  an  attack  on  him  on  account  of  the  Connaught  bull  he  had  de-  stroyed. "  Where  are  those  men  going  : "  said  Fergus.  *'  They  are  going  to  kill  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne."  "  By  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said  Fergus,  "  if  you  do  not  let  the  Brown  Bull  go  back  to  his  own  country  in  safety,  all  he  has  done  to  the  White-horned  is  little  to  what  I  will  do  now  to  you." 

Then  the  Brown  Bull  bellowed  three  times,  and  set  out  on  his  way.  And  when  he  came  to  the  great  ford  of  the  Sionnan  he  stopped  to  drink,  and  the  two  loins  of  the   White-horned   fell  from   his   horns  into  the  water. 


DEATH  OF  THE  BROWN  BULL  275 

And  that  place  is  called  Ath-luain,  the  ford  of  the  loin,  to  this  day.  And  its  liver  fell  in  the  same  way  into  a  river  of  Meath,  and  it  is  called  Ath-Truim,  the  ford  of  the  liver,  to  this  day. 

Then  he  went  on  till  he  came  to  the  top  of  Slieve  Breagh,  and  when  he  looked  from  it  he  saw  his  own  home,  the  hills  of  Cuailgne  ;  and  at  the  sight  of  his  own  country,  a  great  spirit  rose  up  in  him,  and  madness  and  fury  came  on  him,  and  he  rushed  on,  killing  every-  one that  came  in  his  way. 

And  when  he  got  to  his  own  place,  he  turned  his  back  to  a  hill  and  he  gave  out  a  loud  bellowing  of  victory.  And  with  that  his  heart  broke  in  his  body,  and  blood  came  bursting  from  his  mouth,  and  he  died. 


XIV 

THE  ONLY  JEALOUSY  OF  EMER 

TT  happened  one  time,  near  to  the  day  of  Samhain,  the  men  of  Ulster  came  together  for  games  and  for  feasting  upon  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 

And  they  were  all  of  them  there  but  Conall  Cearnach  and  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes.  "  Let  the  feast  be  begun,"  they  said.  "  It  shall  not  be  begun,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  till  Conall  and  Lugaid  are  here." 

Sencha,  the  poet,  said  then  :  "  Let  us  play  chess  while  we  are  waiting,  and  let  poems  be  sung  for  us,  and  let  games  be  played."     And  they  agreed  to  that. 

While  they  were  doing  these  things,  a  flock  of  birds  came  down  on  the  lake  before  them,  and  in  all  Ireland  there  were  not  birds  to  be  seen  that  were  more  beautiful. 

A  great  longing  came  on  the  women  that  were  there  to  have  the  birds  that  were  on  the  lake,  and  they  began  to  quarrel  with  one  another  as  to  who  should  have  them. 

King  Conchubar's  wife  said  :  "  I  must  have  a  bird  of  these  birds  on  each  of  my  two  shoulders."  "  We  must  all  have  the  same,"  said  the  other  women.  "If  any  one  is  to  get  them,  it  is  I  that  must  first  get  them,"  said  Eithne  Inguba,  who  loved  Cuchulain.  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  said  the  women.  "  It  is  I  will  tell  you  that,"  said  Levarcham,  "  for  I  will  go  to  Cuchulain  from  you  to  ask  him  to  get  them." 

So  she  went  to  Cuchulain  and  said  :  "  The  women  of 

276 


THETWOBIRDS  277 

Ulster  desire  that  you  will  get  these  birds  for  them."  Cuchulain  put  his  hand  upon  his  sword  as  if  to  strike  her,  and  he  said  :  "  Have  the  idle  women  of  Ulster  nothing  better  to  do  than  to  send  me  catching  birds  to-  day ? "  "  It  is  not  for  you,"  said  Levarcham,  "  to  be  angry  with  the  women  of  Ulster ;  for  there  are  many  of  them  are  half  blind  to-day  with  looking  at  you,  from  the  greatness  of  their  love  for  you." 

Then  Cuchulain  told  Laeg  to  yoke  his  chariot  for  him,  and  he  went  in  it  to  the  lake,  and  he  gave  the  birds  a  side  stroke  of  his  sword,  so  that  their  feet  and  their  wings  could  not  rise  from  the  water. 

They  caught  them  all  then,  and  divided  them  among  the  women,  so  that  there  was  not  a  woman  among  them  who  did  not  get  two  birds,  but  Eithne  Inguba  only.  Cuchulain  came  last  to  her.  "  It  is  vexed  you  seem  to  be,"  he  said.  "  Is  it  because  I  have  given  the  birds  to  the  other  women  ?  "  "  You  have  good  reason  for  that,"  she  said,  "  for  there  is  not  a  woman  of  them  but  would  share  her  love  and  her  friendship  with  you  ;  while,  as  to  me,  no  person  shares  my  love  but  you  alone." 

"  Do  not  be  vexed  then,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  for  what-  ever birds  may  come  to  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  or  to  the  Boinne,  from  this  out,  you  shall  have  the  two  most  beautiful  among  them." 

It  was  not  long  after  that,  two  other  birds  came  on  the  lake,  and  they  linked  together  with  a  chain  of  red  gold,  and  they  were  singing  soft  music  that  went  near  to  put  sleep  on  the  whole  gathering. 

Cuchulain  went  over  towards  the  birds,  but  Laeg  said  to  him  not  to  go,  and  Eithne  said  :  "  If  you  would  take  our  advice,  you  would  not  go  near  them,  for  there  is  enchantment  behind  these  birds  ;  let  some  other  birds  be  got  for  me  besides  these." 

"  Do  you  think  you  can  put  me  from  what  I  have  a  mind  to  do  ? "  said  Cuchulain.     And  he  said  to  Laeg  : 


278         ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

''  Put  a  stone  into  that  sling."  Laeg  took  a  stone  and  put  it  in  a  sling,  and  Cuchulain  made  a  cast,  but  it  missed.  "  My  grief ! "  he  said.  Then  he  took  another  stone,  and  made  another  cast,  and  it  passed  by  them.  "  I  am  good  for  nothing,"  he  said,  "  for  since  I  first  took  arms  I  never  made  a  bad  cast  till  this  day."  Then  he  threw  his  heavy  spear,  and  it  went  through  the  flying  wing  of  one  of  the  birds,  and  the  two  of  them  dived  down  under  the  water. 

Cuchulain  went  away  then  with  vexation  on  him,  and  he  lay  down  with  his  head  against  a  rock,  and  sleep  came  on  him.  And  he  saw  two  women  coming  towards  him,  one  of  them  having  a  green  cloak  about  her,  and  the  other  a  five-folded  crimson  cloak. 

The  woman  with  the  green  cloak  went  up  to  him,  and  smiled  at  him,  and  she  gave  him  a  stroke  of  a  rod.  The  other  went  up  to  him  then,  and  smiled  at  him,  and  gave  him  a  stroke  in  the  same  way  ;  and  they  went  on  doing  this  for  a  long  time,  each  of  them  striking  him  in  turn,  till  he  was  more  dead  than  alive.  And  then  they  went  away  and  left  him  there. 

All  the  men  of  Ulster  saw  that  something  had  happened,  and  they  asked  if  they  would  awaken  him.  "  Do  not,"  said  Conall  ;  "  do  not  move  him  before  night." 

After  that  Cuchulain  stood  up  in  his  sleep,  and  the  men  of  Ulster  asked  him  who  was  it  had  used  him  like  that,  but  he  could  not  speak  with  them.  But  after  a  while  he  said  :  "  Bring  me  and  lay  me  on  my  bed,  not  to  Dundealgan,  but  to  the  Speckled  House  at  Emain."  "  Let  him  be  brought  to  Dundealgan,  where  Emer  his  wife  is,"  said  Laeg.  "  Not  so,"  said  Cuchulain,  "■  but  bring  me  to  the  Speckled  House."  So  he  was  brought  there,  and  he  stopped  to  the  end  of  a  year  in  that  place  without  speaking  to  any  person. 

One  day  before  the  next  feast  of  Samhain,  at  the  end  of  the   year,  Conchubar  and  the   men   of  Ulster   were 


ANGUS  279 

around  him  in  the  house ;  that  is,  Laegaire  between  him  and  the  wall,  and  Conall  Cearnach  between  him  and  the  door,  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes  beside  his  pillow,  and  Eithne  Inguba  at  his  feet. 

As  they  were  sitting  like  this,  one  who  had  the  appearance  of  a  man  came  into  the  house  to  them,  and  sat  down  on  the  side  of  the  bed  where  Cuchulain  was  lying. 

"  What  has  brought  you  here  ?  "  said  Conall.  "  I  will  tell  you  that,"  said  he.  "  It  is  to  speak  with  the  man  lying  here  on  the  bed  I  am  come.  And  if  the  man  lying  here  were  in  his  health,  he  would  be  a  protection  to  all  the  men  of  Ulster ;  but  as  he  is,  under  great  sick-  ness and  weakness,  he  is  a  better  protection  to  them."  And  he  stood  up  then,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"  If  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim,  would  take  my  friend-  ship to-day,  all  he  has  seen  in  his  sleep  would  be  hiS)  with  no  help  from  his  army. 

"  Liban,  she  who  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword,  has  said  that  the  coming  of  Cuchu-  lain would  bring  great  joy  to  the  heart  of  Fand  her  sister. 

"  O  Cuchulain,  it  is  not  long  your  sickness  would  be  on  you  if  they  would  come,  the  two  daughters  of  Aedh  Abrat.  Here  to  the  south,  to  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  I  will  send  Liban  to  cure  your  sickness,  Cuchulain." 

"Who  are  you  yourself?"  they  said  to  him  then. 

"  I  am  Angus,"  he  said,  and  with  that  he  went  out ;  and  they  did  not  know  where  he  came  from,  or  where  he  went.  And  then  Cuchulain  sat  up  and  spoke  to  them.  "  It  is  time  indeed,"  said  the  men  of  Ulster,  "  for  you  to  tell  us  all  that  has  happened  you."  "  I  saw,"  he  said,  "  a  vision  about  this  time  last  year  "  :  and  then  he  told  them  all  he  had  seen,  and  of  the  women  that  had  come  and  had  struck  him  with  their  rods.  "  And  what  is  to  be  done  now,  my    master,   Conchubar?"   he   said.     "This 


28o        ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   E  M  E  R 

must  be  done,"  said  Conchubar :  "  you  must  go  back  till  you  come  to  the  same  rock." 

So  then  Cuchulain  set  out,  and  came  to  the  same  rock,  and  there  he  saw  the  same  woman  with  the  green  cloak  coming  towards  him.  "  That  is  well,  Cuchulain,"  said  she.  "  It  is  not  well  indeed  ;  and  tell  me  what  did  you  want  with  me  when  you  came  last  year?"  said  Cuchulain. 

"It  was  not  to  harm  you,  indeed,  we  came,"  said  the  woman,  "  but  to  ask  your  love  ;  and  I  am  come  now  to  speak  to  you,"  she  said,  "  from  Fand,  daughter  of  Aedh  Abrat ;  for  Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea,  has  left  her,  and  her  love  has  fallen  on  you  ;  and  my  own  name  is  Liban,  wife  of  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword.  And  I  have  a  message  for  you  from  him,"  she  said,  ''that  he  will  give  all  you  can  wish  for,  if  you  will  give  him  one  day's  help  against  Senach  of  the  crooked  body,  and  against  Eochaid  Juil,  and  against  Eoghan  of  Inver,  that  is  Eoghan  of  the  River's  Mouth." 

"  My  weakness  is  on  me  yet,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  I  could  not  go  out  fighting  against  men  to-day."  "You  will  not  be  long  so,"  said  Liban  ;  "  you  will  be  healed,  and  what  is  lost  of  your  strength  will  be  given  back  to  you  again  ;  and  you  ought  to  do  this  much  for  Labraid,"  she  said,  "because  he  is  the  best  of  the  heroes  of  the  world." 

"In  what  place  is  he?"  said  Cuchulain.  "He  is  in  Magh  Mell,  the  Happy  Plain,"  she  said.  "  I  will  not  go,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  until  I  see  Emer,  my  wife.  And  you  are  to  go  for  me,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  to  where  she  is,  and  tell  her  it  was  the  women  of  the  Sidhe  came  to  me  from  the  hills  and  struck  me  ;  and  tell  her  I  am  getting  better  now,  and  bid  her  come  and  visit  me." 

So  Laeg  went  to  Emer,  and  he  told  her  what  way  Cuchulain  was.  And  Emer  said  :  "  It  is  a  bad  servant  you  are,  Laeg,  you  that  are  coming  and  going  by  the 


EMER'S    REPROACHES  281 

hills,  and  that  cannot  find  a  cure  for  your  master ;  and  it  is  a  pity  for  the  men  of  Ulster,"  she  said,  "  that  they  do  not  find  a  certain  cure  for  him.  If  it  had  been  Conchubar  that  was  in  bonds,  or  Fergus  that  could  not  sleep,  or  Conall  Cearnach  that  had  wounds  on  him,  it  is  Cuchulain  that  would  give  them  relief."  And  it  is  what  she  said : 

"My  grief!  son  of  Riangabra,  you  who  go  early  and  late  among  the  hills,  you  are  not  early  but  late  in  bringing  a  cure  for  the  beautiful  son  of  Dechtire. 

"  It  is  a  pity  for  the  brave  men  of  Ulster,  with  all  the  knowledgeable  men  and  the  learners  among  them,  that  they  have  not  searched  the  whole  face  of  the  world  for  a  cure  for  their  friend  Cuchulain. 

"If  it  was  Fergus  had  lost  his  sleep,  and  that  any  enchantment  could  cure  him,  it  is  the  son  of  Dechtire  would  not  sleep  at  home  till  he  had  found  a  Druid  to  do  it. 

"  If  it  were  Conall  in  the  same  way  was  suffering  from  wounds  and  from  sores,  it  is  the  Hound  would  search  the  wide  world  till  he  would  find  one  that  would  cure  him. 

"If  it  was  Laegaire  of  many  gifts  was  wounded  in  battle,  Cuchulain  would  have  searched  through  all  Ireland  to  cure  the  grandson  of  Iliach. 

"  If  it  were  on  Celthair  the  revengeful  sleep  had  fallen  and  long  sickness,  night  and  day  would  see  the  journeys  of  Setanta  am.ong  the  hills. 

"  If  it  had  been  Furbaigh,  chief  of  fighters,  that  lay  wasting  in  his  bed,  he  would  have  searched  the  ridge  of  the  world  until  he  had  found  what  would  save  him. 

"  The  host  of  the  hill  of  Truin  has  killed  him ;  they  have  taken  from  him  his  great  courage ;  the  Hound  of  Muirthemne  is  no  better  than  any  other  hound  since  the  sleep  of  the  hill  of  Bruagh  came  on  him. 

"  My  grief!  sickness  has  laid  hold  of  me  for  the  Hound 


282         ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

of  the  smith  of  Conchubar ;  it  will  be  sickness  to  my  heart  and  my  body,  I  to  fail  in  bringing  him  a  cure. 

"My  grief!  It  hurts  my  heart,  sickness  to  be  on  the  rider  of  the  plain,  so  that  he  could  not  come  here,  to  the  gathering  at  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 

"  It  is  why  he  does  not  come  from  Emain,  the  appearance  he  had  is  gone  from  him  ;  my  voice  is  weak  and  dead  because  of  the  way  he  is.  A  month  and  a  quarter  and  a  year  without  sleep,  that  is  the  way  I  am,  and  without  hearing  any  one  speak  pleasant  words,  son  of  Riangabra,  O  son  of  Riangabra." 

After  she  had  made  this  complaint,  Emer  went  forward  to  Emain  Macha  to  attend  on  Cuchulain,  and  she  sat  on  the  side  of  the  bed  where  he  was,  and  it  is  what  she  was  saying  : 

"  Rise  up,  champion  of  Ulster,  awake  from  your  sleep,  in  health  and  happiness.  Look  at  the  well-  shaped  king  of  Macha ;  he  will  not  allow  your  long  sleep.  Look  at  his  shoulder,  smooth  like  crystal  ;  look  at  his  drinking-horns  and  battle  spoils  ;  look  at  his  chariots  that  sweep  the  valleys ;  look  at  the  movements  of  his  chess-men. 

"  Think  on  his  heroes  in  their  strength  ;  think  on  his  high,  fine  women  ;  think  on  his  kings  of  brave  doings  ;  think  on  their  high  noble  queens. 

"  Think  on  the  beginning  of  clear  winter ;  think  on  its  wonders  in  their  turn ;  think  in  yourself  of  what  it  brings  forth — its  cold,  its  length,  its  want  of  beauty.  This  stupor,  it  is  not  good  wholesome  sleep ;  it  is  idleness  and  the  fear  of  battle ;  long  sleep  is  the  same  as  drunkenness  ;  weakness  is  only  second  to  death. 

"  Awake  from  the  sleep  of  the  Sidhe  you  have  drunk ;  cast  it  off  with  all  your  great  strength.  You  have  had  your  fill  of  sweet  flowery  words ;  rise  up,  O  hero  of  Ulster." 

Cuchulain  rose  up  then,  and  he  drew  his  hand  across  his  face,  and  he  put  his  stupor  and  his  heaviness  off 


LABRAID'S   COUNTRY  283 

him.  Then  Laeg  said  :  "  It  is  great  idleness  for  a  hero  to  give  in  to  the  sleep  of  a  sick-bed  because  women  from  Magh  Mell  have  appeared  to  you,  who  overcame  you,  who  bound  you,  who  put  you  within  the  power  of  idle  women.  Rise  up  out  of  death,  you  who  are  wounded  by  women  of  the  Sidhe,  for  your  strength  has  come,  the  strength  of  a  hero  among  heroes ;  rise  up  till  you  go  to  the  place  of  fighting  men,  till  you  do  great  deeds,  where  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  leads  his  men.  Rise  up  that  you  may  be  great,  and  leave  this  idleness." 

Then  Cuchulain  went  again  to  the  rock,  and  he  saw  Liban  coming  towards  him,  and  she  asked  him  again  to  go  with  her  to  her  country.  "  What  place  is  Labraid  in  at  this  time  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  will  tell  you  that,"  said  Liban,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"  Labraid  is  at  this  time  upon  a  clear  lake,  where  companies  of  women  come  to.  It  is  not  tired  you  would  be  coming  to  his  country,  if  you  would  but  visit  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword. 

"  A  happy  house  ordered  by  a  kind  woman ;  a  hundred  men  in  it  that  are  masters  of  learning;  the  beauty  of  redness  is  on  the  cheek  of  Labraid. 

"  He  shakes  a  wolfs  head  before  his  thin  red  sword  ;  he  bruises  the  armour  of  rushing  hosts ;  he  breaks  the  shields  of  heroes. 

"  His  appearance  in  the  fight  is  the  delight  of  the  eye ;  he  does  his  brave  deeds  at  all  points ;  it  is  he  is  worth  more  than  any  other  man. 

"  The  greatest  of  fighters,  the  one  told  of  in  stories,  has  reached  the  country  of  Eochaid  Juil ;  his  hair  is  like  rings  of  gold  upon  him ;  his  coming  is  like  the  smell  of  wine. 

"  A  man  of  many  strange  deeds,  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  at  sword  ;  he  does  not  strike  till  he  is  forced ;  he  keeps  his  people  in  quietness. 


284        ONLY   JEALOUSY    OF   EMER 

"There  are  bridles  and  collars  of  red  gold  on  his  horses,  and  this  is  not  all  his  riches  ;  the  house  he  lives  in  is  supported  by  pillars  of  silver  and  of  crystal." 

"  I  will  not  go  on  a  woman's  asking,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Let  Laeg  come  with  me  then,"  said  Liban,  "  to  see  and  to  know  everything."  ''  Let  him  go  then,"  said  Cuchulain. 

Then  Laeg  went  along  with  the  women,  and  they  went  past  Magh  Luada,  the  Racing  Plain,  and  past  the  Bile  Buada,  the  Tree  of  Victory,  and  past  Oenach  Emna,  the  gathering-place  of  Emain,  and  to  Oenach  Fidhga,  the  gathering-place  of  the  woods ;  and  it  was  there  Aedh  Abrat  used  to  be  with  his  daughters.  And  Liban  caught  Laeg  by  the  shoulder :  "  You  will  not  escape  to-day,  Laeg,"  she  said,  "  unless  you  are  protected  by  a  woman."  "  That  is  not  what  we  were  much  used  to  up  to  this,"  said  Laeg,  "to  be  under  women  protection."  "  My  grief  for  ever,  Cuchulain  not  to  be  in  your  place  now  !  "  said  Liban.  "  I  would  be  glad  indeed  he  to  be  here,"  said  Laeg. 

They  went  away  then  towards  the  Island  of  Labraid,  and  when  they  came  to  the  lake  they  saw  a  little  copper  ship  upon  the  water  before  them.  Then  they  went  into  the  ship,  and  they  came  to  the  island,  and  there  they  went  to  the  door  of  a  house.  And  they  saw  a  man  coming  towards  them,  and  Liban  said  to  him  :  "  Where  is  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword  ?  "  And  the  man  said  :  "  Labraid  is  putting  courage  into  the  people,  and  he  is  gathering  them  for  battle.  There  will  be  great  slaughter  made  there,  that  will  fill  the  plain  of  Fidgha," 

Then  they  went  up  to  the  house,  and  Laeg  thought  he  had  seen  it  before,  and  yet  it  was  strange.  And  in  it  were  beds,  crimson,  green,  white  and  gold ;  and  the  great  candle  there  was  a  bright  precious  stone.  And  at  the  western  door,  where  the  sun  goes   down,  there  was  a 


FAND  285 

stud  of  horses  with  grey  speckled  manes,  and  others  of  red-brown.  And  at  the  eastern  door  were  three  tall  trees  of  pure  crimson,  with  lasting  flowers,  and  birds  singing  from  them  for  the  young  men  of  the  king's  rath.  And  there  was  a  tree  at  the  door  of  the  court  that  there  was  not  the  like  of  for  beauty,  a  silver  tree,  and  when  the  sun  was  shining  on  it,  it  was  like  gold.  And  there  were  three  times  twenty  other  trees  there,  and  the  top  of  every  one  meeting  the  other,  and  three  hundred  could  be  fed  from  every  tree  with  fruit  that  is  different,  that  is  always  ripe.  And  there  was  a  fountain  in  the  great  court,  and  three  times  fifty  striped  cloaks,  and  a  shining  gold  pin  in  the  ear  of  every  cloak.  And  there  was  a  vat  of  merry  mead  for  dividing  among  the  household  ;  it  is  a  lasting  custom  that  it  is  always  full,  ever  and  always.  And  in  the  house  were  three  times  fifty  women,  and  they  all  bade  welcome  to  Laeg,  and  it  is  what  they  all  said  to  him  :  "  There  is  a  welcome  before  you,  Laeg,  for  the  sake  of  the  woman  with  whom  you  come,  and  for  the  sake  of  him  from  whom  you  come,  and  for  your  own  sake." 

"  What  will  you  do  now,  Laeg  ?  "  said  Liban.  "  Will  you  go  first  and  speak  with  Fand  ?  "  "I  will,  if  I  know  the  place  she  is  in,"  said  Laeg.  "  I  will  tell  you  that,  for  she  is  apart  in  a  room  by  herself,"  said  Liban.  So  they  went  to  speak  with  her,  and  she  bade  Laeg  welcome  in  the  same  way  as  the  others.  And  the  meaning  of  the  name  Fand  is  a  tear  that  passes  over  the  fire  of  the  eye.  It  was  for  her  purity  she  was  called  that,  and  for  her  beauty  ;  for  there  was  nothing  in  life  with  which  she  could  be  compared  besides  it. 

And  when  she  had  bade  Laeg  welcome,  she  said  :  "  For  what  reason  did  Cuchulain  not  come  ? "  "  He  had  no  mind  to  come  on  a  woman's  asking,"  said  Laeg.  "  And  besides  that,"  he  said,  "  he  did  not  know  if  it  was   from  yourself  the  message  came."     "  It  was 


286        ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

from  myself  indeed,"  she  said,  "  and  let  him  not  be  long  in  coming,  for  it  is  on  this  day  the  battle  is  to  be  fought." 

While  they  were  there  together,  they  heard  the  sound  of  Labraid's  chariot  coming  to  the  island.  "  It  is  troubled  Labraid's  mind  is  to-day,"  said  Liban.  "  Let  us  go  out  before  him."  So  they  went  out,  and  Liban  bade  him  welcome,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"  Welcome,  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  at  sword,  yourself  an  army,  a  destroyer  of  heroes ;  welcome,  welcome,  Labraid." 

Labraid  made  no  answer,  and  Liban  spoke  again : 

"  Welcome,  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  at  sword  ;  his  hand  is  open  to  all ;  his  word  is  faithful ;  his  justice  is  right ;  kind  his  sway ;  strong  his  right  arm  ;  gentle  to  his  horses  ;  welcome,  welcome,  Labraid  !  " 

Still  Labraid  did  not  answer,  and  she  spoke  again,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  Welcome,  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword  ;  lifter  up  of  the  weak ;  subduer  of  the  strong ;  welcome,  Labraid ;  welcome,  Labraid !  " 

Then  Labraid  said  :  "  Leave  your  praises,  woman,  for  it  is  not  pride  or  happiness  or  high  thoughts  of  myself  I  have  in  my  mind  to-day.  A  battle  is  near,  and  the  striking  of  swords  in  right  and  left  hands ;  the  one  heart  of  Eochaid  Juil  is  equal  to  many.  It  is  not  a  time  for  pride." 

"  There  is  good  news  before  you,"  said  Liban  then.  "  Laeg,  the  chariot-driver  of  Cuchulain,  is  here,  and  he  has  brought  a  message  from  him  that  he  will  go  into  the  battle  with  you."  Then  Labraid  bade  him  welcome  as  the  women  had  done,  and  he  said  :  "  Go  back  home  now,  and  tell  Cuchulain  to  make  no  delay  in  coming,  for  it  is  to-day  the  battle  is  to  be  fought." 

So  Laeg  went  away  then  to  Emain  Macha,  and  told  his  story  to  Cuchulain,  and  to  all  the  rest,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : 


FAND   WELCOMES   CUCHULAIN    287 

"  Labraid  is  a  king  of  great  armies.  I  saw  his  country,  bright,  free,  where  no  lies  are  spoken,  and  no  bad  thing.  I  saw  the  masters  of  music  within,  giving  deh'ght  to  the  daughters  of  Aedh.  If  I  had  not  come  away  quickly,  they  would  have  taken  my  strength  from  me. 

"  I  saw  all  this  at  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe.  The  women  there  are  beautiful,  their  gifts  are  beyond  counting;  as  to  Fand,  the  daughter  of  Aedh  Abrat,  no  one  could  reach  her  beauty  but  the  queens  of  the  kings. 

"  Eithne  Inguba  is  a  beautiful  woman,  but  the  woman  I  am  speaking  of  now  takes  away  the  wits  from  whole  armies. 

"  It  is  a  pity,  Cuchulain,  you  did  not  go  a  while  ago,  and  every  one  asking  you  to  do  it,  that  you  might  see  the  way  it  is  in  the  great  house  I  have  seen. 

"  If  all  Ireland  were  mine,  and  I  king  over  the  happy  hills,  I  would  give  it,  and  that  would  be  no  small  thing,  to  live  for  ever  in  the  place  I  have  been  in." 

"  That  is  good,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  is  good,"  said  Laeg,  "  and  it  is  right  to  go  to  reach  it,  and  everything  in  that  country  is  good." 

Then  Cuchulain  rose  up,  and  he  passed  his  hand  over  his  face,  and  he  spoke  pleasantly  with  Laeg,  and  he  felt  that  the  things  the  young  man  was  telling  him  were  a  strengthening  to  his  mind.  And  Laeg  said  :  "  It  is  time  to  come,  for  the  battle  is  being  fought  to-day." 

Cuchulain  went  along  with  him  then  to  that  country,  and  took  his  chariot  with  him  till  they  reached  the  island.  Labraid  bade  them  welcome,  and  all  the  women  ;  and  Fand  bade  Cuchulain  her  own  welcome. 

"What   is   to  be   done  here  now?"   said  Cuchulain. 

"  This  is  what  we  have  to  do,"  said  Labraid  ;  "  to  go  and  take  a  turn  round  the  army  that  is  against  us." 

They  went  forward  then  till  they  reached  the  gather-  ing-place of  the  armies,  and  till  they  cast  an  eye  over 


288         ONLY   JEALOUSY    OF    EMER 

them,  and  it  seemed  as  if  there  was  no  end  to  them.  "  Go  you  away  for  a  while,"  said  Cuchulain  to  Labraid.  So  Labraid  went  away  then,  and  Cuchulain  stayed  before  the  armies.  Then  two  black  ravens  croaked,  and  all  the  armies  laughed.  ''It  is  likely,"  they  said,  "  the  rav'ens  are  telling  of  the  coming  of  the  angry  man  from  IMuirthemne."     And  they  hunted  them  away. 

After  that  Eochaid  Juil  went  to  wash  his  hands  at  the  spring,  and  Cuchulain  saw  his  bare  shoulder  through  the  shirt,  and  he  threw  a  spear  at  him,  and  it  passed  through  him  ;  and  then  he  attacked  the  army  alone,  and  killed  a  great  many.  Then  he  was  attacked  by  Senach  Siabartha  the  Unearthly,  and  they  fought  very  hard,  and  Cuchulain  overcame  him  in  the  end.  And  Labraid  came  then,  and  broke  the  armies  before  him.  and  he  called  to  Cuchulain  to  leave  off  from  killing.  But  Laeg  said  :  "  I  am  in  dread  he  will  spend  his  rage  on  us,  since  he  has  not  had  enough  of  fighting.  And  let  your  people  go,"  he  said,  "  and  let  them  make  ready  three  vats  of  water  to  put  out  his  heat.  The  first  vat  he  will  go  into  will  boil  over ;  the  second  vat,  no  person  could  bear  its  heat ;  but  the  heat  of  the  third  vat  will  be  fit  to  bear." 

When  the  women  saw  Cuchulain  coming  back,  it  was  then  Fand  sang  before  him  :  "  Stately  is  the  man  that  comes  in  his  chariot ;  young  he  is,  and  without  a  beard  ;  his  course  is  splendid  across  the  plain  at  evening,  at  Senach  Fidhga,  the  gathering-place  of  the  woods. 

"  It  is  not  the  music  of  the  Sidhe  would  keep  him  in  a  bed ;  it  is  the  red  colour  of  blood  that  is  upon  him  ;  I  stand  looking  at  the  horses  of  his  chariot ;  their  like  is  not  known,  they  are  as  fast  as  the  winds  of  spring. 

"  It  is  Cuchulain  that  is  coming,  the  young  hero  from  Muirthemne  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  the  man  against  whom  he  is  angered." 

Then  Liban  asked  him  what  he  had  done  in  the  fight  And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Fair,  ruddy-faced  men  attacked 


EMER'S   ANGER  289 

me  on  every  side  from  the  back  of  horses,  the  people  of  Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea,  called  there  by  Eochaid  of  Inver  ;  I  gave  them  wound  for  wound.  I  threw  my  spear  at  Eochaid  Juil ;  it  was  not  with  the  uncertain  cast  of  a  man  among  mists  I  threw  it.  I  heard  his  groan,  and  its  sound  was  friendly  to  me  ;  if  those  who  have  spoken  have  told  the  truth,  it  was  that  throw  won  the  battle." 

It  was  to  the  son,  now,  of  this  Eochaid  Juil  of  the  Land  of  Promise,  that  Aebgreine,  the  daughter  of  Naoise  and  Deirdre  was  given  afterwards  in  marriage  by  Manannan. 

After  that,  Cuchulain  stopped  a  month  in  that  country  with  Fand,  and  at  the  end  of  the  month  he  bade  her  farewell,  and  she  said  to  him :  "  In  whatever  place  you  tell  me  to  go  and  meet  you,  I  will  go  there."  And  the  place  they  settled  to  meet  at  was  at  Ibar  Cinn  Tracta,  the  yew  at  the  head  of  Baile's  strand. 

But  when  all  this  was  told  to  Emer,  there  was  great  anger  on  her,  and  she  had  knives  made  ready  to  kill  the  woman  with ;  and  she  came,  and  fifty  young  girls  with  her,  to  the  place  where  they  had  settled  to  meet. 

Cuchulain  and  Laeg  were  playing  chess  there,  and  they  did  not  see  the  women  coming.  It  was  Fand  saw  them  first,  and  she  said  to  Laeg :  "  Look,  Laeg,  at  what  I  see."  "  What  is  that  ?  "  said  Laeg.  Then  he  looked,  and  it  is  what  Fand  said :  "  Look  behind  you,  Laeg ;  there  are  women  listening  to  you,  wise,  with  sharp,  green  knives  in  their  right  hands,  with  gold  at  their  well-shaped  breasts  ;  they  move  as  brave  men  do,  going  through  a  battle  of  chariots.  Well  does  Emer,  daughter  of  Forgall,  change  colour  in  her  anger." 

"  No  harm  shall  be  done  to  you  by  her,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  and  she  shall  not  reach  to  you  at  all.  Come  into  the  sunny  seat  of  the  chariot,  opposite  myself,  for  I  will  defend  you  against  all  the  many  women  of  the  four  points   of  Ulster ;   for  though  Forgall's  daughter  may 

T 


290        ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

threaten,"  he  said,  "  on  the  strength  of  her  companions,  to  do  some  daring  thing,  it  is  surely  not  against  me  she  will  dare  it." 

Then  Cuchulain  said  to  Emer  :  "  It  is  little  I  mind  you,  woman,  in  spite  of  my  affection  for  you,  more  than  any  other  man  minds  a  woman.  The  spear  in  your  shaking  hand  does  not  wound  me,  nor  your  weak,  thin  knife,  nor  your  vain,  gathered  anger ;  for  it  would  be  a  pity  my  strength  to  be  put  down  by  a  woman's  strength." 

"  I  ask  then,"  said  Emer,  "  what  was  it  led  you,  Cuchulain,  to  dishonour  me  before  all  the  women  of  the  province,  and  before  all  the  women  of  Ireland,  and  before  all  honourable  people  in  the  same  way?  For  it  was  under  your  shelter  I  came,  and  on  the  strength  of  your  faithfulness  ;  for  although  you  threaten  a  great  quarrel  in  your  pride,  it  is  certain,  Cuchulain,  you  cannot  put  me  away,  even  if  you  would  try  to  do  it." 

"  I  ask  you,  Emer,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  why  I  may  not  have  my  turn  in  the  company  of  this  woman  ;  for  in  the  first  place  she  is  well-behaved,  comely,  well-mannered,  worthy  of  a  king,  this  woman  from  beyond  the  waves  of  the  great  sea  ;  with  form  and  countenance  and  high  descent  ;  with  embroidery  and  handiness,  with  sense  and  quickness  ;  for  there  is  not  anything  under  the  skies  her  husband  could  ask,  but  she  would  do  it,  even  if  she  had  not  given  her  promise.  And  O  Emer,"  he  said,  "you  will  never  find  any  brave,  comely  man  so  good  as  myself" 

"  It  is  certain,"  said  Emer,  "  that  I  will  not  refuse  this  woman  if  you  follow  her.  But  all  the  same,  everything  red  is  beautiful,  everything  new  is  fair,  everything  high  is  lovely,  everything  common  is  bitter,  everything  we  are  without  is  thought  much  of;  everything  we  know  is  thought  little  of,  till  all  knowledge  is  known.  And  O  Cuchulain,"  she  said,  "  I  was  at  one  time  in  esteem  with  you  and  I  would  be  so  again,  if  it  were  pleasing  to  you," 


FAND'S   COMPLAINT  291 

And  grief  came  upon  her,  and  overcame  her.  "  By  my  word,  now,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  you  are  pleasing  to  me,  and  will  be  pleasing  as  long  as  I  live." 

"  Let  me  be  given  up,"  said  Fand.  "  It  is  better  for  me  to  be  given  up,"  said  Emer.  "  Not  so,"  said  Fand,  "  it  is  I  that  will  be  given  up  in  the  end,  and  it  is  I  that  have  been  in  danger  of  it  all  this  time." 

And  great  grief  and  trouble  of  mind  came  on  Fand,  because  she  was  ashamed  to  be  given  up,  and  to  have  to  go  back  to  her  home  there  and  then ;  and  the  great  love  she  had  given  Cuchulain  troubled  her ;  and  so  she  was  lamenting,  and  she  made  this  com-  plaint : 

"  It  is  I  will  go  on  the  journey  ;  I  agree  to  it  with  great  sorrow  ;  though  my  father  has  so  great  a  name,  I  would  sooner  stay  with  Cuchulain.  It  would  be  better  for  me  to  be  here,  to  be  under  your  rule  without  grief,  than  to  go,  though  you  may  wonder  at  it,  to  the  sunny  house  of  Aedh  Abrat. 

"  O  Emer,  the  man  is  yours,  and  well  may  you  wear  him,  for  you  are  worthy  ;  what  my  arm  cannot  reach,  that  at  least  I  may  wish  well  to. 

"  Many  were  the  men  asking  for  me,  in  the  court  and  in  country  places;  I  never  went  to  meet  one  of  them,  for  it  is  myself  was  of  right  behaviour. 

"  A  pity  it  is  to  give  love  to  a  man,  and  he  to  take  no  heed  to  it.  It  is  better  to  be  turned  away,  if  you  are  not  loved  as  you  love. 

"  It  was  not  right  of  you,  Emer  of  the  yellow  hair,  to  take  hold  of  Fand,  to  kill  her  in  her  misery." 

Now  all  this  was  told  to  Manannan,  that  Fand,  daughter  of  Aedh  Abrat  was  fighting  alone  against  the  women  of  Ulster,  and  that  Cuchulain  was  putting  her  away.  Manannan  came  then  from  the  east  in  search  of  her,  and  he  was  near  them,  and  no  one  of  them  saw  him  but  only  Fand,     And  then  great  fear  and  trouble  of 


292        ONLY  JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

mind  came  on  her  at  seeing  Manannan,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"  Look  on  the  great  son  of  the  sea,  from  the  plains  of  Eoghan  of  Inver  ;  Manannan,  lord  of  the  fair  hills  of  the  world  ;  there  was  a  time  when  he  was  dear  to  me. 

"  He  may  even  to-day  be  constant ;  my  mind  is  no  friend  to  jealousy.     There  is  a  road  love  leads  us  in. 

"  The  time  I  and  the  friend  of  Lugh  were  in  the  sunny  palace  of  Dun  Inver,  we  thought,  without  a  doubt,  that  we  should  never  be  parted  from  one  another. 

"  When  Manannan  the  great  married  me,  I  was  a  wife  worthy  of  him  ;  he  gave  me  a  bracelet  of  heavy  gold,  as  the  price  of  my  beauty. 

"  I  see,  coming  over  the  sea,  no  earthly  person  sees  him,  the  crested  horseman  of  the  high-maned  waves  ;  he  has  no  need  of  long  ships. 

"  As  for  me  myself,  because  there  is  foolishness  in  the  minds  of  women,  the  man  I  loved  exceedingly  has  left  me  here  astray. 

"  Farewell  to  you,  beautiful  Cuchulain ;  I  go  away  from  you  with  a  kind  heart.  Though  I  do  not  come  back  again,  let  me  have  your  good  will ;  all  things  are  good  in  comparison  with  a  parting. 

"  It  is  time  for  me  to  go  away  ;  there  is  one  to  whom  it  is  not  grief,  but  for  all  that,  it  is  a  great  disgrace  to  me,  O  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra. 

"  It  is  with  my  own  husband  I  will  go,  because  he  will  do  as  I  desire.  Look  now  at  my  going,  that  it  may  not  be  said  I  went  away  secretly." 

Then  Fand  went  over  to  Manannan,  and  Manannan  bade  her  welcome,  and  he  said  :  "  Well,  woman,  is  it  after  Cuchulain  you  will  be  going  from  this  time,  or  is  it  with  me  you  will  go  ?  "  "  By  my  word  now,"  said  she,  "  there  is  one  of  you  I  would  sooner  follow  than  the  other  ;  but  it  is  along  with  you  I  will  go  and  I  will  not  wait  on  Cuchulain,  because  he  has  left  me.    And  another  thing," 


MANANNAN'S   CLOAK  293 

she  said,  "  you  have  not  a  queen  that  is  fitting  for  you,  and  that  is  what  Cuchulain  has." 

But  when  Cuchulain  saw  the  woman  going  away  from  him  with  Manannan,  he  said  to  Laeg  :  "  What  is  that  ?  "  "  It  is  Fand,"  said  Laeg,  "  that  is  going  to  Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea,  because  she  was  not  pleasing  to  you." 

It  is  then  there  was  great  anger  on  Cuchulain,  and  he  went  with  great  leaps  southward  to  Luachair,  the  place  of  rushes  ;  and  he  stopped  for  a  long  while  without  drink,  without  food,  among  the  mountains,  and  where  he  slept  every  night,  was  on  the  road  of  Midluachan. 

And  when  Emer  heard  that,  she  went  to  visit  Conchubar  in  Emain  Macha,  and  she  told  him  the  way  Cuchulain  was. 

Then  Conchubar  sent  the  poets  and  the  skilled  men  and  the  Druids  of  Ulster  to  visit  him,  that  they  might  lay  hold  of  him,  and  bring  him  to  Emain  Macha  along  with  them.  But  when  they  came  to  him,  he  would  have  killed  them,  but  the  Druids  did  enchantment  on  him,  until  they  had  laid  hold  of  him,  and  until  his  wits  began  to  come  back  to  him.  Then  he  asked  them  for  a  drink,  and  the  Druids  gave  him  a  drink  of  forgetfulness.  From  the  moment  he  drank  that  drink,  he  did  not  remember  Fand,  and  all  the  things  he  had  done.  And  they  gave  a  drink  of  forgetfulness  to  Emer  as  well,  that  she  might  forget  her  jealousy,  for  the  state  she  was  in  was  no  better  than  his  own. 

And  after  that,  Manannan  shook  his  cloak  between  Cuchulain  and  Fand,  the  way  they  should  never  meet  one  another  again. 


XV 

ADVICE  TO  A  PRINCE 

'T^HERE  was  a  meeting  of  the  three  provinces  of  Ireland  held  about  this  time  in  Teamhair,  to  try  could  they  find  some  person  to  give  the  High  Kingship  of  Ireland  to  ;  for  they  thought  it  a  pity  the  Hill  of  the  Lordship  of  Ireland,  that  is  Teamhair,  to  be  without  the  rule  of  a  king  on  it,  and  the  tribes  to  be  without  a  king's  government  to  judge  their  houses.  For  the  men  of  Ireland  had  been  without  the  government  of  a  High  King  over  them  since  the  death  of  Conaire  at  Da  Derga's   Inn. 

And  the  kings  that  met  now  at  the  court  of  Cairbre  Niafer  were  Ailell  and  Maeve  of  Connaught,  and  Curoi,  and  Tigernach,  son  of  Luchta,  king  of  Tuathmumain,  and  Finn,  son  of  Ross,  king  of  Leinster.  But  they  would  not  ask  the  men  of  Ulster  to  help  them  in  choosing  a  king,  for  they  were  all  of  them  against  the  men  of  Ulster. 

There  was  a  bull-feast  made  ready  then,  the  same  way  as  the  time  Conaire  was  chosen,  to  find  out  who  was  the  best  man  to  get  the  kingship. 

After  a  while  the  dreamer  screamed  out  in  his  sleep,  and  told  what  he  saw  to  the  kings.  And  what  he  saw  this  time,  was  a  young  strong  man,  with  high  looks,  and  with  two  red  stripes  on  his  body,  and  he  sitting  over  the  pillow  of  a  man  that  was  wasting  away  in  Emain  Macha. 

291 


CUCHULAIN'S   ADVICE  295 

A  message  was  sent  then  with  this  account  to  Emain  Macha.  The  men  of  Ulster  were  gathered  at  that  time  about  Cuchulain,  that  was  on  his  sick-bed.  The  messenger  told  his  story  to  Conchubar  and  to  the  chief  men  of  Ulster. 

"  There  is  a  young  man  of  good  race  and  good  birth  with  us  now  that  answers  to  that  account,"  said  Conchubar  ;  "  that  is  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes,  son  of  Clothru,  daughter  of  Eochaid  Feidlech,  the  pupil  of  Cuchulain  ;  and  he  is  sitting  by  his  pillow  within,  caring  him,  for  he  is  on  his  sick-bed." 

And  when  it  was  told  Cuchulain  that  messengers  were  come  for  Lugaid,  to  make  him  King  in  Teamhair,  he  rose  up  and  began  to  advise  him,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"  Do  not  be  a  frightened  man  in  a  battle ;  do  not  be  light-minded,  hard  to  reach,  or  proud.  Do  not  be  ungentle,  or  hasty,  or  passionate  ;  do  not  be  overcome  with  the  drunkenness  of  great  riches,  like  a  flea  that  is  drowned  in  the  ale  of  a  king's  house.  Do  not  scatter  many  feasts  to  strangers  ;  do  not  visit  mean  people  that  cannot  receive  you  as  a  king.  Do  not  let  wrongful  possession  stand  because  it  has  lasted  long ;  but  let  witnesses  be  searched  to  know  who  is  the  right  owner  of  land.  Let  the  tellers  of  history  tell  truth  before  you  ;  let  the  lands  of  brothers  and  their  increase  be  set  down  in  their  lifetime  ;  if  a  family  has  increased  in  its  branches,  is  it  not  from  the  one  stem  they  are  come  ?  Let  them  be  called  up,  let  the  old  claims  be  established  by  oaths  ;  let  the  heir  be  left  in  lawful  possession  of  the  place  his  fathers  lived  in  ;  let  strangers  be  driven  off  it  by  force. 

"  Do  not  use  too  many  words.  Do  not  speak  noisily  ;  do  not  mock,  do  not  give  insults,  do  not  make  little  of  old  people.  Do  not  think  ill  of  any  one  ;  do  not  ask  what  is  hard  to  give.  Let  you  have  a  law  of  lending,  a  law  of  oppression,  a  law  of  pledging.     Be  obedient  to 


296  ADVICE   TO   A    PRINCE 

the  advice  of  the  wise ;  keep  in  mind  the  advice  of  the  old.  Be  a  follower  of  the  rules  of  your  fathers.  Do  not  be  cold-hearted  to  friends  ;  be  strong  towards  your  enemies ;  do  not  give  evil  for  evil  in  your  battles.  Do  not  be  given  to  too  much  talking.  Do  not  speak  any  harm  of  others.  Do  not  waste,  do  not  scatter,  do  not  do  away  with  what  is  your  own.  When  you  do  wrong,  take  the  blame  of  it ;  do  not  give  up  the  truth  for  any  man.  Do  not  be  trying  to  be  first,  the  way  you  will  not  be  jealous  ;  do  not  be  an  idler,  that  you  may  not  be  weak  ;  do  not  ask  too  much,  that  you  may  not  be  thought  little  of.     Are  you  willing  to  follow  this  advice,  my  son  ?  " 

Then  Lugaid  answered  Cuchulain,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  As  long  as  all  goes  well,  I  will  keep  to  your  words,  and  every  one  will  know  that  there  is  nothing  wanting  in  me  ;  all  will  be  done  that  can  be  done." 

Then  Lugaid  went  away  with  the  messengers  to  Teamhair,  and  he  was  made  king,  and  he  slept  in  Teamhair  that  night.  And  after  that  all  the  people  that  had  gathered  there  went  to  their  own  homes. 


XVI 

THE  SONS  OF  DOEL  DERMAIT 

/^NE  time  Cuchulain  was  gone  west  to  Carraige,  in  ^""^  the  province  of  Connaught,  and  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes  with  him,  and  Laeg.  And  one  day  they  saw  a  young  girl  standing  on  the  burial-hill  of  Tetach.  "  What  is  it  you  are  wanting  ?  "  said  Lugaid.  "  I  want  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim,"  she  said,  "  for  I  have  set  my  love  on  him  on  account  of  his  great  deeds  that  I  have  heard  of."  "There  he  is,  beyond,"  said  Lugaid.  Then  she  went  over  to  him,  and  put  her  arms  about  his  neck,  and  kissed  him  ;  and  she  told  him  she  was  Finnchoem,  daughter  of  Eocho  Rond,  king  of  Hy  Maine. 

Then  Cuchulain  took  her  into  his  keeping,  and  they  travelled  northward  through  the  night,  towards  Emain.  And  one  time  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  towards  Fid  Manach,  they  saw  three  fires  in  a  wood  before  them,  and  nine  men  at  every  fire ;  outlaws  they  were,  that  were  robbing  the  country.  And  Cuchulain  killed  three  of  them  at  every  fire. 

And  in  the  morning  they  saw  a  troop  of  men  coming  towards  them  on  the  plain,  and  Finnchoem's  father,  the  king  of  Hy  Maine,  leading  them,  and  he  having  on  him  a  four-folded  crimson  cloak,  with  four  borders  of  gold,  and  a  shield  with  eight  borders  of  white  bronze,  and  a  gold-hilted  sword  at  his  side.  And  he  had  light  yellow  hair  falling  down  on  each  side  to  the  flanks  of  his  grey-black  horse ;  and  there  was  a  gold   chain   of  the 

2»7 


298    THE   SONS   OF   DOEL   DERMAIT    . 

weight  of  seven  ounces  hanging  from  his  hair,  and  it  was  from  that  he  took  his  name,  Eocho  Rond,  that  is,  Eocho  of  the  gold  chain.  And  as  soon  as  he  saw  Cuchulain,  he  threw  his  spear  at  him.  But  Cuchulain  caught  the  spear  and  threw  it  back  again,  and  it  struck  the  horse  in  the  neck,  so  that  he  reared  up  and  threw  his  master.  And  Cuchulain  lifted  Eocho  in  his  arms,  and  carried  him  as  far  as  Cruachan,  that  they  were  near  at  the  time,  to  leave  him  with  Ailell  and  with  Maeve.  And  there  was  great  shame  on  the  king  of  Hy  Maine  at  what  had  happened. 

And  when  Cuchulain  was  leaving  him  he  said  :  "  May  you  never  have  rest  in  sitting,  or  in  lying  down,  until  you  find  out  what  it  was  brought  away  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait,  the  Beetle  of  Forgetfulness,  out  of  their  own  country." 

And  Cuchulain  went  on  to  Emain.  But  when  he  sat  down  in  his  place,  it  seemed  to  him  the  walls  of  the  house  and  the  ground  under  him  to  be  on  fire.  Then  he  said  to  his  people  :  "  I  think  what  Eocho  Rond  threatened  me  with  is  coming  on  me,  and  I  will  get  my  death  if  I  do  not  do  as  he  bade  me." 

Then  he  went  back  to  his  own  place,  Dundealgan,  and  out  westward  to  Baile's  strand.  And  there  he  saw  a  boat  coming,  and  the  king  of  Alban's  son  in  it,  and  his  people,  and  they  bringing  presents  for  king  Conchubar,  of  purple,  and  of  golden  drinking-cups.  And  when  they  saw  the  three  men  on  the  strand,  Cuchulain  and  Lugaid  and  Laeg,  they  said  to  them :  "  It  is  likely  if  the  king  knew  we  were  here,  he  would  send  us  food  and  drink  by  you."  "Is  it  a  steward  you  would  make  of  me?"  said  Cuchulain,  and  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  took  the  sword  in  his  hand  to  strike  them.  "  Give  us  our  life,  Cuchulain,  for  we  did  not  know  you,"  said  the  king's  son. 

"  Do  you  know  what  was  it  drove  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  from  their  own  country  ? "  said  Cuchulain. 


THE   SILVER-WALLED    ISLAND    299 

"  I  do  not  know  that,"  said  the  king's  son.  "  But  I  have  a  sea  charm,  and  I  will  set  it  for  you,  and  I  will  give  it  to  you,  and  you  will  find  the  knowledge  you  are  looking  for."  Then  Cuchulain  gave  him  his  little  spear,  and  scratched  an  Ogham  on  it,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Set  out  now,  and  go  and  take  my  seat  at  Emain  Macha." 

Then  they  took  the  things  out  of  the  boat,  and  Cuchulain  got  in,  and  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes,  and  Laeg ;  and  they  put  up  the  sail,  and  went  on  for  a  day  and  a  night  until  they  came  to  an  island.  It  was  a  fine,  large,  beautiful  island,  having  a  silver  wall  about  it,  and  a  paling  of  bronze. 

Then  Cuchulain  landed,  and  he  saw  a  house  with  pillars  of  white  bronze,  and  three  times  fifty  beds  in  the  house,  and  a  chessboard,  and  a  draughtboard,  and  a  harp  hanging  over  every  bed.  And  he  saw  a  grey  king  and  queen  in  the  house,  with  purple  cloaks  on  them,  worked  with  dark-coloured  gold,  and  three  young  girls  of  the  one  age,  having  a  dress  worked  with  gold  thread  on  each  of  them. 

And  the  king  gave  them  a  friendly  welcome,  and  he  said  :  "  Cuchulain  is  welcome  to  us  for  Lugaid's  sake,  and  Laeg  is  welcome  for  his  father  and  his  mother's  sake." 

Then  Cuchulain  asked  him  did  he  know  what  was  it  drove  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  out  of  their  own  country.  "  You  will  soon  know  that,"  he  said,  "  for  their  sister  and  their  sister's  husband  are  in  that  island  there  to  the  south." 

Then  three  pieces  of  iron  were  put  in  the  fire,  and  when  they  were  red-hot,  the  three  young  girls  took  them  out,  and  put  them  in  three  vats,  and  Cuchulain  and  Lugaid  and  Laeg  bathed  in  the  vats.  And  they  were  brought  cups  of  mead.  And  then  they  heard  a  noise  of  arms  and  of  trumpets,  and  they  saw  fifty  armed  men  coming  to  the  house,  and  every  two  of  them  bringing  a 


300     THESONSOFDOELDERMAIT 

pig  and  an  ox,  and  every  one  a  cup  of  mead  of  hazel  nuts.  And  then  every  man  of  them  came  again,  and  a  load  of  firing  on  his  back ;  and  then  the  oxen  and  the  pigs  were  cooked,  and  a  feast  for  hundreds  was  given  to  Cuchulain  and  his  comrades. 

And  the  next  day  they  went  on  to  the  island  where  the  daughter  of  Doel  Dermait  was,  and  the  boat  went  on,  steering  itself,  to  the  island.  And  Condla,  son-in-law  of  Doel  Dermait,  was  lying  on  the  strand,  and  his  head  against  a  pillar  at  the  east  of  the  island,  and  his  feet  at  the  west  of  the  island,  and  every  time  he  breathed,  he  made  a  wave  in  the  sea  that  turned  the  boat  back.  But  then  he  called  out  to  Cuchulain :  ''  Come  to  land,  for  there  is  no  fear  of  you  on  us  ;  for  however  great  your  anger  may  be,  it  is  not  in  the  prophecy  that  it  is  by  you  this  island  will  be  destroyed."  Then  Cuchulain  came  to  land,  and  Condla  and  his  wife  bade  him  welcome.  And  Cuchulain  asked  if  they  knew  what  it  was  had  driven  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  from  their  own  country.  "  I  know  it,"  said  the  woman,  "  and  I  will  show  you  where  they  are,  for  it  is  foretold  that  their  healing  is  to  come  by  you  ;  and  it  is  glad  my  true,  warm  heart  would  be,  they  to  be  healed."  And  then  she  said  :  "  Go  to  where  that  wall  is,  and  you  will  find  Cairpre  Cundail,  and  he  will  bring  you  to  the  valley  where  they  are  kept  by  Eocho  Glas,  the  strong  man." 

So  they  went  on  to  the  wall,  and  they  saw  two  women  that  were  cutting  rushes,  and  Cuchulain  said  to  one  of  them  :  "  What  is  the  name  of  this  country  I  have  come  to  ? "  And  the  woman  rose  up,  and  it  is  what  she  said :  "  There  are  seven  princes  in  this  country,  and  every  one  of  them  has  had  seven  victories  ;  and  there  are  seven  women  in  this  country,  every  one  of  them  having  a  king  under  her  feet.  And  every  one  of  them  has  seven  armies  ;  and  when  a  thief  comes  to  this  place,  he  does  not  go  back  again  to  tell  the  story  of  it." 


THE   PRISONERS    HEALED        301 

Then  Cuchulain  struck  her  down  with  his  hand,  and  the  other  woman  went  away  to  tell  Cairpre  Cundail  what  had  happened. 

Cairpre  Cundail  came  out  then,  and  he  and  Cuchulain  fought  through  the  day,  and  neither  got  the  better  of  the  other.  But  at  night  Cairpre  said  :  "  That  is  enough,  Cuchulain."  And  they  left  off  for  the  night.  And  next  morning  Cairpre  brought  Cuchulain  to  the  valley  where  Eocho  Glas  was,  that  he  himself  was  always  at  war  with.  And  Eocho  Glas  called  out :  "  Is  any  one  there  of  your  miserable  fighters  ? "  "  There  is  some  one  here,"  said  Cuchulain.  At  that  Eocho  said  :  "  That  is  not  a  voice  that  pleases  me,  for  it  is  the  voice  of  the  angry  man  from  Muirthemne." 

Then  he  came  out,  and  they  fought  together  in  the  valley,  and  then  they  fought  beside  the  sea.  And  in  the  end  Cuchulain  took  the  Gae  Bulg  and  put  it  through  him,  and  he  fell,  and  Cuchulain  struck  his  head  off. 

Then  the  prisoners  of  Eocho  Glas  came  running  from  the  hills  on  every  side,  east  and  west,  and  bathed  them-  selves in  his  blood,  for  he  had  been  doing  them  every  sort  of  hurt  and  harm,  and  they  all  got  healing. 

And  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  came  with  them,  and  were  healed  along  with  them,  and  they  told  their  whole  story  to  Cuchulain.  And  then  they  set  out  for  their  own  country. 

And  Cuchulain  went  back  the  same  way  as  he  came ;  and  he  brought  wonderful  presents  with  him  from  Cairpre  Cundail. 

And  when  he  got  back  to  Ulster,  he  went  on  to  Emain  Macha,  and  his  share  of  food  and  drink  were  waiting  there  for  him  yet.  And  he  told  his  whole  story  to  Conchubar  and  to  the  heroes  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  to  Eocho  Rond,  king  of  Hy  Maine  ;  and  that  is  the  way  he  made  his  peace  with  him, 


XVII 

BATTLE  OF  ROSNAREE 

npHERE  was  a  time,  now,  after  the  war  for  the  Bull  '*'  of  Cuailgne,  when  King  Conchubar  got  someway  down-hearted,  and  there  was  a  heaviness  on  his  mind. 

And  the  men  of  Ulster  thought  it  might  be  lonesome  he  was,  and  fretting  after  Deirdre  yet,  and  they  searched  about  through  the  whole  province  for  a  wife  for  him. 

And  at  last  they  found  a  beautiful  young  girl  of  good  race,  whose  name  was  Luain,  and  they  brought  her  to  Emain  Macha,  and  a  great  wedding  was  made,  and  great  feasting  ;  and  the  king  grew  to  be  quiet  and  happy  in  his  mind.  But  among  the  men  that  came  to  the  wedding  were  the  two  sons  of  the  poet  Aithirne,  that  had  such  a  bad  name  for  covetousness  and  for  cruelty. 

The  two  sons  were  poets  as  well,  Cuingedach  and  Abhartach,  and  when  they  saw  Luain,  Conchubar's  queen,  and  she  so  beautiful,  the  two  of  them  fell  in  love  with  her  there  and  then.  And  they  stopped  at  Emain,  and  after  a  while  each  of  them  tried  to  gain  her  secret  love.  But  there  was  great  anger  and  displeasure  on  Luain  at  that,  and  she  drove  them  from  her. 

They  went  home  then  to  their  father,  Aithirne,  and  the  three  of  them,  to  avenge  themselves  on  Luain,  made  satires  on  her,  that  brought  blotches  out  on  her  face.  And  when  her  face  that  was  so  beautiful  was  spoiled  like  that,  she  went  back  and  hid  herself  in  her  father's 

302 


CONCHUBAR'S   SICKNESS         303 

house,  and  with  the  shame  and  the  sorrow  that  were  on  her,  she  died  there. 

Then  great  anger  and  rage  came  on  Conchubar,  and  he  sent  the  men  of  Ulster  to  Aithirne's  house,  and  they  killed  himself  and  his  two  sons,  and  they  pulled  his  house  down  to  the  ground. 

But  the  rest  of  the  poets  of  Ulster  were  not  well  pleased  that  Conchubar  should  put  such  disrespect  on  one  of  themselves  and  do  such  a  great  vengeance  on  him,  and  they  gathered  together  and  gave  Aithirne  a  great  burial  and  keened  him,  and  it  was  Amergin  that  made  a  lament  over  his  grave. 

And  then  Conchubar  stopped  in  Emain  Macha,  and  the  cloud  of  trouble  came  on  him  again,  and  he  used  to  be  thinking  of  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  of  all  that  Maeve's  army  did  when  he  was  in  his  weakness ;  and  he  did  not  sleep  in  the  night,  and  there  was  no  food  that  pleased  him. 

And  then  the  men  of  Ulster  bid  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  go  to  Conchubar,  and  rouse  him  out  of  his  sickness. 

So  Cathbad  went  to  him,  and  he  cried  tears  down  when  he  saw  him,  and  he  said  :  "  Tell  me,  Conchubar,  what  wound  it  is  or  what  sickness  has  weakened  you  and  has  made  your  face  so  pale  ?  "  "  It  is  no  wonder  sick-  ness to  be  on  me,"  said  Conchubar,  "when  I  think  of  the  way  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  came  and  destroyed  my  forts  and  my  duns  and  my  walled  towns  and  the  houses  of  my  people,  and  when  I  think  how  Maeve  brought  away  cattle  and  gold  and  silver,  and  how  she  came  as  far  as  Dun  Sescind  and  Dun  Sobairce,  and  brought  away  Daire's  bull  out  of  my  own  province.  And  it  is  what  vexes  me,  Maeve  herself  to  have  got  away  safe  from  the  battle ;  and  it  is  time  for  me  to  go  and  avenge  that  time  on  the  men  of  Ireland,"  he  said.  "  That  is  no  right  thing  you  are  saying,"  said  Cathbad,  "for  the  men  of  Ulster  did  a  good  vengeance  on  the 


304  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

men  of  Ireland  the  time  they  gained  the  battle  of  Ilgaireth."  "  I  do  not  count  any  battle  to  be  a  battle,"  said  Conchubar,  "  unless  a  king  or  a  queen  has  fallen  in  it ;  and  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,  Cathbad,"  he  said,  "  that  kings  and  great  men  will  be  brought  to  their  death  by  me,  or  else  I  myself  will  go  to  my  death." 

"  This  is  my  advice  to  you,"  said  Cathbad,  "  not  to  set  out  till  the  winter  is  gone  by  ;  for  at  this  time  the  winds  are  rough,  and  the  roads  are  heavy,  and  the  rivers  are  full  and  flooded,  and  every  windy  gap  is  cold.  It  is  best  to  wait  for  the  summer,"  he  said,  "  till  the  fords  are  shallow  and  the  roads  are  smooth,  till  the  thick  leaves  on  the  bushes  will  be  shelters,  till  every  sod  of  grass  will  be  a  pillow,  till  our  colts  will  be  strong,  till  the  nights  will  be  short  for  keeping  watch  against  an  enemy.  It  is  best  to  wait,"  he  said, "  till  you  can  gather  together  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  till  you  can  send  messengers  to  your  friends  among  the  Gall."  "  I  am  willing  to  do  that,"  said  Conchubar,  "  but  I  give  my  word,"  he  said,  "  let  them  come,  or  let  them  not  come,  I  will  go  myself  to  Teamhair  to  get  satisfaction  from  Cairbre  Niafer,  my  own  son-in-  law,  that  did  not  come  to  help  me  at  the  gathering  at  Ilgaireth,  and  to  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi,  and  to  Eocha,  son  of  Luchta,  and  to  Maeve,  and  to  Ailell,  till  I  throw  down  the  stones  over  the  graves  of  their  chief  men,  till  I  destroy  and  lay  waste  their  country,  the  same  way  as  the  men  of  Ireland  destroyed  my  province." 

So  then  Conchubar  sent  out  messengers  to  Conall  Cearnach,  that  was  raising  his  tribute  in  the  islands  of  Leodus,  and  of  Cadd,  and  of  Ore,  and  to  the  countries  of  the  Gall,  to  Olaib,  grandson  of  the  king  of  Norway,  and  to  Baire  of  the  Scigger  islands,  and  to  Siugraid  Soga,  king  of  Sudiam  ;  to  the  seven  sons  of  Romra,  and  to  the  son  of  the  king  of  Alban,  and  to  the  king  of  the  island  of  Ore. 

And  the  first  to  answer  the  messengers,  and  to  set  out 


BAILEANDAILLINN  305 

for  Ulster  was  Conall  Cearnach,  for  there  was  great  anger  on  him  when  he  heard  of  all  that  had  happened  in  Ulster  in  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  he  not  in  it.  "  And  if  I  had  been  in  it,"  he  said,  "  the  men  of  Connaught  would  not  have  taken  spoil  from  Ulster,  without  an  equal  vengeance  being  measured  to  them  again."  And  Olaib,  grandson  of  the  king  of  Norway,  came  with  him,  and  Baire,  of  the  Scigger  islands,  and  their  men  with  them  in  their  ships ;  and  they  came  through  the  green  waves,  and  the  seals  and  the  sword-fishes  rising  about  them,  towards  Dundealgan,  and  the  place  where  they  landed  was  at  the  Strand  of  Baile,  son  of  Buan. 

This,  now,  is  the  story  of  Baile  that  was  buried  at  that  strand. 

He  was  of  the  race  of  Rudraige,  and  although  he  had  but  little  land  belonging  to  him,  he  was  the  heir  of  Ulster,  and  every  one  that  saw  him  loved  him,  both  man  and  woman,  because  he  was  so  sweet-spoken  ;  and  they  called  him  Baile  of  the  Honey-Mouth.  And  the  one  that  loved  him  best  was  Aillinn,  daughter  of  Lugaidh,  the  King  of  Leinster's  son.  And  one  time  she  herself  and  Baile  settled  to  meet  one  another  near  Dundealgan,  beside  the  sea.  Baile  was  the  first  to  set  out,  and  he  came  from  Emain  Macha,  over  Slieve  Fuad,  over  Muir-  themne,  to  the  strand  where  they  were  to  meet ;  and  he  stopped  there,  and  his  chariots  were  unyoked,  and  his  horses  were  let  out  to  graze.  And  while  he  and  his  people  were  waiting  there  they  saw  a  strange,  wild-looking  man,  coming  towards  them  from  the  South,  as  fast  as  a  hawk  that  darts  from  a  cliff  or  as  the  wind  that  blows  from  off  the  green  sea.  "  Go  and  meet  him,"  said  Baile  to  his  people,  "  and  ask  him  news  of  where  he  is  going  and  where  he  comes  from,  and  what  is  the  reason  of  his  haste."  So  they  asked  news  of  him,  and  he  said  :  "  I  am  going  back  now  to  Tuagh  Inbhir,  from  Slieve  Suidhe  Laighen,  and  this  is  all  the  news  I  have,  that  Aillinn 

U 


3o6  BATTLE   OF   ROSN  A  REE 

daughter  of  Lugaidh,  was  on  her  way  to  meet  Baile,  son  of  Buan,  that  she  loved.  And  the  young  men  of  Leinster  overtook  her,  and  kept  her  back  from  going  to  him,  and  she  died  of  the  heartbreak  there  and  then.  For  it  was  foretold  by  Druids  that  were  friendly  to  them  that  they  would  not  come  together  in  their  lifetime,  but  that  after  their  death  they  would  meet,  and  be  happy  for  ever  after."  And  with  that  he  left  them,  and  was  gone  again  like  a  blast  of  wind,  and  they  were  not  able  to  hinder  him. 

And  when  Baile  heard  that  news,  his  life  went  out  from  him,  and  he  fell  dead  there  on  the  strand. 

And  at  that  time  the  young  girl  Aillinn  was  in  her  sunny  parlour  to  the  south,  for  she  had  not  set  out  yet.  And  the  same  strange  man  came  in  to  her,  and  she  asked  him  where  he  came  from.  "  I  come  from  the  North,"  he  said,  "  from  Tuagh  Inver,  and  I  am  going  past  this  place  to  Slieve  Suidhe  Laighen.  And  all  the  news  I  have,"  he  said,  "  is  that  I  saw  the  men  of  Ulster  gathered  together  on  the  strand  near  Dundealgan,  and  they  raising  a  stone,  and  writing  on  it  the  name  of  Baile,  son  of  Buan,  that  died  there  when  he  was  on  his  way  to  meet  the  woman  he  had  given  his  love  to  ;  for  it  was  not  meant  for  them  ever  to  reach  one  another  alive,  or  that  one  of  them  should  see  the  other  alive."  And  when  he  had  said  that  he  vanished  away,  and  as  to  Aillinn,  her  life  went  from  her,  and  she  died  the  same  way  that  Baile  had  died. 

And  an  apple-tree  grew  out  of  her  grave,  and  a  yew-  tree  out  of  Baile's  grave.  And  it  was  near  that  yew-tree  Conall  Cearnach  landed,  and  Baire,  and  the  grandson  of  the  king  of  Norway.  And  Cuchulain  had  made  ready  a  great  feast  for  them,  and  for  Conchubar  that  had  come  to  meet  them,  at  bright-faced  Dundealgan. 

And  the  Hound  bade  them  a  kind,  loving  welcome,  and  he  said  :  "  Welcome  to  those  I  know,  and  those  I  do 


THE   OLD   FIGHTING   MEN         307 

not  know,  to  the  good  and  the  bad,  the  young  and  the  old  among  you."  And  they  stopped  there  a  week,  and  Conchubar  was  well  pleased  to  see  the  whole  strand  full  of  his  friends  that  were  come  in  their  ships.  And  then  he  bade  farewell  to  Emer,  daughter  of  Forgall,  and  he  said  to  Cuchulain  :  "  Go  now  to  the  three  fifties  of  old  fighting  men,  that  are  resting  in  their  age,  under  Irgalach,  son  of  Macclach,  and  say  to  them  to  come  with  me  to  this  gathering  and  to  this  war,  the  way  I  will  have  their  help  and  their  advice."  "  Let  them  go  to  it  if  they  have  a  mind,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  but  it  is  not  I  that  will  go  and  ask  it  of  them." 

So  then  Conchubar  himself  went  to  the  great  house,  where  the  old  fighting  men  used  to  be  living  that  had  laid  by  their  arms.  And  when  he  came  in,  they  raised  their  heads  from  their  places  to  look  at  the  great  king.  And  then  they  leaped  up,  and  they  said :  "  What  has  brought  you  to  us  to  day,  our  chief  and  our  lord  ? "  "  Did  you  get  no  word,"  he  said,  "  of  the  way  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  came  against  us,  and  how  they  burned  down  our  forts  and  our  houses,  and  how  they  brought  their  makers  of  poems  and  of  stories  along  with  them,  that  their  deeds  might  be  told,  and  our  disgrace  might  be  the  greater.  And  I  am  going  out  against  them  now,"  he  said,  "  to  get  satisfaction  from  them  ;  and  let  you  come  with  me,  and  I  will  have  your  advice."  Then  the  hearts  of  the  old  men  rose  in  them,  and  they  caught  their  old  horses  and  yoked  their  old  chariots.  And  they  went  on  with  the  king  to  the  mouth  of  the  Water  of  Luachann  that  night. 

And  the  next  day  Conchubar  set  out  with  his  own  men  and  his  friends  from  beyond  the  sea,  to  Slieve  Breagh,  that  is  near  Rosnaree  on  the  Boinne.  And  they  made  their  camp  at  Cuanglas,  the  green  harbour,  and  lighted  their  fires,  and  music  and  merry  songs  were  made   for   them.      But   Cuchulain   stopped   behind    in 


308  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

Dundealgan  to  gather  his  own  people,  and  to  make  provision  for  them  on  the  march. 

Now  news  had  been  brought  to  Cairbre  Niafer  at  Teamhair,  that  Conchubar  was  gathering  his  men  to  get  satisfaction  for  all  that  had  been  done  to  Ulster  in  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  that  it  was  likely  he  himself  would  be  the  first  he  would  come  against. 

For  there  was  some  bad  feeling  between  Cairbre  and  the  men  of  Ulster,  since  the  time  he  drove  the  sons  of  Umor  into  Connaught,  with  the  heavy  rent  he  put  on  them,  and  that  after  Conall  Cearnach  and  Cuchulain  giving  their  own  security  for  their  good  behaviour.  They  turned  on  their  securities  after  that,  and  fought  with  them,  and  Conall  Cool,  the  son  of  their  chief,  fell  ;  and  Cuchulain,  and  his  father,  and  his  friends,  raised  the  heap  of  stones  over  him  that  is  called  Carn  Chonaill,  in  the  province  of  Connaught. 

And  Cairbre  sent  a  message  to  Cruachan,  to  say  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve  :  "  If  it  is  towards  us  Conchubar  and  the  men  of  Ulster  are  coming,  let  you  come  to  our  help  ;  but  if  it  is  past  us  they  go,  into  the  fair-  headed  province  of  Connaught,  we  will  go  to  your  help."  So  when  Conchubar  came  to  Cuanglas,  at  Rosnaree,  there  was  a  good  army  gathered  there  to  make  a  stand  against  him  ;  the  three  troops  of  the  children  of  Deagha,  and  a  great  troop  of  the  Collam-  nachs,  and  of  the  men  of  Bregia,  and  of  the  Gailiana.  And  he  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  he  could  see  the  moving  of  men  and  the  shining  of  spears,  and  he  heard  the  noise  of  a  great  army,  and  he  said  :  "  We  will  send  some  one  of  our  men  to  bring  us  word  about  them." 

And  he  sent  out  Feic,  son  of  Follaman.  And  Feic  went  up  to  a  hill  beside  the  Boinne,  and  he  began  to  look  at  the  army  and  to  count  it,  and  it  vexed  him  to  see  how  many  were  in  it.  "  If  I  go  back  now  and  tell  this,"  he  said,  "  the  men  of  Ulster  will  come  and  will  begin  the 


DAIREOFCUAILGNE  309 

battle,  and  there  will  be  no  better  chance  for  me  to  get  a  great  name  and  do  great  deeds  than  for  any  other  man.  And  why  would  I  not  go  and  begin  a  fight  now  by  myself?"     And  with  that  he  crossed  the  river. 

But  the  men  that  were  in  front  caught  sight  of  him,  and  the  whole  army  began  shouting  around  him,  and  he  had  not  courage  to  go  against  them,  but  he  turned  to  cross  the  river  again.  But  he  gave  a  false  leap,  just  where  the  water  was  deepest,  and  a  wave  laughed  over  him,  and  he  died. 

It  seemed  a  long  time  to  Conchubar  that  he  was  away,  and  he  said  to  the  men  of  Ulster :  "  What  is  your  advice  to  us  about  this  battle  ?  "  "  It  is  what  we  advise,"  they  said,  "  to  wait  till  our  strong  fighters  and  our  chief  men  are  come.  And  they  had  not  long  to  wait  before  they  saw  troops  coming,  Cathbad  with  twelve  hundred  men,  and  Am.ergin  with  twelve  hundred  men,  and  Eoghan,  king  of  Fernmaighe,  and  Laegaire  Buadach,  and  the  three  sons  of  Conall  Buide. 

And  then  they  saw  another  troop  coming,  and  in  the  front  of  it  a  fierce,  brown  man.  Rough,  dark  hair  he  had,  and  a  big  nose  and  hollow  cheeks,  and  his  talk  was  quick  and  hurried.  A  blue  cloak  about  him,  and  a  brooch  of  silver  as  white  as  a  bird,  a  heavy  sword,  and  a  shield  with  iron  rims.  And  this  is  who  he  was,  Daire  of  Cuailgne,  that  was  come  to  get  satisfaction  for  his  bull  and  for  his  herds  on  the  men  of  Ireland.  "  What  is  delaying  you  here,"  he  said  to  Conchubar.  "  I  have  good  reason  for  delaying,"  said  Conchubar,  "  for  there  is  a  great  army  under  Cairbre  Niafer  before  us  at  Rosnaree,  and  there  are  not  enough  of  us  to  go  against  them.  And  it  is  not  refusing  a  battle  we  are,  but  waiting  till  we  get  our  full  number."  "  By  my  word,"  said  Daire,  "  if  you  do  not  go  out  against  them,  it  is  I  will  go  against  them  by  myself" 

Then  Conchubar  put   on   his   armour,  and  took   his 


310  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

many-coloured  shield,  and  his  sword,  the  Ochain.  And  all  the  men  of  Ulster  gathered  around  him,  and  they  raised  their  spears  and  their  shields,  and  it  was  like  a  great  river  breaking  from  the  side  of  a  mountain,  and  breaking  what  it  meets  of  stones  and  trees  before  it,  that  they  went  to  meet  the  men  of  Leinster  at  Rosnaree  on  the  Boinne. 

And  when  Cairbre  Niafer  and  his  friends  and  his  men  saw  them  coming,  they  made  ready  for  them,  and  came  towards  the  river. 

And  the  men  of  Ulster  crossed  the  river,  and  the  two  armies  met,  and  each  of  them  took  to  hacking  and  destroying  the  other.  And  the  Gailiana  pressed  heavily  on  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  came  in  to  the  middle  of  them,  and  cut  them  down  like  trees  are  cut  in  a  wood.  And  as  for  Conchubar  he  did  not  give  back,  where  he  was,  and  Celthair  on  his  right  hand,  and  Amergin  the  poet  on  his  right  hand  again,  and  Eoghan,  king  of  Fernmaighe,  on  his  left,  and  Daire  of  Cuailgne  near  him.  These  few  stood  against  the  Gailiana,  and  fought  against  them,  stout  and  proud.  But  as  to  the  young  men  and  those  that  were  never  in  a  fight  before,  they  turned  round  and  burst  through  the  battle  northwards. 

It  was  just  then  Conall  Cearnach  was  coming  in  his  chariot,  and  when  the  young  men  of  Ulster  saw  the  face  of  Conall,  they  came  to  a  stop,  and  Conall  saw  that  they  were  beaten  and  running  from  the  battle,  and  he  called  out  sharp  words  to  them,  for  there  was  anger  on  him,  they  to  have  left  the  fight,  and  with  no  sign  of  blood  or  of  wounds  upon  them. 

But  they  were  ashamed  then,  and  content  to  go  back  to  the  battle,  when  they  had  Conall's  hand  to  help  them  ;  and  each  one  of  them  tore  a  green  branch  off  the  oak  trees  that  were  near  them,  and  held  it  up,  and  they  went  with  him  ;  for  they  knew  there  would  be  no  running  away  in  any  place  where  Conall's  face  would  be  seen. 


CONALL'S   SWORD  311 

And  it  happened  just  at  that  time  Conchubar,  the  High  King,  was  taking  three  backward  steps  out  of  the  battle  northward,  but  when  he  saw  the  face  of  Conall  coming  towards  him,  he  called  to  him  to  stop  the  army  from  fall-  ing back.    "  I  give  my  word,"  said  Conall,  "  I  think  it  easier  to  fight  the  battle  by  myself  than  to  stop  the  rout  now."  And  just  then  the  three  royal  poets  of  the  king  of  Teamhair  came  to   give  him  their   help,  Eochaid   the  Learned,  and  Diarment  of  the  Songs,  and  Forgel  the  Just,  and  they  went  into  the  fight  against  Conall.     And  Conall  looked  at  them  and  he  said  :  "  I   give  my  true  word,"  he  said,  "  if  you  were  not  poets  and  men  of  learn-  ing, you  would  have  got  your  death  by  me  before  this  ;  and  now  that  you  are  come  fighting  with  your  master,"  he  said,  "  where  is  there  any  reason  for  sparing  you  ?  "    And  with  that  he  made  a  blow  at  them  with  a  heavy  stick  that  was  in  his  hand,  that  struck  the  three  heads  off  them.  Then  Conall  drew  his  sword  out  of  its  sheath,  and  he  played  the  music  of  his  sword  on  the  armies  of  Leinster,  and  the  sound  of  it  was  heard  on  every  side ;  and  when  the  men  near  him  heard  it  their  faces  whitened,  and  each  one  of  them  went  back  to  his  place  in  the  battle.     And  at  that  time  Cuchulain  came  into  the  battle,  and  the  men  of  the  Gailiana  gave  wild  shouts  at  him,  and  anger  came  on  him  and  he  scattered  them. 

And  strength  came  again  into  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  their  anger  rose,  and  the  earth  shook  under  their  feet,  and  there  was  clashing  of  swords  on  both  sides,  and  the  shouting  of  young  men,  and  the  screams  of  old  men,  and  the  groaning  of  chariot-fighters,  and  the  crying  of  ravens.  And  there  were  many  lying  in  cold  pools,  the  white  soles  of  their  feet  close  together,  and  the  red  lips  turn-  ing grey,  and  the  bright  faces  very  pale,  and  darkness  com-  ing on  their  grey  eyes,  and  confusion  on  their  clear  wits.  It  is  then  Cuchulain  met  with  Cairbre  Niafer,  and  he  went  against  him,  and  put  his  shield  against  his  shield 


312  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

and  there  they  were  face  to  face.     And  Cairbre  said  words  of  insult  to  Cuchulain,  and  Cuchulain  answered  him  back  and  said  :  "  It  is  all  I  ask  of  you,  to  fight  with  me  now  alone."     "  I  will  do  that,"  said  Cairbre  Niafer,  "  for  I  am  a  king  in  my  way  of  living,  and  a  champion  in  battles."  Then  each  attacked  the  other,  and  it  was  hard  for  them  to  hold  their  feet  firm,  or  to  strike  with  their  hands,  in  the  closeness  of  the  fight.     And  Cairbre  broke  all  his  weapons,  but  nine  of  his  men  came  and  kept  up  the  fight  against  Cuchulain  till  more  weapons  could  be  brought  to  him.     And  then  Cuchulain's  weapons  were  broken,  and  Cairbre  and  nine  of  his  men   came  and  held  up  their  shields  before  him  till  Laeg  could  bring  him  his  own  right  weapons,  the  Dubach,  the  grim  one,  his  spear,  and  the  Cruaidin,  his  sword.     And  then  they  took  to  hitting  at  one  another  again,  and  at  last  Cuchulain  took  his  spear  into  his  left  hand,  and  struck  at  Cairbre  with  it,  and  he  lowered  his  shield  to  protect  his  body.    And  then  Cuchu-  lain changed  it  to  his  right  hand,  and  struck  at  him  over  the  rim  of  his  shield,  and  it  went  through  his  heart ;  and  before  his  body  could  reach  the  ground,  Cuchulain  made  a  spring  and  struck  his  head  off.     And  then  he  held  up  the  head,  and  shook  it  before  the  two  armies. 

Then  Sencha,  son  of  Ailell,  rose  up  and  shook  the  branch  of  peace,  and  the  men  of  Ulster  stood  still.  As  to  the  men  of  Leinster,  when  they  saw  their  king  was  killed,  they  fell  back  ;  but  Iriel  of  the  Great  Knees,  the  son  of  Conall  Cearnach,  followed  after  them,  and  did  a  great  slaughter  on  the  Gailiana  and  on  the  rest  of  the  army  till  they  reached  to  the  Rye  of  Leinster. 

And  then  the  men  of  Ulster  went  back  to  their  homes.  And  as  to  Conchubar,  he  went  back  to  Emain,  and  it  was  not  till  a  good  while  after  that  he  got  the  wound  in  his  head  that  Fintan  sewed  up  with  gold  thread,  to  match  the  colour  of  his  hair,  and  that  brought  him  to  his  death  in  the  end. 


XVIII 

THE  ONLY  SON  OF  AOIFE 

'T^HE  time  Cuchulain  came  back  from  Alban,  after  he  had    learned    the   use   of    arms    under    Scathach,  he  left  Aoife,  the  queen  he  had  overcome  in  battle,  with  child. 

And  when  he  was  leaving  her,  he  told  her  what  name  to  give  the  child,  and  he  gave  her  a  gold  ring,  and  bade  her  keep  it  safe  till  the  child  grew  to  be  a  lad,  and  till  his  thumb  would  fill  it ;  and  he  bade  her  to  give  it  to  him  then,  and  to  send  him  to  Ireland,  and  he  would  know  he  was  his  son  by  that  token.  She  promised  to  do  so,  and  with  that  Cuchulain  went  back  to  Ireland. 

It  was  not  long  after  the  child  was  born,  word  came  to  Aoife  that  Cuchulain  had  taken  Emer  to  be  his  wife  in  Ireland.  When  she  heard  that,  great  jealousy  came  on  her,  and  great  anger,  and  her  love  for  Cuchulain  was  turned  to  hatred  ;  and  she  remembered  her  three  cham-  pions that  he  had  killed,  and  how  he  had  overcome  herself,  and  she  determined  in  her  mind  that  when  her  son  would  come  to  have  the  strength  of  a  man,  she  would  get  her  revenge  through  him.  She  told  Conlaoch  her  son  nothing  of  this,  but  brought  him  up  like  any  king's  son  ;  and  when  he  was  come  to  sensible  years,  she  put  him  under  the  teaching  of  Scathach,  to  be  taught  the  use  of  arms  and  the  art  of  war.  He  turned  out  as  apt  a  scholar  as  his  father,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he  had  learnt  all  Scathach  had  to  teach. 

313 


314        THE   ONLY   SON   OF   AOIFE 

Then  Aoife  gave  him  the  arms  of  a  champion,  and  bade  him  go  to  Ireland,  but  first  she  laid  three  commands  on  him  :  the  first  never  to  give  way  to  any-  living  person,  but  to  die  sooner  than  be  made  turn  back  ;  the  second,  not  to  refuse  a  challenge  from  the  greatest  champion  alive,  but  to  fight  him  at  all  risks,  even  if  he  was  sure  to  lose  his  life ;  the  third,  not  to  tell  his  name  on  any  account,  though  he  might  be  threatened  with  death  for  hiding  it.  She  put  him  under  geasa,  that  is,  under  bonds,  not  to  do  these  things. 

Then  the  young  man,  Conlaoch,  set  out,  and  it  was  not  long  before  his  ship  brought  him  to  Ireland,  and  the  place  he  landed  at  was  Baile's  Strand,  near  Dundealgan. 

It  chanced  that  at  that  time  Conchubar,  the  High  King,  was  holding  his  court  there,  for  it  was  a  con-  venient gathering-place  for  his  chief  men,  and  they  were  settling  some  business  that  belonged  to  the  government  of  that  district. 

When  word  was  brought  to  Conchubar  that  there  was  a  ship  come  to  the  strand,  and  a  young  lad  in  it  armed  as  if  for  fighting,  and  armed  men  with  him,  he  sent  one  of  the  chief  men  of  his  household  to  ask  his  name,  and  on  what  business  he  was  come. 

The  messenger's  name  was  Cuinaire,  and  he  went  down  to  the  strand,  and  when  he  saw  the  young  man  he  said  :  "  A  welcome  to  you,  young  hero  from  the  east,  with  the  merry  face.  It  is  likely,  seeing  you  come  armed  as  if  for  fighting,  you  are  gone  astray  on  your  journey  ;  but  as  you  are  come  to  Ireland,  tell  me  your  name  and  what  your  deeds  have  been,  and  your  victories  in  the  eastern  bounds  of  the  world." 

"  A:  to  my  name,"  said  Conlaoch,  "  it  is  of  no  great  account ;  but  whatever  it  is,  I  am  under  bonds  not  to  tell  it  to  the  stoutest  man  living." 

"It  is  best  for  you  to  tell  it  at  the  king's  desire,"  said 


CUCHULAIN    AND   CONLAOCH    315 

Cuinaire,  "  before  you  get  your  death  through  refusing  it,  as  many  a  champion  from  Alban  and  from  Britain  has  done  before  now."  "If  that  is  the  order  you  put  on  us  when  we  land  here,  it  is  I  will  break  it,"  said  Conlaoch,  "and  no  one  will  obey  it  any  longer  from  this  out." 

So  Cunaire  went  back  and  told  the  king  what  the  young  lad  had  said.  Then  Conchubar  said  to  his  people :  "  Who  will  go  out  into  the  field,  and  drag  the  name  and  the  story  out  of  this  young  man ? "  "I  will  go,"  said  Conall,  for  his  hand  was  never  slow  in  fighting.  And  he  went  out,  and  found  the  lad  angry  and  destroying,  handling  his  arms,  and  they  attacked  one  another  with  a  great  noise  of  swords  and  shouts,  and  they  were  gripped  together,  and  fought  for  a  while,  and  then  Conall  was  overcome,  and  the  great  name  and  the  praise  that  was  on  Conall,  it  was  on  the  head  of  Conlaoch  it  was  now. 

Word  was  sent  then  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  in  pleasant,  bright-faced  Dundealgan.  And  the  messenger  told  him  the  whole  story,  and  he  said  :  "  Conall  is  lying  humbled,  and  it  is  slow  the  help  is  in  coming ;  it  is  a  welcome  there  would  be  before  the  Hound." 

Cuchulain  rose  up  then  and  went  to  where  Conlaoch  was,  and  he  still  handling  his  arms.  And  Cuchulain  asked  him  his  name  and  said  :  "  It  would  be  well  for  you,  young  hero  of  unknown  name,  to  loosen  yourself  from  this  knot,  and  not  to  bring  down  my  hand  upon  you,  for  it  will  be  hard  for  you  to  escape  death."  But  Conlaoch  said  :  "If  I  put  you  down  in  the  fight,  the  way  I  put  down  your  comrade,  there  will  be  a  great  name  on  me  ;  but  if  I  draw  back  now,  there  will  be  mockery  on  me,  and  it  will  be  said  I  was  afraid  of  the  fight.  I  will  never  give  in  to  any  man  to  tell  the  name,  or  to  give  an  account  of  myself.  But  if  I  was  not  held  with  a  com-  mand," he  said,  "there  is  no  man  in  the  world  I  would 


3i6        THE   ONLY   SON   OF   AOIFE 

sooner  give  it  to  than  to  yourself,  since  I  saw  your  face.  But  do  not  think,  brave  champion  of  Ireland,  that  I  will  let  you  take  away  the  fame  I  have  won,  for  nothing." 

With  that  they  fought  together,  and  it  is  seldom  such  a  battle  was  seen,  and  all  wondered  that  the  young  lad  could  stand  so  well  against  Cuchulain. 

So  they  fought  a  long  while,  neither  getting  the  better  of  the  other,  but  at  last  Cuchulain  was  charged  so  hotly  by  the  lad  that  he  was  forced  to  give  way,  and  although  he  had  fought  so  many  good  fights,  and  killed  so  many  great  champions,  and  understood  the  use  of  arms  better  than  any  man  living,  he  was  pressed  very  hard. 

And  he  called  for  the  Gae  Bulg,  and  his  anger  came  on  him,  and  the  flames  of  the  hero-light  began  to  shine  about  his  head,  and  by  that  sign  Conlaoch  knew  him  to  be  Cuchulain,  his  father.  And  just  at  that  time  he  was  aiming  his  spear  at  him,  and  when  he  knew  it  was  Cuchulain,  he  threw  his  spear  crooked  that  it  might  pass  beside  him.  But  Cuchulain  threw  his  spear,  the  Gae  Bulg,  at  him  with  all  his  might,  and  it  struck  the  lad  in  the  side  and  went  into  his  body,  so  that  he  fell  to  the  ground. 

And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Now,  boy,  tell  your  name  and  what  you  are,  for  it  is  short  your  life  will  be,  for  you  will  not  live  after  that  wound." 

And  Conlaoch  showed  the  ring  that  was  on  his  hand,  and  he  said :  "  Come  here  where  I  am  lying  on  the  field,  let  my  men  from  the  east  come  round  me.  I  am  suffering  for  revenge.  I  am  Conlaoch,  son  of  the  Hound,  heir  of  dear  Dundealgan  ;  I  was  bound  to  this  secret  in  Dun  Scathach,  the  secret  in  which  1  have  found  my  grief" 

And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  It  is  a  pity  your  mother  not  to  be  here  to  see  you  brought  down.  She  might  have  stretched  out  her  hand  to  stop  the  spear  that  wounded 


CUCHULAIN'S   COMPLAINT      317 

you."  And  Conlaoch  said  :  "  My  curse  be  on  my  mother,  for  it  was  she  put  me  under  bonds  ;  it  was  she  sent  me  here  to  try  my  strength  against  yours."  And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  My  curse  be  on  your  mother,  the  woman  that  is  full  of  treachery ;  it  is  through  her  harm-  ful thoughts  these  tears  have  been  brought  on  us."  And  Conlaoch  said  :  "  My  name  was  never  forced  from  my  mouth  till  now ;  I  never  gave  an  account  of  myself  to  any  man  under  the  sun.  But,  O  Cuchulain  of  the  sharp  sword,  it  was  a  pity  you  not  to  know  me  the  time  I  threw  the  slanting  spear  behind  you  in  the  fight." 

And  then  the  sorrow  of  death  came  upon  Conlaoch,  and  Cuchulain  took  his  sword  and  put  it  through  him,  sooner  than  leave  him  in  the  pain  and  the  punishment  he  was  in. 

And  then  great  trouble  and  anguish  came  on  Cuchulain,  and  he  made  this  complaint : 

"  It  is  a  pity  it  is,  O  son  of  Aoife,  that  ever  you  came  into  the  province  of  Ulster,  that  you  ever  met  with  the  Hound  of  Cuailgne. 

"If  I  and  my  fair  Conlaoch  were  doing  feats  of  war  on  the  one  side,  the  men  of  Ireland  from  sea  to  sea  would  not  be  equal  to  us  together.  It  is  no  wonder  I  to  be  under  grief  when  I  see  the  shield  and  the  arms  of  Conlaoch.  A  pity  it  is  there  is  no  one  at  all,  a  pity  there  are  not  hundreds  of  men  on  whom  I  could  get  satisfaction  for  his  death. 

"  If  it  was  the  king  himself  had  hurt  your  fair  body,  it  is  I  would  have  shortened  his  days. 

"  It  is  well  for  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  for  the  heads  of  its  fair  army  of  heroes,  it  was  not  they  that  killed  my  only  son. 

"  It  is  well  for  Laegaire  of  Victories  it  is  not  from  him  you  got  your  heavy  pain. 

"  It  is  well  for  the  heroes  of  Conall  they  did  not  join  in  the  killing  of  you ;  it  is  well  that  travelling  across 


3i8        THE   ONLY   SON   OF   AOIFE 

the  plain  of  Macha  they  did  not  fall  in  with  me  after  such  a  fight. 

"  It  is  well  for  the  tall,  well-shaped  Forbuide  ;  well  for  Dubthach,  your  Black  Beetle  of  Ulster. 

"It  is  well  for  you,  Cormac  Conloingeas,  your  share  of  arms  gave  no  help,  that  it  is  not  from  your  weapons  he  got  his  wound,  the  hard-skinned  shield  or  the  blade. 

"  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  one  on  the  plains  of  Munster,  or  in  Leinster  of  the  sharp  blades,  or  at  Cruachan  of  the  rough  fighters,  that  struck  down  my  comely  Conlaoch. 

"  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  in  the  country  of  the  Cruithne,  of  the  fierce  Fians,  you  fell  in  a  heavy  quarrel,  or  in  the  country  of  the  Greeks,  or  in  some  other  place  of  the  world,  you  died,  and  I  could  avenge  you. 

"  Or  in  Spain,  or  in  Sorcha,  or  in  the  country  of  the  Saxons  of  the  free  armies  ;  there  would  not  then  be  this  death  in  my  heart. 

"It  is  very  well  for  the  men  of  Alban  it  was  not  they  that  destroyed  your  fame ;  and  it  is  well  for  the  men  of  the  Gall. 

"  Och  !  It  is  bad  that  it  happened  ;  my  grief!  it  is  on  me  is  the  misfortune,  O  Conlaoch  of  the  Red  Spear,  I  myself  to  have  spilled  your  blood, 

"  I  to  be  under  defeat,  without  strength.  It  is  a  pity  Aoife  never  taught  you  to  know  the  power  of  my  strength  in  the  fight. 

"  It  is  no  wonder  I  to  be  blinded  after  such  a  fight  and  such  a  defeat. 

"  It  is  no  wonder  I  to  be  tired  out,  and  without  the  sons  of  Usnach  beside  me. 

"  Without  a  son,  without  a  brother,  with  none  to  come  after  me ;  without  Conlaoch,  without  a  name  to  keep  my  strength. 

"  To  be  without  Naoise,  without  Ainnle,  without  Ardan  ;  is  it  not  with  me  is  my  fill  of  trouble  ? 


CUCHULAIN    AND   THE   WAVES    319 

"  I  am  the  father  that  killed  his  son,  the  fine  green  branch  ;  there  is  no  hand  or  shelter  to  help  me. 

"  I  am  a  raven  that  has  no  home ;  I  am  a  boat  going  from  wave  to  wave ;  I  am  a  ship  that  has  lost  its  rudder ;  I  am  the  apple  left  on  the  tree ;  it  is  little  I  thought  of  falling  from  it ;  grief  and  sorrow  will  be  with  me  from  this  time." 

Then  Cuchulain  stood  up  and  faced  all  the  men  of  Ulster.  "  There  is  trouble  on  Cuchulain,"  said  Conchubar ;  "  he  is  after  killing  his  own  son,  and  if  I  and  all  my  men  were  to  go  against  him,  by  the  end  of  the  day  he  would  destroy  every  man  of  us.  Go  now,"  he  said  to  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  "and  bind  him  to  go  down  to  Baile's  Strand,  and  to  give  three  days  fighting  against  the  waves  of  the  sea,  rather  than  to  kill  us  all." 

So  Cathbad  put  an  enchantment  on  him,  and  bound  him  to  go  down.  And  when  he  came  to  the  strand,  there  was  a  great  white  stone  before  him,  and  he  took  his  sword  in  his  right  hand,  and  he  said :  "  If  I  had  the  head  of  the  woman  that  sent  her  son  to  his  death,  I  would  split  it  as  I  split  this  stone."  And  he  made  four  quarters  of  the  stone. 

Then  he  fought  with  the  waves  three  days  and  three  nights,  till  he  fell  from  hunger  and  weakness,  so  that  some  men  said  he  got  his  death  there.  But  it  was  not  there  he  got  his  death,  but  on  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 


XIX  THE  GREAT  GATHERING  AT  MUIRTHEMNE 

IVTOW  after  all  the  battles  Cuchulain  had  fought,  and  all  the  men  he  had  killed,  it  is  no  wonder  he  had  a  good  share  of  enemies  watching  to  get  the  upper  hand  of  him.  And  besides  Maeve,  those  that  had  their  minds  most  set  against  him  were  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre  Niafer,  that  he  had  killed  at  Rosnaree,  and  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi,  that  he  had  killed  at  his  own  house  in  Munster,  and  the  three  daughters  of  Calatin. 

This,  now,  was  the  way  it  happened  that  Curoi  got  his  death  by  him.  He  met  with  Blanad  one  time,  a  good  while  after  Curoi  had  given  him  the  championship  of  Ulster,  and  it  is  what  she  told  him  that  there  was  not  a  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth  she  loved  more  than  him-  self. And  she  bade  him  come,  near  Samhain  time,  to  Curoi's  dun  at  Finglas,  and  his  men  with  him,  and  to  bring  her  away  by  force. 

So  when  the  time  came,  Cuchulain  set  out,  and  his  men  with  him,  and  they  came  to  a  wood  near  the  dun,  that  had  a  stream  running  through  it,  and  he  sent  word  to  Blanad  he  was  waiting  there.  And  Blanad  sent  him  back  word  to  come  and  bring  her  away  at  whatever  time  he  would  see  the  stream  in  the  wood  turning  white.  And  when  what  she  thought  to  be  a  good  time  came,  when  all  the  men  of  the  place  were  sent  out  looking  for  stones  to  build  a  great  new  dun,  she  milked  the  three  white 

320 


BLANAD  321 

cows  with  red  ears  Curoi  had  brought  away  by  force  from  her  father,  Midhir,  into  the  cauldron  he  had  brought  away  with  them,  and  she  poured  a  great  vessel  of  new  milk  into  the  stream,  where  it  ran  by  the  dun.  And  when  Cuchulain  saw  the  stream  turning  white,  he  went  up  to  the  dun.  But  he  found  Curoi  there  before  him,  and  they  fought,  and  Curoi  was  killed,  the  son  of  Daire,  lord  of  the  southern  sea,  that  had  a  great  name  and   great  praise  on  him   before   Blanad  was  his  wife. 

Then  Cuchulain  brought  Blanad  away  with  him  to  Ulster.  But  Curoi's  poet,  Feirceirtne,  followed  after  them  to  avenge  his  master's  death.  And  when  they  were  come  as  far  as  the  headland  of  Cian  Beara,  he  saw  Blanad  standing  on  the  edge  of  a  high  rock,  and  she  alone.  And  he  went  up  to  her,  and  took  her  in  his  arms,  and  threw  her,  and  himself  along  with  her,  over  the  rock,  and  they  both  got  their  death  by  the  fall  on  the  moment. 

And  as  to  the  children  of  Calatin,  this  is  the  way  it  was  with  them.  At  the  time  Cuchulain  made  an  end  of  Calatin  at  the  ford,  and  of  all  his  sons  with  him,  Calatin's  wife  was  with  child.  And  when  her  time  came,  there  were  three  daughters  born  at  the  one  birth,  and  they  de-  formed, and  each  of  them  having  but  one  eye. 

Then  Maeve  came  from  Cruachan  to  visit  them,  and  she  brought  away  the  children  with  her,  and  took  the  charge  of  them.  And  when  they  were  come  to  sensible  years,  she  came  to  see  them,  and  she  said  :  "  Do  you  know  who  it  was  killed  your  father  ?  "  "  We  know  well,"  they  said,  "  it  was  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim,  killed  him."  *'  That  is  so,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  let  you  make  a  journey  now,"  she  said,  "  through  the  whole  world,  to  get  know-  ledge of  spells  and  enchantments  from  them  that  have  it,  the  way  you  will  be  able  to  avenge  your  father  when  the  time  comes." 

When  the  three  one-eyed  daughters  of  Calatin  heard 

X 


322   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

that,  they  went  out  into  Alban,  and  to  every  other  country,  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  and  they  were  learning  every  sort  of  enchantment  and  of  witchcraft.  And  at  the  end  they  came  back  to  Cruachan. 

And  as  to  Maeve,  she  went  up  one  morning  to  her  sunny  parlour,  and  from  there  she  saw  the  three  daughters  of  Calatin  sitting  outside  on  the  lawn.  So  she  took  her  cloak,  that  had  beautiful  embroidery  on  it,  and  put  it  about  her,  and  she  went  out  on  the  lawn  and  bade  them  welcome,  and  she  sat  down  before  them,  and  asked  news  of  all  they  had  done  since  they  left  Ireland.  And  they  told  her  all  they  had  learned.  "  Do  you  remember  it  all  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  We  remember  it  well,"  they  said,  "  and  we  can  do  many  things,  and  we  can  make  the  appearance  of  terrible  battles  by  secret  words." 

Maeve  brought  them  then  into  the  royal  house,  and  they  were  attended  on,  and  they  were  given  every  sort  of  food  and  of  drink,  and  of  good  treatment. 

And  then  Maeve  sent  word  to  Lugaid,  and  he  came  to  Cruachan,  and  himself  and  Maeve  began  to  talk  together.  "  Do  you  remember,"  she  said,  "  who  it  was  killed  Curoi  your  father  ?  "  "I  remember  it  well,"  he  said  ;  "  it  was  Cuchulain  killed  him."  Then  Ere  came  to  her,  and  she  asked  him  the  same  question  about  his  father  Cairbre  Niafer,  and  he  made  the  same  answer.  "  What  you  say  is  true,"  Maeve  said  then,  "  and  the  children  of  Calatin  are  come  back  to  me  now,  after  going  through  the  whole  world,  to  fight  against  Cuchulain  with  their  enchantments.  And  there  is  no  king  or  chief  man,  or  fighting  man  in  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland,  but  lost  his  friend  or  his  comrade,  his  father  or  his  brother,  by  him  in  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  or  at  some  other  time.  And  now,"  she  said,  "  it  is  best  for  us  to  gather  together  a  great  army  of  the  men  of  Ireland  to  make  an  attack  on  him,  for  the  men  of  Ulster  have  their  weakness  coming  on  them,  and  it  is  likely  they  will  not  be  able  to  help  him." 


LEVARCHAM'S   MESSAGE        323 

With  that,  Lugaid  went  away  southward  to  the  king  of  Munster,  to  bid  him  come,  and  bring  his  men  with  him ;  and  Ere  went  and  called  to  the  chief  men  of  Leinster  in  the  same  way. 

Then  all  the  provinces  gathered  together  to  Cruachan,  and  they  stopped  there  with  feasting  and  merriment  for  three  days  and  three  nights.  And  at  the  end  of  that  time  they  went  out  of  Cruachan.  But  Maeve  did  not  bring  Fergus  with  them  this  time,  for  she  was  sure  the  men  of  Ireland  would  never  be  able  to  make  an  end  of  Cuchulain  if  Fergus  was  along  with  them. 

And  this  is  the  way  they  went,  beyond  Magh  Finn  to  Athluain,  and  they  rested  there  that  night. 

And  the  next  day  they  went  on  their  road  till  they  came  to  Glean-na-loin,  and  from  that  to  Glean-mor,  and  from  that  to  Tailtin,  and  they  stopped  the  night  there ;  and  then  they  went  on  by  the  borders  of  Magh  Breagh,  and  Midhe,  and  Treathfa,  and  Cuailgne. 

It  is  then  Conchubar,  King  of  Ulster,  got  word  that  the  borders  of  his  province  were  being  robbed  and  destroyed  by  the  men  of  Munster  and  Leinster,  and  of  Con  naught. 

"  Where  is  Levarcham  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  I  am  here,"  she  said.  "Go  out  for  me  now,"  said  Con-  chubar, "  and  bring  Cuchulain  here  to  Emain  ;  for  it  is  against  him  this  army  we  have  news  of  is  gathered.  Bid  him  to  make  no  delay,  but  to  leave  Dundealgan  and  Muir-  themne  and  to  come  here  to  advise  with  myself,  and  with  Cathbad  and  Amergin,  and  all  the  knowledgeable  men.  For  if  he  can  put  off  this  battle  till  I  myself,  and  Conall,  and  all  the  men  of  Ulster,  will  be  ready  to  go  out  with  him,  we  will  give  them  a  great  defeat,  the  way  they  will  not  come  into  my  province  again.  For  there  are  many  bear  him  ill-will,"  he  said,  "  on  account  of  all  he  killed.  Finn,  son  of  Ross,  Fraoch,  son  of  Idath,  and  Dearg,  son  of  Conroi,  and  many  of  the  best  men  of  Ulster ;  and 


324   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

Cairbre  Niafer  at  the  battle  of  Rosnaree  ;  and  Curoi,  son  of  Daire,  High  King  of  Munster,  and  many  of  the  men  of  Munster  besides  him  ;  Fircearna,  and  Fiamain,  and  Niall,  and  Laoc  Leathbuine,  and  many  more  along  with  them." 

Levarcham  went  quickly  then  with  that  message,  and  it  is  where  she  found  Cuchulain,  between  sea  and  land,  on  Baile's  Strand,  and  he  trying  to  bring  down  sea-birds  with  his  sling  ;  but  with  all  the  birds  that  were  flying  over  him  and  past  him,  he  could  not  bring  one  down,  but  they  all  escaped  him. 

And  there  was  heaviness  on  him,  not  to  be  able  to  hit  them,  for  he  knew  it  had  some  bad  meaning.  And  in-  deed he  had  never  been  very  happy  in  his  mind  since  the  death  of  the  blossomed  branch,  Aoife's  son,  there  on  that  strand.  Then  he  saw  Levarcham  coming,  and  he  bade  her  welcome.  "  I  am  glad  of  that  welcome,"  said  Levarcham,  "and  it  with  news  from  Conchubar  I  am  come  to  you."  "  What  is  your  news  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  have  news  indeed,"  she  said.  And  then  she  told  him  all  that  Conchubar  had  said,  from  beginning  to  end.  "  And  it  is  what  all  are  asking  of  you,"  she  said  :  ''chief  men  and  fighting  men,  poets  and  learned  men,  women  and  young  girls,  to  keep  aside  from  the  men  of  Ireland  that  are  coming  here  to  Muirthemne,  and  not  to  go  out  alone  against  that  great  army."  "  I  would  sooner  stop  here  and  defend  my  own  place,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  is  best  for  you  to  go  to  Emain,"  said  Laeg.  So  after  a  while  he  gave  in  to  them,  and  they  went  back  to  Dundealgan,  and  Emer  came  out  on  the  lawn  to  meet  them,  and  they  gave  her  the  same  advice,  to  go  to  Emain  Macha  where  Conchubar  and  his  chief  men  were  gathered  together.  Then  Emer  got  her  chariot,  and  she  sent  her  servants  and  the  herds,  and  the  cattle  to  Slieve  Cuilenn  in  the  North,  and  herself  and  Cuchulain  set  out  for  Emain.  And  that  was  the  first  time  Dundealgan  was  emptied  since  Cuchulain  had  the  sway  over  it. 


CUCHULAINATEMAIN  325 

And  when  Cuchulain  came  to  Emain  Macha,  they  brought  him  to  the  bright,  sunny  house.  And  when  the  women  of  the  place  heard  he  was  there,  they  came  and  spoke  sweet  words,  and  the  poets  and  the  harpers  came,  and  the  skilled  men,  and  they  all  made  music,  and  feasting,  and  pleasant  talk  round  about  Cuchulain,  in  the  wide,  white,  sunny  house  of  the  Red  Branch  ;  for  what  always  quieted  Cuchulain  best  was  the  singing  of  songs  and  rhymes  before  him.  It  is  that  way  Scumac,  the  story-teller,  quieted  him  one  time  he  was  vexed,  and  had  a  mind  to  set  fire  to  Emain,  because  Conchubar  had  gone  to  a  feast  given  by  Conall,  son  of  Gleo  Glas,  in  Cuailgne,  and  had  left  no  word  for  him  to  follow. 

And  Conchubar  bade  Cathbad,  and  the  learned  men,  and  the  women,  to  keep  a  good  watch  on  Cuchulain,  and  to  mind  him  well.  "  For  I  leave  the  charge  of  him  on  you,"  he  said,  "  to  save  him  from  the  plans  Maeve  has  made  against  him,  and  from  the  power  of  the  children  of  Calatin.  For  if  he  should  fall,"  he  said,  "  it  is  certain  the  safety  and  the  prosperity  of  Ulster  will  fall  with  him  for  ever."  "That  is  true,"  said  Cathbad,  and  all  the  others  said  the  same. 

"  Well,"  said  Geanann,  Cathbad's  son,  "  I  will  go  now  and  see  him."  He  went  then  to  the  place  Cuchulain  and  Emer  were,  and  the  poets,  and  the  women,  and  the  learned  men  with  them,  and  a  feast  laid  out  on  the  table,  and  all  of  them  at  drinking  and  pleasantness  and  games. 

Now  as  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  they  came  to  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  and  they  made  their  camp  there,  and  they  began  to  destroy  and  to  take  all  they  could  find  there,  and  in  Macaire  Conall ;  and  when  they  knew  Cuchulain  had  left  Dundealgan,  it  is  then  the  three  daughters  of  Calatin  went  with  the  lightness  and  the  quickness  of  the  wind  to  Emain  Macha.  And  they  sat  down  on  the  lawn  outside  the  house  where  Cuchulain  was,  and  they  began  to  tear  up  the  earth  and  the  grass,  and  by  means 


326  GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

of  their  witchcraft  they  put  the  appearance  of  troops  of  men  and  of  armies  on  stalks  and  coloured  oak-leaves,  and  little  fuzz-balls  ;  and  the  sounds  of  fighting  and  strik-  ing, and  the  shouting  of  a  great  army  were  heard  on  every  side,  as  if  there  was  an  attack  being  made  on  the  dun. 

It  was  bright-faced  Geanann,  son  of  Cathbad,  was  keeping  a  watch  on  Cuchulain  that  day,  and  he  saw  him  sit  up  and  look  out  on  the  lawn,  and  redness  and  shame  came  on  his  face,  when  he  saw,  as  he  thought,  two  armies  fighting  one  another,  and  he  put  out  his  hand  as  if  to  take  his  sword,  but  Geanann  threw  his  two  arms  about  him  and  hindered  him,  and  told  him  there  was  nothing  before  him  but  witchcraft  and  enchantment,  and  the  appearance  of  fighting  made  up  by  the  children  of  Calatin  to  bring  him  out  to  his  death.  And  Cathbad  and  all  the  learned  men  came  then  and  told  him  the  same  thing.  But  after  all  that,  it  was  hardly  they  were  able  to  hold  him  back  and  to  persuade  him. 

The  next  day  Cathbad  himself  came  to  keep  a  watch  on  him  with  the  rest,  and  after  a  while  the  noise  of  shouting  began  again,  and  for  all  they  could  do,  Cuchu-  lain went  and  looked  out  at  the  window.  And  the  first  thing  he  thought  he  saw  was  the  army  of  Ireland  stand-  ing there  upon  the  plain.  And  then  he  thought  he  saw  Gradh,  son  of  Lir,  standing  there ;  and  after  that  he  thought  he  heard  the  harp  of  the  son  of  Meardha  playing  the  sweet  music  of  the  Sidhe,  and  he  knew  when  he  heard  those  sounds  that  his  time  was  come,  and  that  his  courage  and  his  strength  would  soon  be  made  an  end  of.  And  then  one  of  the  daughters  of  Calatin  took  the  appearance  of  a  crow,  and  came  flying  over  him  and  saying  mocking  words,  and  she  bade  him  go  out  and  save  his  own  house  and  his  lands  from  the  enemies  that  were  destroying  them.  And  though  Cuchulain  knew  well   by  this  time  it  was  witchcraft  was  being  worked 


N  I  A  M  H  327 

against  him,  he  was  as  ready  as  before  to  rush  out  when  he  heard  the  sounds  and  the  shouting  of  battle  ;  and  there  came  trouble  and  confusion  on  his  mind  with  the  noise  of  striking  and  of  fighting,  and  with  the  sweet  sounds  of  the  harp  of  the  Sidhe.  But  Cathbad  did  his  best  with  him,  and  it  is  what  he  told  him,  that  if  he  would  but  stop  quiet  for  another  three  days  in  Emain,  the  power  of  the  enchantments  would  be  broken,  and  Conall  Cearnach  would  have  come  to  his  help,  and  he  could  go  out  again,  and  the  whole  world  would  be  full  of  his  name  and  of  his  lasting  victories. 

And  the  women  of  Emain  and  the  musicians  closed  round  him,  and  they  sang  sweet  songs,  and  led  away  his  mind  from  what  he  had  heard,  until  the  day  drew  to  a  close. 

And  on  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  Conchubar  called  for  Cathbad  and  Bright-Faced  Geanann,  and  the  rest  of  the  Druids.  And  Emer  came  along  with  them,  and  Celthair's  daughter,  Niamh,  that  Cuchulain  loved,  and  the  rest  of  the  women  of  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch.  And  Conchubar  asked  them  in  what  way  they  could  best  keep  a  watch  on  Cuchulain  through  the  day.  "  We  do  not  know  that,"  they  said.  "  I  will  tell  you  what  is  best  to  do,"  said  Conchubar  then.  "  Bring  him  away  with  you  to  Glean-na-Bodhar,  the  Deaf  Valley.  For  if  all  the  men  of  Ireland  were  letting  out  shouts  and  cries  of  war  around  it,  no  one  that  would  be  in  that  valley  would  hear  any  sound  at  all.  Bring  Cuchulain  there,  then,"  he  said,  "  and  keep  him  there  with  you  till  their  enchantments  will  be  spent,  and  till  Conall  Cearnach  will  come  to  his  help  out  of  the  island  of  Leodus."  "  King,"  said  Niamh, "  we  were  asking  him  and  persuading  him  all  through  yesterday  to  go  to  that  valley,  but  he  would  not  go  there,  for  all  I  myself  or  the  rest  of  the  women  of  Ireland  could  say.  And  let  you  yourself  go  to  him  now,"  she  said, "  with  Cathbad,  and  Geanann,  and  the 


328   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

poets,  and  with  Emer,  and  let  you  bring  him  into  that  valley,  and  let  there  be  music  and  pleasantness  made  about  him  there,  the  way  he  will  not  hear  the  shouts  and  the  mocking  words  of  the  children  of  Calatin."  It  is  not  I  will  go  with  him,"  said  Emer,  "  but  let  Niamh  go,  and  my  blessing  with  her,  for  it  will  be  hard  for  him  to  refuse  her."  So  they  agreed  to  that,  and  they  went  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  and  Conchubar's  harper,  Cobhtach,  went  along  with  them,  making  sweet  music.  Then  Cathbad  went  out  to  Cuchulain  where  he  was  lying  on  the  bed,  and  he  began  to  ask  him  and  to  persuade  him.  "  Dear  son,"  he  said,  "  come  with  me  to-day  to  use  the  feast  I  am  making,  and  all  the  women  and  the  poets  will  come  with  us.  And  there  are  bonds  on  you  not  to  refuse  my  feast."  "  My  grief  for  that,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  This  is  no  fit  time  for  me  to  be  feasting  and  making  merry,  and  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  burning  and  destroying  Ulster,  and  the  men  of  Ulster  in  their  weak-  ness, and  Conall  away,  and  the  men  of  Ireland  putting  insults  on  me  and  reproaches,  and  saying  I  have  run  away  before  them.  And  but  for  yourself  and  Con-  chubar,"  he  said,  "  and  for  Geanann  and  Amergin,  I  would  fall  on  them  and  scatter  them,  that  their  dead  would  be  more  than  their  living."  Then  all  the  women  per-  suaded him,  and  Emer  spoke  to  him,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  Little  Hound,  I  never  hindered  you  until  this  hour  from  any  deed  or  any  adventure  you  had  a  mind  for.  So  now,  for  my  sake,  my  choice  sweetheart,  my  first  love  and  first  darling  of  the  men  of  the  world,  go  with  Cathbad  and  with  Geanann,  with  Niamh  and  with  the  poets,  to  share  Cathbad's  feast." 

Then  Niamh  went  over  to  him  and  gave  him  three  fond,  loving  kisses  ;  and  then  they  all  rose  up,  and  he  rose  along  with  them,  heavy  and  sorrowful,  and  in  that  way  he  went  in  their  company  into  Glean-na-Bodhar.  And  when  they  came  into  it,  he  said  :  "  My  grief!  I  ever 


THE   DEAF  VALLEY  329 

to  have  come  here,  and  I  never  came  to  any  place  I  liked  less  than  this  :  for  now  the  men  of  Ireland  will  be  saying  it  was  to  escape  them  I  came  here."  "  You  gave  me  your  word,"  said  Niamh,  "  you  would  not  go  out  to  meet  the  men  of  Ireland  without  leave  from  me."  If  I  gave  it,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  right  for  me  to  hold  to  it." 

Their  chariots  were  unyoked  then,  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  and  the  Black  Sainglain  were  let  loose  to  graze  in  the  valley,  and  they  all  went  to  the  house  Cathbad  had  made  ready.  And  there  was  a  great  feast  laid  out,  and  Cuchulain  was  put  in  the  chief  place,  and  to  his  right  hand  were  Cathbad  and  Geanann  and  the  poets,  and  on  the  left  was  Niamh,  daughter  of  Celthair,  with  the  women.  And  opposite  them  were  the  musicians  and  the  reciters.  And  then  they  all  took  to  feasting  and  drink-  ing and  to  games,  and  they  made  a  great  show  of  mirth  and  pleasantness  before  Cuchulain. 

But  as  to  the  three  deformed,  one-eyed  children  of  Calatin,  they  came  quickly  and  lightly,  the  way  they  had  come  on  the  other  days,  to  the  lawn  at  Emain,  to  the  place  where  they  had  got  sight  of  Cuchulain  in  the  house.  And  when  they  did  not  see  him  there,  they  searched  through  the  whole  of  Emain,  but  when  they  did  not  find  him  with  Conchubar,  or  with  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch,  there  was  great  wonder  on  them.  And  then  they  began  to  think  it  was  Cathbad  was  hiding  him  from  them,  and  they  rose  up  high  in  the  air,  on  a  blast  of  moaning  wind  they  made  by  their  enchantments,  and  on  it  they  went  over  the  whole  province,  searching  out  every  wood  and  valley,  every  cave  and  secret  path.  But  they  fou  nd  nothing,  till  at  last  they  came  over  Glean-na-Bodhar,  and  there  in  the  middle  of  the  valley  they  saw  the  Grey  of  Macha  and  the  Black  Sainglain  and  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  beside  them. 

They  knew  then  that  Cuchulain  must  be  in  the  valley,  and   presently  they  heard  the  sounds  of  music  and  of 


330   GATHERING   AT    MUIRTHEMNE 

laughter  and  of  women's  voices,  where  all  the  people  in  the  feasting-house  were  trying  their  best  to  raise  the  cloud  and  the  heaviness  off  Cuchulain's  mind. 

Then  the  children  of  Calatin  came  down  into  the  valley,  and  the  same  way  as  before  they  took  thistle-  stalks  and  little  fuzz-balls  and  withered  leaves,  and  put  on  them  the  appearance  of  troops  of  armed  men,  so  that  there  seemed  to  be  no  hill  or  no  place  outside  the  whole  valley  but  was  filled  with  battalions,  coming  hundred  by  hundred.  And  the  air  w^as  all  filled  with  sounds  of  battle  and  shouts,  and  of  trumpets  and  dreadful  laughter,  and  the  cries  of  wounded  men.  And  there  seemed  to  be  fires  in  the  country  about,  and  a  noise  of  the  crying  of  women.  And  great  dread  came  on  all  that  heard  that  outcry,  both  men  and  women,  and  dogs  of  every  kind. 

But  when  the  women  that  were  with  Cuchulain  heard  those  shouts,  they  shouted  back  again  and  raised  their  voices,  but  with  all  they  could  do,  they  did  not  keep  the  outcry  from  reaching  to  Cuchulain,  "  My  grief !  "  he  said,  "  I  hear  the  shouts  of  the  men  of  Ireland  that  are  spoiling  the  whole  of  the  province ;  my  fame  is  at  an  end,  my  great  name  is  gone  from  me,  Ulster  is  put  down  for  ever."  "  Let  the  noise  pass  by,"  said  Cathbad  ;  "  it  is  only  the  noise  made  by  the  children  of  Calatin,  that  want  to  draw  you  out  from  where  you  are,  to  make  an  end  of  you.  Stop  here  with  us  now,  and  put  the  trouble  off  your  mind." 

Cuchulain  stayed  quiet  then,  but  the  children  of  Calatin  went  on  a  long  time  filling  the  air  with  battle  noises.  But  they  tired  of  it  at  last,  for  they  saw  that  Cathbad  and  the  women  were  too  much  for  them. 

Then  anger  came  on  Badb,  one  of  Calatin's  daughters,  and  she  said:  "Go  on  now,  makingsounds  of  fighting  in  the  air,  and  I  myself  will  go  into  the  valley  ;  for  even  if  I  get  my  death  by  it,  I  will  speak  with  Cuchulain." 

With  that,  she  went  on  in  the  madness  of  her  anger 


CUCHULAIN   GOES   OUT  331 

to  the  very  house  where  the  feast  was  going  on,  and  there  she  took  the  appearance  of  a  woman  of  Niamh's  women,  and  she  beckoned  Niamh  out  to  speak  with  her. 

So  Niamh  came  out,  thinking  she  had  news  to  give  her,  and  a  good  many  of  the  other  women  of  Emain  with  her,  and  Badb  bade  them  follow  her.  And  she  led  them  a  long  way  down  the  valley,  and  then  by  her  enchant-  ments she  raised  a  thick  mist  between  them  and  the  house,  so  that  they  could  not  find  their  way,  but  were  astray  in  the  valley,  not  knowing  where  they  were. 

Then  she  went  back  to  the  feasting-house,  and  she  put  on  herself  the  appearance  of  Niamh,  and  she  came  in  to  where  Cuchulain  was  and  called  out :  "  Rise  up,  Cuchulain  ;  Dundealgan  is  burned,  Muirthemne  is  destroyed,  and  Conaille  Muirthemne.  The  whole  pro-  vince is  trampled  down  by  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  it  is  on  myself  the  blame  will  be  laid,"  she  said,  "  and  all  Ulster  will  say  that  I  hindered  you,  and  kept  you  back  from  going  out  to  check  the  army,  and  to  get  satisfaction  from  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  it  is  from  Conchubar  himself  I  will  get  my  death  on  account  of  that,"  she  said.  For  she  knew  Cuchulain  had  given  Niamh  his  promise  that  without  leave  from  her,  he  would  not  go  out  to  face  the  men  of  Ireland. 

"  My  grief!"  said  Cuchulain  then,  "  it  is  hard  to  trust  in  women.  For  I  thought,"  he  said,  "that  you  would  not  have  given  me  that  leave  for  the  whole  riches  of  the  world.  But  since  you  yourself  give  me  leave  to  go  out  and  face  the  men  of  Ireland,  I  will  do  it."  And  with  that  he  rose  up  to  go  out.  And  as  he  rose  up,  he  threw  his  cloak  about  him,  and  his  foot  caught  in  the  cloak,  and  the  gold  brooch  that  was  in  the  cloak  fell  on  his  foot  and  pierced  it.  "  Truly  the  brooch  is  a  friend  that  gives  me  a  warning,"  said  Cuchulain. 

He  went  out  then,  and  he  bade  Laeg  to  yoke  the  horses  and  to  make  ready  the  chariot.     And  Cathbad, 


332   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

and  Geanann,  and  the  women  followed  him  out,  and  took  hold  of  him,  but  they  were  not  able  to  stop  him.  For  the  cries  of  battle  were  still  in  the  air,  and  he  thought  he  saw  a  great  army  standing  on  the  lawn  at  Emain,  and  the  whole  plain  filled  up  and  crowded  with  troops  and  bands  of  men,  with  horses  and  arms  and  armour,  and  he  thought  he  heard  great  shouts,  and  that  he  saw  all  Conchubar's  city  burning,  and  all  the  hills  round  about  Emain  full  of  things  brought  away,  and  he  thought  he  saw  Emer's  sunny  house  thrown  down,  and  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  in  one  blaze,  and  all  Emain  under  fire  and  smoke.  And  Cathbad  tried  to  quiet  him.  "  Dear  son,"  he  said,  "  for  this  day  only,  follow  my  advice,  and  do  not  go  out  against  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  I  will  be  able  to  save  you  from  all  the  enchantments  of  the  children  of  Calatin."  But  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Dear  master,  there  is  no  reason  for  me  to  care  for  my  life  from  this  out,  for  my  time  is  at  an  end,  and  Niamh  has  given  me  leave  to  go  and  face  the  men  of  Ireland."  And  then  Niamh  herself  came  up  to  him  and  said:  "My  grief!  my  little  Hound,  I  would  never  have  given  you  that  leave  for  all  the  riches  of  the  world  ;  and  it  was  not  I  that  gave  you  leave,  but  Badb,  the  daughter  of  Calatin,  that  took  my  shape  on  her.  And  stay  with  me  now,"  she  said,  "  my  friend,  my  darling."  But  Cuchulain  would  not  believe  her,  and  he  bade  Laeg  yoke  the  chariot,  and  put  his  arms  in  order.  Laeg  went  to  do  that,  but  indeed  that  time  above  all  others  he  had  no  mind  for  the  work.  And  when  he  shook  the  bridles  towards  the  horses  as  he  was  used  to  do,  they  went  away  from  him  ;  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  would  not  let  him  come  near  him  at  all.  "  Truly,"  said  Laeg,  "  this  is  a  warning  of  some  bad  thing.  And  indeed,  my  life,"  he  said  to  the  Grey,  "  it  is  seldom  you  would  not  come  to  meet  the  bridle  and  to  meet  myself,  up  to  this  day."  Then  he  went  to  Cuchulain  and  said  :  "  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people 


THE   GREY   OF   MACHA  333 

swear  by,  that  if  all  the  men  in  the  province  of  Ulster  were  round  about  the  Grey  of  Macha,  they  would  not  be  able  to  bring  him  as  far  as  the  chariot,  and  I  never  refused  you  up  to  this,"  he  said,  "  and  come  out  now  and  speak  to  the  Grey  yourself." 

So  Cuchulain  went  out,  and  the  horse  turned  his  left  side  three  times  to  his  master.  Then  he  reproached  the  horse.  "  You  were  not  used,"  he  said,  "  to  behave  like  that  to  me."  Then  the  Grey  of  Macha  came  up  to  him  and  he  let  big,  round  tears  of  blood  fall  on  Cuchulain's  feet. 

Then  the  chariot  was  yoked  ;  and  it  was  the  Morrigu  had  unyoked  it  and  had  broken  it  the  night  before,  for  she  did  not  like  Cuchulain  to  go  out  and  to  get  his  death  in  the  battle.  And  Cuchulain  set  out  and  came  to  Emain,  and  to  the  house  where  Emer  was,  and  she  came  out  and  bade  him  come  down  from  his  chariot.  "  I  will  not,"  he  said,  "  until  I  go  first  to  Muirthemne,  to  attack  the  four  great  provinces  of  Ireland,  and  to  avenge  all  the  hurts  and  the  insults  they  have  put  on  me,  and  on  Ulster,  for  I  have  seen  their  gatherings  and  their  armies."  "  Those  were  made  up  by  enchantments,"  said  Emer.  "  I  tell  you,  woman,"  he  said,  "  and  I  swear  by  my  word,  I  will  never  come  back  here  until  I  have  made  an  attack  upon  them  in  their  camp." 

Then  he  turned  his  chariot  towards  the  south,  by  the  road  of  Meadhon  Luachair,  and  Levarcham  cried  out  after  him,  and  the  three  times  fifty  queens  that  were  in  Emain  Macha,  and  that  loved  him,  cried  out  upon  him  miserably,  and  struck  their  hands  together,  for  they  knew  he  would  not  come  back  to  them  again. 


XX 

DEATH  OF  CUCHULAIN 

/^UCHULAIN  went  on  then  to  the  house  of  his  ^^  mother,  Dechtire,  to  bid  her  farewell.  And  she  came  out  on  the  lawn  to  meet  him,  for  she  knew  well  he  was  going  out  to  face  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  she  brought  out  wine  in  a  vessel  to  him,  as  her  custom  was  when  he  passed  that  way.  But  when  he  took  the  vessel  in  his  hand,  it  was  red  blood  that  was  in  it.  "  My  grief!"  he  said,  "  my  mother  Dechtire,  it  is  no  wonder  others  to  forsake  me,  when  you  yourself  offer  me  a  drink  of  blood."  Then  she  filled  the  vessel  a  second,  and  a  third  time,  and  each  time  when  she  gave  it  to  him,  there  was  nothing  in  it  but  blood. 

Then  anger  came  on  Cuchulain,  and  he  dashed  the  vessel  against  a  rock,  and  broke  it,  and  he  said  :  "  The  fault  is  not  in  yourself,  my  mother  Dechtire,  but  my  luck  is  turned  against  me,  and  my  life  is  near  its  end,  and  I  will  not  come  back  alive  this  time  from  facing  the  men  of  Ireland."  Then  Dechtire  tried  hard  to  persuade  him  to  go  back  and  to  wait  till  he  would  have  the  help  of  Conall.  "  I  will  not  wait,"  he  said,  "  for  anything  you  can  say ;  for  I  would  not  give  up  my  great  name  and  my  courage  for  all  the  riches  of  the  world.  And  from  the  day  I  first  took  arms  till  this  day,  I  have  never  drawn  back  from  a  fight  or  a  battle.  And  it  is  not  now  I  will  begin  to  draw  back,"  he  said,  "  for  a  great  name  outlasts  life." 

334 


THE   WASHER   AT   THE    FORD     335 

Then  he  went  on  his  way,  and  Cathbad,  that  had  followed  him,  went  with  him.  And  presently  they  came  to  a  ford,  and  there  they  saw  a  young  girl,  thin  and  white-skinned  and  having  yellow  hair,  washing  and  ever  washing,  and  wringing  out  clothing  that  was  stained  crimson  red,  and  she  crying  and  keening  all  the  time.  "Little  Hound,"  said  Cathbad,  "do  you  see  what  it  is  that  young  girl  is  doing?  It  is  your  red  clothes  she  is  washing,  and  crying  as  she  washes,  because  she  knows  you  are  going  to  your  death  against  Maeve's  great  army.  And  take  the  warning  now  and  turn  back  again."  "  Dear  master,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  you  have  followed  me  far  enough ;  for  I  will  not  turn  back  from  my  vengeance  on  the  men  of  Ireland  that  are  come  to  burn  and  to  destroy  my  house  and  my  country.  And  what  is  it  to  me,  the  woman  of  the  Sidhe  to  be  washing  red  clothing  for  me  ?  It  is  not  long  till  there  will  be  clothing  enough,  and  armour  and  arms,  lying  soaked  in  pools  of  blood,  by  my  own  sword  and  my  spear.  And  if  you  are  sorry  and  loth  to  let  me  go  into  the  fight,  I  am  glad  and  ready  enough  myself  to  go  into  it,  though  I  know  as  well  as  you  yourself  I  must  fall  in  it.  Do  not  be  hindering  me  any  more,  then,"  he  said,  "  for,  if  I  stay  or  if  I  go,  death  will  meet  me  all  the  same.  But  go  now  to  Emain,  to  Conchubar  and  to  Emer,  and  bring  them  life  and  health  from  me,  for  I  will  never  go  back  to  meet  them  again.  It  is  my  grief  and  my  wound,  I  to  part  from  them  !  And  O  Laeg ! "  he  said,  "  we  are  going  away  under  trouble  and  under  darkness  from  Emer  now,  as  it  is  often  we  came  back  to  her  with  gladness  out  of  strange  places  and  far  countries." 

Then  Cathbad  left  him,  and  he  went  on  his  way.  And  after  a  while  he  saw  three  hags,  and  they  blind  of  the  left  eye,  before  him  in  the  road,  and  they  having  a  venomous  hound  they  were  cooking  with  charms  on  rods 


336  DEATH    OF  CUCHULAIN 

of  the  rowan  tree.  And  he  was  going  by  them,  for  he  knew  it  was  not  for  his  good  they  were  there. 

But  one  of  the  hags  called  to  him  :  "  Stop  a  while  with  us,  Cuchulain."  "  I  will  not  stop  with  you,"  said  Cuchu-  lain.  "  That  is  because  we  have  nothing  better  than  a  dog  to  give  you,"  said  the  hag.  "  If  we  had  a  grand,  big  cooking-hearth,  you  would  stop  and  visit  us  ;  but  because  it  is  only  a  little  we  have  to  offer  you,  you  will  not  stop.  But  he  that  will  not  show  respect  for  the  small,  though  he  is  great,  he  will  get  no  respect  himself." 

Then  he  went  over  to  her,  and  she  gave  him  the  shoulder-blade  of  the  hound  out  of  her  left  hand,  and  he  ate  it  out  of  his  left  hand.  And  he  put  it  down  on  his  left  thigh,  and  the  hand  that  took  it  was  struck  down,  and  the  thigh  he  put  it  on  was  struck  through  and  through,  so  that  the  strength  that  was  in  them  before  left  them. 

Then  he  went  down  the  road  of  Meadhon-Luachair,  by  Slieve  Fuad,  and  his  enemy,  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre,  saw  him  in  the  chariot,  and  his  sword  shining  red  in  his  hand,  and  the  light  of  his  courage  plain  upon  him,  and  his  hair  spread  out  like  threads  of  gold  that  change  their  colour  on  the  edge  of  the  anvil  under  the  smith's  hand,  and  the  Crow  of  Battle  in  the  air  over  his  head. 

"  Cuchulain  is  coming  at  us,"  said  Ere  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  "  and  let  us  be  ready  for  him."  So  they  made  a  fence  of  shields  linked  together,  and  Ere  put  a  couple  of  the  men  that  were  strongest  here  and  there,  to  let  on  to  be  fighting  one  another,  that  they  might  call  Cuchulain  to  them  ;  and  he  put  a  Druid  with  every  couple  of  them,  and  he  bid  the  Druid  to  ask  Cuchulain's  spears  of  him,  for  it  would  be  hard  for  him  to  refuse  a  Druid.  For  it  was  in  the  prophecy  of  the  children  of  Calatin  that  a  king  would  be  killed  by  each  one  of  those  spears  in  that  battle. 

And  he  bid  the  men  of  Ireland  to  give  out  shouts,  and  Cuchulain  came  against  them  in  his  chariot,  doing  his 


DEATHOFLAEG  337 

three  thunder  feats,  and  he  used  his  spear  and  his  sword  in  such  a  way,  that  their  heads,  and  their  hands,  and  their  feet,  and  their  bones,  were  scattered  through  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  like  the  sands  on  the  shore,  like  the  stars  in  the  sky,  like  the  dew  in  May,  like  snow-flakes  and  hailstones,  like  leaves  of  the  trees,  like  buttercups  in  a  meadow,  like  grass  under  the  feet  of  cattle  on  a  fine  summer  day.  It  is  red  that  plain  was  with  the  slaughter  Cuchulain  made  when  he  came  crashing  over  it. 

Then  he  saw  one  of  the  men  that  was  put  to  quarrel  with  the  other,  and  the  Druid  called  to  him  to  come  and  hinder  them,  and  Cuchulain  leaped  towards  them.  "  Your  spear  to  me,"  cried  the  Druid.  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said  Cuchulain,  "you  are  not  so  much  in  want  of  it  as  I  am  in  want  of  it  myself  The  men  of  Ireland  are  upon  me,"  he  said,  "and  I  am  upon  them."  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  you  if  you  refuse  it  to  me,"  said  the  Druid.  "  There  was  never  a  bad  name  put  on  me  yet,  on  account  of  any  refusal  of  mine,"  said  Cuchulain,  and  with  that  he  threw  the  spear  at  him,  and  it  went  through  his  head,  and  it  killed  the  men  that  were  on  the  other  side  of  him. 

Then  Cuchulain  drove  through  the  host,  and  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi,  got  the  spear.  "  Who  is  it  will  fall  by  this  spear,  children  of  Calatin  ? "  said  Lugaid.  "  A  king  will  fall  by  it,"  said  they.  Then  Lugaid  threw  the  spear  at  Cuchulain's  chariot,  and  it  went  through  and  hit  the  driver,  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  and  he  fell  back,  and  his  bowels  came  out  on  the  cushions  of  the  chariot.  "  My  grief!"  said  Laeg,  "it  is  hard  I  am  wounded."  Then  Cuchulain  drew  the  spear  out,  and  Laeg  said  his  farewell  to  him,  and  Cuchulain  said  :  "  To-day  I  will  be  a  fighter  and  a  chariot-driver  as  well." 

Then  he  saw  the  other  two  men  that  were  put  to  quarrel  with  one  another,  and  one  of  them  called  out  it  would  be  a  great  shame  for  him  not  to  give  him  his 

Y 


338  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

help.  Then  Cuchulain  leaped  towards  them.  "Your  spear  to  me,  Cuchulain,"  said  the  Druid.  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,"  said  he,  "  you  are  not  in  such  want  of  the  spear  as  I  am  myself,  for  it  is  by  my  courage,  and  by  my  arms,  that  I  have  to  drive  out  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  that  are  sweeping  over  Muirthemne  to-day."  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  upon  you,"  said  the  Druid.  '*  I  am  not  bound  to  give  more  than  one  gift  in  the  day,  and  I  have  paid  what  is  due  to  my  name  already,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  the  Druid  said  :  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  the  province  of  Ulster,  because  of  your  refusal." 

"  Ulster  was  never  dispraised  yet  for  any  refusal  of  mine,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  or  for  anything  I  did  unworthily.  Though  little  of  my  life  should  be  left  to  me,  Ulster  will  not  be  reproached  for  me  to-day."  With  that  he  threw  his  spear  at  him,  and  it  went  through  his  head,  and  through  the  heads  of  the]nine  men  that  were  behind  him,  and  Cuchulain  went  through  the  host  as  he  did  before. 

Then  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre  Niafer,  took  up  his  spear.  "  Who  will  fall  by  this  ? "  he  asked  the  children  of  Calatin.  "  A  king  will  fall  by  it,"  they  said.  "  I  heard  you  say  the  same  thing  of  the  spear  that  Lugaid  threw  a  while  ago,"  said  Ere.  "  That  is  true,"  said  they,  "  and  the  king  of  the  chariot-drivers  of  Ireland  fell  by  it,  Cuchulain's  driver  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra." 

With  that.  Ere  threw  the  spear,  and  it  went  through  the  Grey  of  Macha.  Cuchulain  drew  the  spear  out,  and  they  said  farewell  to  one  another.  And  then  the  Grey  went  away  from  him,  with  half  his  harness  hanging  from  his  neck,  and  he  went  into  Glas-linn,  the  grey  pool  in  Slieve  Fuad. 

Then  Cuchulain  drove  through  the  host,  and  he  saw  the  third  couple  disputing  together,  and  he  went  between  them  as  he  did  before.  And  the  Druid  asked  his  spear  of  him,  but  he  refused  him,     "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on 


CUCHULAIN   LEFT   ALONE        339 

you,"  said  the  Druid.  "  I  have  paid  what  is  due  to  my  name  to-day,"  said  he  ;  "  my  honour  does  not  bind  me  to  give  more  than  one  request  in  a  day."  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  upon  Ulster  because  of  your  refusal."  "  I  have  paid  what  is  due  for  the  honour  of  Ulster,"  said  Cuchulain.  "Then  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  your  kindred,"  said  the  Druid.  "  The  news  that  I  have  been  given  a  bad  name  shall  never  go  back  to  that  place  I  am  never  to  go  back  to  myself ;  for  it  is  little  of  my  life  that  is  left  to  me,"  said  Cuchulain.  With  that  he  threw  the  spear  at  him,  and  it  went  through  him,  and  through  the  heads  of  the  men  that  were  along  with  him. 

"  You  do  your  kindness  unkindly,  Cuchulain,"  said  the  Druid,  as  he  fell.  Then  Cuchulain  drove  for  the  last  time  through  the  host,  and  Lugaid  took  the  spear,  and  he  said  :  "  Who  will  fall  by  this  spear,  children  of  Calatin  ?  "  "A  king  will  fall  by  it,"  said  they.  "  I  heard  you  saying  that  a  king  would  fall  by  the  spear  Ere  threw  a  while  ago."  "  That  is  true,"  they  said,  "  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  fell  by  it,  that  was  the  king  of  the  horses  of  Ireland." 

Then  Lugaid  threw  the  spear,  and  it  went  through  and  through  Cuchulain's  body,  and  he  knew  he  had  got  his  deadly  wound  ;  and  his  bowels  came  out  on  the  cushions  of  the  chariot,  and  his  only  horse  went  away  from  him,  the  Black  Sainglain,  with  half  the  harness  hanging  from  his  neck,  and  left  his  master,  the  king  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland,  to  die  upon  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 

Then  Cuchulain  said  :  "  There  is  great  desire  on  me  to  go  to  that  lake  beyond,  and  to  get  a  drink  from  it." 

"We  will  give  you  leave  to  do  that,"  they  said,  "if  you  will  come  back  to  us  after." 

"  I  will  bid  you  come  for  me  if  I  am  not  able  to  come  back  myself,"  said  Cuchulain. 

Then  he  gathered  up  his  bowels  into  his  body,  and  he  went  down  to  the  lake.  He  drank  a  drink,  and  he  washed   himself,  and   he  turned  back  again   to  his 


340  DEATH    OF   CUCHULAIN 

death,  and  he  called  to  his  enemies  to  come  and  meet  him. 

There  was  a  pillar-stone  west  of  the  lake,  and  his  eye  lit  on  it,  and  he  went  to  the  pillar-stone,  and  he  tied  himself  to  it  with  his  breast-belt,  the  way  he  would  not  meet  his  death  lying  down,  but  would  meet  it  standing  up.  Then  his  enemies  came  round  about  him,  but  they  were  in  dread  of  going  close  to  him,  for  they  were  not  sure  but  he  might  be  still  alive. 

"  It  is  a  great  shame  for  you,"  said  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre,  "  not  to  strike  the  head  off  that  man,  in  revenge  for  his  striking  the  head  off  my  father." 

Then  the  Grey  of  Macha  came  back  to  defend  Cuchulain  as  long  as  there  was  life  in  him,  and  the  hero-  light  was  shining  above  him.  And  the  Grey  of  Macha  made  three  attacks  against  them,  and  he  killed  fifty  men  with  his  teeth,  and  thirty  with  each  of  his  hoofs.  So  there  is  a  saying  :  "  It  is  not  sharper  work  than  this  was  done  by  the  Grey  of  Macha,  the  time  of  Cuchulain's  death." 

Then  a  bird  came  and  settled  on  his  shoulder.  "  It  is  not  on  that  pillar  birds  were  used  to  settle,"  said  Ere. 

Then  Lugaid  came  and  lifted  up  Cuchulain's  hair  from  his  shoulders,  and  struck  his  head  off,  and  the  men  of  Ireland  gave  three  great  heavy  shouts,  and  the  sword  fell  from  Cuchulain's  hand,  and  as  it  fell,  it  struck  off  Lugaid's  right  hand,  so  that  it  fell  to  the  ground.  Then  they  cut  off  Cuchulain's  hand,  in  satisfaction  for  it,  and  then  the  light  faded  away  from  about  Cuchulain's  head,  and  left  it  as  pale  as  the  snow  of  a  single  night.  Then  all  the  men  of  Ireland  said  that  as  it  was  Maeve  had  gathered  the  army,  it  would  be  right  for  her  to  bring  away  the  head  to  Cruachan.  "  I  will  not  bring  it  with  me  ;  it  is  for  Lugaid  that  struck  it  off  to  bring  it  with  him,"  said  Maeve.  And  then  Lugaid  and  his  men  went  away,  and  they  brought  away  Cuchulain's  head  and  his 


LUGAID   AT   THE   RIVER  341 

right  hand  with  them,  and  they  went  south,  towards  the  Life  river. 

At  that  time  the  army  of  Ulster  was  gathering  to  attack  its  enemies,  and  Conall  was  out  before  them,  and  he  met  the  Grey  of  Macha,  and  his  share  of  blood  dripping  from  him.  And  then  he  knew  that  Cuchulain  was  dead,  and  himself  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  went  looking  for  Cuchulain's  body.  And  when  they  saw  his  body  at  the  pillar-stone,  the  Grey  of  Macha  went  and  laid  his  head  in  Cuchulain's  breast :  "  That  body  is  a  heavy  care  to  the  Grey  of  Macha,"  said  Conall. 

Then  Conall  went  after  the  army,  thinking  in  his  own  mind  what  way  he  could  get  satisfaction  for  Cuchulain's  death.  For  it  was  a  promise  between  himself  and  Cuchulain  that  whichever  of  them  would  be  killed  the  first,  the  other  would  get  satisfaction  for  his  death. 

"  And  if  I  am  the  first  that  is  killed,"  said  Cuchulain  at  that  time,  "  how  long  will  it  be  before  you  get  satis-  faction for  me  ?  " 

"  Before  the  evening  of  the  same  day,"  said  Conall,  "  I  will  have  got  satisfaction  for  you.  And  if  it  is  I  that  will  die  before  you,"  he  said,  "  how  long  will  it  be  before  you  get  satisfaction  for  me  ?  " 

"  Your  share  of  blood  will  not  be  cold  on  the  ground,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  when  I  will  have  got  satisfaction  for  you." 

So  Conall  followed  after  Lugaid  to  the  river  Life. 

Lugaid  was  going  down  to  bathe  in  the  water,  but  he  said  to  his  chariot-driver :  "  Look  out  there  over  the  plain,  for  fear  would  any  one  come  at  us  unknown." 

The  chariot-driver  looked  around  him.  "  There  is  a  man  coming  on  us,"  he  said,  "and  it  is  in  a  great  hurry  he  is  coming  ;  and  you  would  think  he  has  all  the  ravens  in  Ireland  flying  over  his  head,  and  there  are  flakes  of  snow  speckling  the  ground  before  him." 

"  It  is  not  in  friendship  the  man  comes  that  is  coming 


342  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

like  that,"  said  Lugaid.  "  It  is  Conall  Cearnach  it  is,  with  Dub-dearg,  and  the  birds  that  you  see  after  him,  they  are  the  sods  the  horse  has  scattered  in  the  air  from  his  hoofs,  and  the  flakes  of  snow  that  are  speckHng  the  ground  before  him,  they  are  the  froth  that  he  scatters  from  his  mouth  and  from  the  bit  of  his  bridle.  Look  again,"  said  Lugaid,  "  and  see  what  way  is  he  coming."  "It  is  to  the  ford  he  is  coming,  the  same  way  the  army  passed  over,"  said  the  chariot-driver.  "  Let  him  pass  by  us,"  said  Lugaid,  "  for  I  have  no  mind  to  fight  with  him."  But  when  Conall  came  to  the  middle  of  the  ford,  he  saw  Lugaid  and  his  chariot-driver,  and  he  went  over  to  them.  "  Welcome  is  the  sight  of  a  debtor's  face,"  said  Conall.  "  The  man  you  owe  a  debt  to  is  asking  payment  of  you  now,  and  I  myself  am  that  man,"  he  said,  "  for  the  sake  of  my  comrade,  Cuchulain,  that  you  killed.  And  I  am  standing  here  now,  to  get  that  debt  paid." 

They  agreed  then  to  fight  it  out  on  the  plain  of  Magh  Argetnas,  and  in  the  fight  Conall  wounded  Lugaid  with  his  spear.  From  that  they  went  to  a  place  called  Ferta  Lugdac.  "  I  would  like  that  you  would  give  me  fair  play,"  said  Lugaid.  "  What  fair  play  ? "  said  Conall  Cearnach. 

"  That  you  and  I  should  fight  with  one  hand,"  said  he,  "  for  I  have  the  use  of  but  one  hand." 

"  I  will  do  that,"  said  Conall.  Then  Conall's  hand  was  bound  to  his  side  with  a  cord,  and  then  they  fought  for  a  long  time,  and  one  did  not  get  the  better  of  the  other.  And  when  Conall  was  not  gaining  on  him,  his  horse,  Dub-dearg,  that  was  near  by,  came  up  to  Lugaid,  and  took  a  bite  out  of  his  side. 

"  Misfortune  on  me,"  said  Lugaid,  "  it  is  not  right  or  fair  that  is  of  you,  Conall." 

"  It  was  for  myself  I  promised  to  do  what  is  right  and  fair,"  said  Conall.  "  I  made  no  promise  for  a  beast,  that  is  without  training  and  without  sense." 


THENEWSATEMAIN  343 

"  It  is  well  I  know  you  will  not  leave  me  till  you  take  my  head,  as  I  took  Cuchulain's  head  from  him,"  said  Lugaid.  "  Take  it,  then,  along  with  your  own  head.  Put  my  kingdom  with  your  kingdom,  and  my  courage  with  your  courage ;  for  I  would  like  that  you  would  be  the  best  champion  in  Ireland." 

Then  Conall  made  an  end  of  him,  and  he  went  back,  bringing  Cuchulain's  head  along  with  him  to  the  pillar-  stone  where  his  body  was. 

And  by  that  time  Emer  had  got  word  of  all  that  had  happened,  and  that  her  husband  had  got  his  death  by  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  by  the  powers  of  the  children  of  Calatin.  And  it  was  Levarcham  brought  her  the  story,  for  Conall  Cearnach  had  met  her  on  his  way,  and  had  bade  her  go  and  bring  the  news  to  Emain  Macha ;  and  there  she  found  Emer,  and  she  sitting  in  her  upper  room,  looking  over  the  plain  for  some  word  from  the  battle. 

And  all  the  women  came  out  to  meet  Levarcham,  and  when  they  heard  her  story,  they  made  an  outcry  of  grief  and  sharp  cries,  with  loud  weeping  and  burning  tears  ;  and  there  were  long  dismal  sounds  going  through  Emain,  and  the  whole  country  round  was  filled  with  crying.  And  Emer  and  her  women  went  to  the  place  where  Cuchulain's  body  was,  and  they  gathered  round  it  there,  and  gave  themselves  to  crying  and  keening. 

And  when  Conall  came  back  to  the  place,  he  laid  the  head  with  the  body  of  Cuchulain,  and  he  began  to  lament  along  with  them,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  It  is  Cuchulain  had  prosperity  on  him,  a  root  of  valour  from  the  time  he  was  but  a  soft  child  ;  there  never  fell  a  better  hero  than  the  hero  that  fell  by  Lugaid  of  the  Lands.  And  there  are  many  are  in  want  of  you,"  he  said,  "  and  until  all  the  chief  men  of  Ireland  have  fallen  by  me,  it  is  not  fitting  there  should  ever  be  peace. 

"It  is  grief  to  me,  he  to  have  gone  into  the  battle 


344  DEATH    OF   CUCHULAIN 

without  Conall  being  at  his  side;  it  was  a  pity  for  him  to  go  there  without  my  body  beside  his  body.  Och  !  it  is  he  was  my  foster-son,  and  now  the  ravens  are  drinking  his  blood  ;  there  will  not  be  either  laughter  or  mirth,  since  the  Hound  has  gone  astray  from  us." 

"  Let  us  bury  Cuchulain  now,"  said  Emer.  "  It  is  not  right  to  do  that,"  said  Conall,  "until  I  have  avenged  him  on  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  it  is  a  great  shouting  I  hear  about  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  and  it  is  full  the  country  is  of  crying  after  Cuchulain ;  and  it  is  good  at  keeping  the  country  and  watching  the  boundaries  the  man  was  that  is  here  before  me,  a  cross-hacked  body  in  a  pool  of  blood.  And  it  is  well  it  pleased  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi,  to  be  at  the  killing  of  Cuchulain,  for  it  was  Cuchu-  lain killed  the  chiefs  and  the  children  of  Deaguid  round  Famain,  son  of  Foraoi,  and  round  Curoi,  son  of  Daire  himself.  And  this  shouting  has  taken  away  my  wits  and  my  memory  from  me,"  he  said,  "  and  it  is  hard  for  me,  Cuchulain  not  to  answer  these  cries,  and  I  to  be  without  him  now  ;  for  there  is  not  a  champion  in  Ireland  that  was  not  in  dread  of  the  sword  in  his  hand.  And  it  is  broken  in  halves  my  heart  is  for  my  brother,  and  I  will  bring  my  revenge  through  Ireland  now,  and  I  will  not  leave  a  tribe  without  wounding,  or  true  blood  without  spilling,  and  the  whole  world  will  be  told  of  my  rout  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,  until  the  men  of  Munster  and  Connaught  and  Leinster  will  be  crying  for  the  rising  they  made  against  him.  And  without  the  spells  of  the  children  of  Calatin,  the  whole  of  them  would  not  have  been  able  to  do  him  to  death." 

After  that  complaint,  rage  and  madness  came  on  Conall,  and  he  went  forward  in  his  chariot  to  follow  after  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  the  same  way  as  he  had  followed  after  Lugaid. 

And  Emer  took  the  head  of  Cuchulain  in  her  hands,  and  she  washed  it  clean,  and  put  a  silk  cloth  about  it. 


EMER'S   COMPLAINT  345 

and  she  held  it  to  her  breast ;  and  she  began  to  cry  heavily  over  it,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  Ochone ! "  said  she,  "  it  is  good  the  beauty  of  this  head  was,  though  it  is  low  this  day,  and  it  is  many  of  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  world  would  be  keening  it  if  they  knew  the  way  it  is  now,  and  the  poets  and  the  Druids  of  Ireland  and  of  Alban ;  and  many  were  the  goods  and  the  jewels  and  the  rents  and  the  tributes  that  you  brought  home  to  me  from  the  countries  of  the  world,  with  the  courage  and  the  strength  of  your  hands ! " 

And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  Och,  head !  Ochone,  O  head  !  you  gave  death  to  great  heroes,  to  many  hundreds  ;  my  head  will  lie  in  the  same  grave,  the  one  stone  will  be  made  for  both  of  us 

"  Och,  hand !  Ochone,  hand  that  was  once  gentle.  It  is  often  it  was  put  under  my  head  ;  it  is  dear  that  hand  was  to  me  ! 

"  Dear  mouth  i  Ochone,  kind  mouth  that  was  sweet-  voiced  telling  stories  ;  since  the  time  love  first  came  on  your  face,  you  never  refused  either  weak  or  strong ! 

"  Dear  the  man,  dear  the  man,  that  would  kill  the  whole  of  a  great  host;  dear  his  cold  bright  hair,  and  dear  his  bright  cheeks  ! 

"  Dear  the  king,  dear  the  king,  that  never  gave  a  refusal  to  any ;  thirty  days  it  is  to-night  since  my  body  lay  beside  your  body. 

"  Och,  two  spears  !  Ochone,  two  spears  !  Och,  shield  !  Och,  deadly  sword !  Let  them  be  given  to  Conall  of  the  battles  ;  there  was  never  any  wage  given  like  that. 

"  I  am  glad,  I  am  glad,  Cuchulain  of  Muirthemne,  I  never  brought  red  shame  on  your  face,  for  any  un-  faithfulness against  you. 

"  Happy   arc   they,  happy  are  they,  who   will    never 


346  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

hear   the  cuckoo  again    for  ever,  now  that  the  Hound  has  died  from  us. 

"  I  am  carried  away  like  a  branch  on  the  stream ;  I  will  not  bind  up  my  hair  to-day.  From  this  day  I  have  nothing  to  say  that  is  better  than  Ochone ! " 

And  then  she  said  :  "It  is  long  that  it  was  showed  to  me  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  that  Cuchulain  would  fall  by  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  it  appeared  to  me  Dundealgan  to  be  falling  to  the  ground,  and  his  shield  to  be  split  from  lip  to  border,  and  his  sword  and  his  spears  broken  in  the  middle,  and  I  saw  Conall  doing  deeds  of  death  before  me,  and  myself  and  yourself  in  the  one  death.  And  oh  !  my  love,"  she  said,  "  we  were  often  in  one  another's  company,  and  it  was  happy  for  us  ;  for  if  the  world  had  been  searched  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  sunset,  the  like  would  never  have  been  found  in  one  place,  of  the  Black  Sainglain  and  the  Grey  of  Macha,  and  Laeg  the  chariot-driver,  and  myself  and  Cuchulain.  And  it  is  breaking  my  heart  is  in  my  body,  to  be  listening  to  the  pity  and  the  sorrowing  of  women  and  men,  and  the  harsh  crying  of  the  young  men  of  Ulster  keening  Cuchulain,  and  Ulster  to  be  in  its  weakness,  and  without  strength  to  revenge  itself  upon  the  men  of  Ireland." 

And  after  she  had  made  that  complaint,  she  brought  Cuchulain's  body  to  Dundealgan ;  and  they  all  cried  and  keened  about  him  until  such  time  as  Conall  Cearnach  came  back  from  making  his  red  rout  through  the  army  of  the  men  of  Ireland. 

For  he  was  not  satisfied  to  make  a  slaughter  of  the  men  of  Munster  and  Connaught,  without  reddening  his  hand  in  the  blood  of  the  men  of  Leinster  as  well. 

And  when  he  had  done  that,  he  came  to  Dundealgan,  and  his  men  along  with  him,  but  they  made  no  rejoicing  when  they  went  back  that  time.     And  he  brought  the 


LAY   OF   THE   HEADS  347 

heads  of  the  men  of  Ireland  along  with  him  in  a  gad,  and  he  laid  them  out  on  the  green  lawn,  and  the  people  of  the  house  gave  three  great  shouts  when  they  saw  the  heads.  And  Emer  came  out,  and  when  she  saw  Conall  Cearnach,  she  said  :  "  My  great  esteem  and  my  wel-  come before  you,  king  of  heroes,  and  may  your  many  wounds  not  be  your  death  ;  for  you  have  avenged  the  treachery  done  on  Ulster,  and  now  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  make  our  grave,  and  to  lay  us  together  in  the  grave,  for  I  will  not  live  after  Cuchulain. 

"  And  tell  me,  Conall,"  she  said,  "  whose  are  those  heads  all  around  on  the  lawn,  and  which  of  the  great  men  of  Ireland  did  they  belong  to  ?  " 

And  she  was  asking,  and  Conall  was  answering,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  Tell  me,  Conall,  whose  are  those  heads,  for  surely  you  have  reddened  your  arms  with  them.  Tell  me  the  names  of  the  men  whose  heads  are  there  upon  the  ground." 

And  Conall  said :  "  Daughter  of  Forgall  of  the  Horses,  young  Emer  of  the  sweet  words,  it  is  in  revenge  for  the  Hound  of  Feats  I  brought  these  heads  here  from  the  south." 

"  Whose  is  the  great  black  head,  with  the  smooth  cheek  redder  than  a  rose ;  it  is  at  the  far  end,  on  the  left  side,  the  head  that  has  not  changed  its  colour  ?  " 

"  It  is  the  head  of  the  king  of  Meath,  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre  of  Swift  Horses  ;  I  brought  his  head  with  me  from  far  off,  in  revenge  for  my  own  foster-son." 

"  Whose  is  that  head  there  before  me,  with  soft  hair,  with  smooth  eyebrows,  its  eyes  like  ice,  its  teeth  like  blossoms  ;  that  head  is  more  beautiful  in  shape  than  the  others  ?  " 

"  A  son  of  Maeve  ;  a  destroyer  of  harbours,  yellow-  haired  Maine,  man  of  horses  ;  I  left  his  body  without  a  head ;  all  his  people  fell  by  my  hand." 


348  DEATH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

"O  great  Conall,  who  did  not  fail  us,  whose  head  is  this  you  hold  in  your  hand  ?  Since  the  Hound  of  Feats  is  not  living,  what  do  you  bring  in  satisfaction  for  his  head  ?  " 

"  The  head  of  the  son  of  Fergus  of  the  Horses,  a  destroyer  in  every  battle-field,  my  sister's  son  of  the  narrow  tower  ;  I  have  struck  his  head  from  his  body." 

"  Whose  is  that  head  to  the  west,  with  fair  hair,  the  head  that  is  spoiled  with  grief?  I  used  to  know  his  voice  ;  I  was  for  a  while  his  friend." 

"  That  is  he  that  struck  down  the  Hound,  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi  of  the  Rhymes.  His  body  was  laid  out  straight  and  fair,  I  struck  his  head  off  afterwards." 

"  Whose  are  those  two  heads  farther  out,  great  Conall  of  good  judgment  ?  For  the  sake  of  your  friendship,  do  not  hide  the  names  of  the  men  put  down  by  your  arms." 

"  The  heads  of  Laigaire  and  Clar  Cuilt,  two  men  that  fell  by  my  wounds.  It  was  they  wounded  faithful  Cuchu-  lain ;  I  made  my  weapons  red  in  their  blood." 

"Whose  are  those  heads  farther  to  the  east,  great  Conall  of  bright  deeds?  The  hair  of  the  two  is  of  the  one  colour  ;  their  cheeks  are  redder  than  a  calf's  blood." 

"  Brave  Cullain  and  hardy  Cunlaid,  two  that  were  used  to  overcome  in  their  anger.  There  to  the  east,  Emer,  are  their  heads ;  I  left  their  bodies  in  a  red  pool." 

"  Whose  are  those  three  heads  with  evil  looks  I  see  before  me  to  the  north  ?  Their  faces  blue,  their  hair  black  ;  even  hard  Conall's  eye  turns  from  them." 

"  Three  of  the  enemies  of  the  Hound,  daughters  of  Calatin,  wise  in  enchantments  ;  they  are  the  three  witches  killed  by  me,  their  weapons  in  their  hands." 

'  O  great  Conall,  father  of  kings,  whose  is  that  head  that  would  overcome  in  the  battle  ?     His  bushy  hair  is 


DEATHOFEMER  349 

gold-yellow ;  his  head-dress  is  smooth  and  white  like  silver." 

"  It  is  the  head  of  the  son  of  Red-Haired  Ross,  son  of  Necht  Min,  that  died  by  my  strength.  This,  Emer,  is  his  head  ;  the  high  king  of  Leinster  of  Speckled  Swords." 

"  O  great  Conall,  change  the  story.  How  many  of  the  men  that  harmed  him  fell  by  your  hand  that  does  not  fail,  in  satisfaction  for  the  head  of  Cuchulain?" 

"  It  is  what  I  say,  ten  and  seven  scores  of  hundreds  is  the  number  that  fell,  back  to  back,  by  the  anger  of  my  hard  sword  and  of  my  people." 

"  O  Conall,  what  way  are  they,  the  women  of  Ireland,  after  the  Hound  ?  Are  they  mourning  the  son  of  Sualtim  ?  are  they  showing  respect  through  their  grief?  " 

"O  Emer,  what  shall  I  do  without  my  Cuchulain,  my  fine  nurseling,  going  in  and  out  from  me,  to-  night ?  " 

"  O  Conall,  lift  me  to  the  grave.  Raise  my  stone  over  the  grave  of  the  Hound  ;  since  it  is  through  grief  for  him  I  go  to  death,  lay  my  mouth  to  the  mouth  of  Cuchulain. 

"  I  am  Emer  of  the  Fair  Form  ;  there  is  no  more  vengeance  for  me  to  find  ;  I  have  no  love  for  any  man.  It  is  sorrowful  my  stay  is  after  the  Hound." 

And  after  that  Emer  bade  Conall  to  make  a  wide,  very  deep  grave  for  Cuchulain  ;  and  she  laid  herself  down  beside  her  gentle  comrade,  and  she  put  her  mouth  to  his  mouth,  and  she  said :  "  Love  of  my  life,  my  friend,  my  sweetheart,  my  one  choice  of  the  men  of  the  earth,  many  is  the  woman,  wed  or  unwed,  envied  me  till  to-day :  and  now  I  will  not  stay  living  after  you." 

And  her  life  went  out  from  her,  and  she  herself  and  Cuchulain  were  laid  in  the  one  grave  by  Conall.  And  he  raised  the  one  stone  over  them,  and   he  wrote  their 


350  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

names  in  Ogham,  and  he  himself  and  all  the  men  of  Ulster  keened  them. 

But  the  three  times  fifty  queens  that  loved  Cuchulain  saw  him  appear  in  his  Druid  chariot,  going  through  Emain  Macha ;  and  they  could  hear  him  singing  the  music  of  the  Sidhe. 


THE    END 


NOTE   BY    W.   B.   YEATS    ON    THE    CONVER-  SATION   OF    CUCHULAIN    AND    EMER. 

(Page  23). 

This  conversation,  so  full  of  strange  mythological  information,  is  an  example  of  the  poet  speech  of  ancient  Ireland.  One  comes  upon  this  speech  here  and  there  in  other  stories  and  poems.  One  finds  it  in  the  poem  attributed  to  Ailbhe,  daughter  of  Cormac  Mac  Art,  and  quoted  by  O'Curry  in  "  MS.  Materials,'  of  which  one  verse  is  an  illusion  to  a  story  given  in  Lady  Gregory's  book : 

'*The  apple  tree  of  high  Aillinn,  The  yew  of  Baile  of  little  land,  Though  they  are  put  into  lays,  Rough  people  do  not  understand  them." 

One  finds  it  too  in  the  poems  which  Brian,  Son  of  Tuireann,  chanted  when  he  did  not  wish  to  be  wholly  understood.  "  That  is  a  good  poem,  but  I  do  not  understand  a  word  of  its  meaning,"  said  the  kings  before  whom  he  chanted  ;  but  his  obscurity  was  more  in  a  roundabout  way  of  speaking  than  in  mythological  allusions.  There  is  a  description  of  a  banquet,  quoted  by  Professor  Kuno  Meyer,  where  hens'  eggs  are  spoken  of  as  "  gravel  of  Glenn  Ai,"  and  leek,  as  "  a  tear  of  a  fair  woman,"  and  some  eatable  sea-  weed, dulse,  perhaps,  as  a  "net  of  the  plains  of  Rein" — that  is  to  say,  of  the  sea — and  so  on.  He  quotes  also  a  poem  that  calls  the  sallow,  "  the  strength  of  bees,"  and  the  hawthorn  "  the  barking  of  hounds,"  and  the  gooseberry  bush  "  the  sweetest  of  trees,"  and  the  yew,  "the  oldest  of  trees." 

This    poet    speech    somewhat    resembles  the   Icelandic    court 

poetry,  as  it  is  called,  which  certainly  required  alike  for  the  writing 

and  understanding  of  it  a  great  traditional  culture.     Its  descriptions 

of  shields  and  tapestry,  and  its  praises  of  Kings,  that  were  first 

written,  it  seems,  about  the  tenth  century,  depended  for  their  effects 

on  just  this  heaping  up  of  mythological  allusions,  and  the  "Eddas" 

?5l 


352  NOTES 

were  written  to  be  a  granary  for  the  makers  of  such  poems.  But  by  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  they  have  come  to  be  as  irritating  to  the  new  Christian  poets  and  writers  who  stood  outside  their  tradition,  as  are  the  more  esoteric  kinds  of  modern  verse  to  unlettered  readers.  They  were  called  "  obscure,"  and  "  speaking  in  riddles,"  and  the  like. 

It  has  sometimes  been  thought  that  the  Irish  poet  speech  was  indeed  but  a  copy  of  this  court  poetry,  but  Professor  York  Powell  contradicts  this,  and  thinks  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Irish  poems  influenced  the  Icelandic,  and  made  them  more  mythological  and  obscure. 

I  am  not  scholar  enough  to  judge  the  Scandinavian  verse,  but  the  Irish  poet  speech  seems  to  me  at  worst  an  over-abundance  of  the  esoterism  which  is  an  essential  element  in  all  admirable  literature,  and  I  think  it  a  folly  to  make  light  of  it,  as  a  recent  writer  has  done.  Even  now,  verse  no  less  full  of  symbol  and  myth  seems  to  me  as  legitimate  as,  let  us  say,  a  religious  picture  full  of  symbolic  detail,  or  the  symbolic  ornament  of  a  Cathedral. 

Nash's— 

"  Brightness  falls  from  the  air.  Queens  have  died  young  and  fair,  Dust  hath  closed  Helen's  eye  " — 

must  seem  as  empty  as  a  Scald's  song,  or  the  talk  of  Cuchulain  and  Emer,  to  one  who  has  never  heard  of  Helen,  or  even  to  one  who  did  not  fall  in  love  with  her  when  he  was  a  young  man.  And  if  we  were  not  accustomed  to  be  stirred  by  Greek  myth,  even  with-  out remembering  it  very  fully,  "Berenice's  ever  burning  hair'  would  not  stir  the  blood,  and  especially  if  it  were  put  into  some  foreign  tongue,  losing  those  resounding  "  b's  "  on  the  way. 

The  mythological  events  Cuchulain  speaks  of  give  mystery  to  the  scenery  of  the  tales,  and  when  they  are  connected  with  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  the  most  tremendous  of  mythological  battles,  or  anything  else  we  know  much  about,  they  are  full  of  poetic  meaning  or  historical  interest.  The  hills  that  had  the  shape  of  a  sow's  back  at  the  coming  of  the  Children  of  Miled,  remind  one  of  Borlase's  conviction  that  the  pig  was  the  symbol  of  the  mythological  ancestry  of  the  Firbolg,  which  the  Children  of  Miled  were  to  bring  into  subjection,  and  of  his  suggestion  that  the  magical  pigs  that  Maeve  numbered  were  some  Firbolg  tribe  that  Maeve  put  down  in  war.  And  everywhere  that  esoteric  speech  brings  the  odour  of  the  wild  woods  into  our  nostrils. 

The  earlier  we  get,  the  more  copious  does  this  traditional  and  symbolical  element  in  literature  become.     Till  Greece  and  Rome 


NOTES  353 

created  a  new  culture,  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  man,  all  that  we  understand  by  humanism,  nobody  wrote  history,  nobody  described  anything  as  we  understand  description.  One  called  up  the  image  of  a  thing  by  comparing  it  with  something  else,  and  partly  because  one  was  less  interested  in  man,  who  did  not  seem  to  be  important,  than  in  divine  revelations,  in  changes  among  the  heavens  and  the  gods,  which  can  hardly  be  expressed  at  all,  and  only  by  myth,  by  symbol,  by  enigma.  One  was  always  losing  oneself  in  the  unknown,  and  rushing  to  the  limits  of  the  world.  Imagination  was  all  in  all.  Is  not  poetry,  when  all  is  said,  but  a  little  of  this  habit  of  mind  caught  as  in  the  beryl  stone  of  a  Wizard  ? 


NOTES 

The  Irish  text,  from  which  the  greater  number  of  the  stories  in  this  book  have  been  taken,  has  been  published  either  in  Irische  Texte  or  the  Revue  Celtiqiie^  or  by  O'Curry  in  Atlantis  and  else-  where, and  I  have  worked  from  this  text,  comparing  it  with  the  translations  that  have  been  already  made.  In  some  cases,  as  in  the  greater  part  of  "  The  War  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,"  a  very  small  part  of  the  Irish  text  has  as  yet  been  printed,  and  I  have  had  to  work  by  comparing  and  piecing  together  various  translations. 

I  have  had  to  put  a  connecting  sentence  of  my  own  here  and  there,  and  I  have  condensed  many  passages,  and  I  have  sometimes  tried  to  give  the  meaning  of  a  formula  that  has  lost  its  old  meaning.  Thus  I  have  exchanged  for  the  grotesque  accounts  of  Cuchulain's  distortion — whicn  no  doubt  merely  meant  that  in  time  of  great  strain  or  anger  he  had  more  than  human  strength — the  more  simple  formula  that  his  appearance  changed  to  the  appearance  of  a  god.  In  the  same  way,  I  have  left  out  Levarcham's  distortion,  which  was  the  recognised  way  of  saying  she  was  a  swift  messenger. 

As  to  the  date  of  the  stories,  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  from  Mr  Alfred  Nutt's  "  Cuchulain,  the  Irish  Achilles"  :— 

"  It  suffices  to  say  that  we  possess  a  MS.  literature  of  which  Cuchulain  and  his  contemporaries  are  the  subject,  the  extent  of  which  may  be  roughly  reckoned  at  2000  8vo  pages.  The  great  bulk  of  this  is  contained  in  MSS.  which  are  older  than  the  twelfth  century,  or  which  demonstrably  are  copied  from  pre-twelfth-  century  MSS. ;  where  post-twelfth-century  versions  alone  remain,  the  story  itself  is  nearly  always  known  from  earlier  sources  ;  in  fact,  there  is  hardly  a  single  scene  or  incident  in  the  whole  cycle  which  has  reached  us  only  in  MSS.  of  the  thirteenth  and  following  centuries.  At  the  same  time  a  not  inconsiderable  portion  of  the  cycle  comes  before  us  altered  in  language,  and  to  some  extent  in  content,  style  of  narrative,  and  characterisation,  showing  that  the  saga  as  a  whole  remained  a  living  element  of  Irish  culture  and  participated  in  the  accidents  of  its  evolution. 


356  NOTES 

"  The  great  bulk  of  this  literature  is,  as  I  have  said,  certainly  older  than  the  twelfth  century  ;  but  we  can  carry  it  back  much  farther,  apart  from  any  considerations  based  upon  the  subject-  matter.  Arguments  of  a  nature  purely  philological,  based  upon  the  language  of  the  texts,  or  critical,  based  upon  the  relations  of  the  various  MSS.  to  each  other,  not  only  allow,  but  compel  us  to  date  the  redaction  of  the  principal  Cuchulain  stories,  substan-  tially in  the  form  under  which  they  have  survived,  back  to  the  seventh  to  ninth  centuries.  Whether  or  no  they  are  older  yet,  is  a  question  that  cannot  be  answered  without  preHminary  examina-  tion of  the  subject-matter.  In  the  meantime  it  is  something  to  know  that  the  Cuchulain  stories  were  put  into  permanent  literary  form  at  about  the  same  date  as  Beowulf,  some  loo  to  250  years  before  the  Scandinavian  mythology  crystallised  into  its  present  form,  at  least  200  years  before  the  oldest  Charlemagne  romances,  and  probably  300  years  before  the  earliest  draft  of  the  Nibe-  lungenlied.  Irish  is  the  most  ancient  vernacular  literature  of  modern  Europe,  a  fact  which  of  itself  commends  it  to  the  attention  of  the  student." 

A  critical  account  of  this  and  the  other  Irish  cycles  is  also  given  in  Dr  Douglas  Hyde's  "  Literary  History  of  Ireland." 

The  Tuatha  de  Danaan,  or  the  Sidhe,  so  often  mentioned,  were  the  divine  race,  the  people  of  the  Gods  of  Dana,  who  conquered  the  Fomor,  the  powers  of  darkness  and  their  helpers  the  Firbolgs,  in  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  and  possessed  Ireland  until  they  were  in  their  turn  conquered  by  the  children  of  the  Gael,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Sons  of  Miled.  Then  they  became  invisible,  and  made  their  home  in  hills  and  raths. 

The  Morrigu  was  their  goddess  of  battle,  and  Angus  Og,  Son  of  the  Dagda,  their  god  of  youth  and  love,  and  Lugh,  the  Master  of  many  Arts,  their  Hermes,  their  Apollo,  and  Manannan,  Son  of  Lir,  their  Sea-God,  or,  as  some  say,  the  sea  itself. 

The  spelling  of  Irish  names  for  English  readers  is  always  a  difficulty.  I  have  not  gone  by  any  fixed  rule,  but  have  taken  the  spelling  of  names  from  various  good  authorities.  As  to  pronuncia-  tion, the  modern  is  generally  used,  but  we  know  so  little  what  the  ancient  pronunciation  was,  that  we  are  left  some  freedom,  and  some  words  have  taken  a  shape  from  English-speaking  generations,  that  it  is  hard  to  change.  Teamhair,  for  instance,  has  become  Tara  through  a  mistaken  use  of  the  genitive  ;  Muirthemne  is  called  by  Irish  speakers  "  Mur-hev-na,"  but  others  call  it  Muir'them-rae, 


NOTES 


357 


and  I  am  inclined  to  prefer  this  for  the  charm  of  its  sound,  and  I  do  not  see  any  stronger  reason  against  using  it  than  against  sounding  as  we  do  the  "s"  in  Paris.  After  all,  it  has  not  yet  been  definitely  settled  whether  Trafalgar  is  to  be  spoken  in  the  Spanish  or  the  English  way  ;  English  poets  have  given  it  one  or  the  other  emphasis.  This  is  the  approximate  pronunciation  of  some  of  the  more  difficult  names  : — 


Aedh 

Aoife 

Badb 

Bodb 

Cliodna 

Cobhthach  . 

Conchubar  . 

Cuailgne 

Cuchulain    . 

Dun  Sobairce 

Emain 

Eochaid 

Eocho 

Eoghan 

Fernmaighe 

Glen  na  (m)  Bodhar 

Inbhir 

Lugh 

Magh  Tuireadh 

Muirthemne 

Niamh 

Rudraige     . 

Sidhe 

Slieve  Suidhe  Laig 

Suibnes 

Teamhair    . 

Tuathmumain 


hen 


Ae  (rhyming  to  "  day  "). 

Eefa. 

Bibe  (as  "jibe"). 

Bove. 

Cleevna. 

Cowhach. 

Conachoor. 

Cooley. 

Cuhoolin,  or  Cu-huUin. 

Dom  Severka. 

A  win. 

Yohee. 

Yucho. 

Owen. 

Farney. 

Glen  na  Mower  (as  ** bower"). 

Inver. 

Loo. 

Moytirra. 

Mvir-hev-na. 

Nee-av. 

Rury. 

Shee. 

Slieve  see  lihon. 

Sivness. 

T'yower. 

Too-moon. 


I  give  below  some  names  of  places  that  can  still  be  identified- 


Ard  Inver   .  Argatros  Ath  Cliath  .  Ath  Firdiadh  Ath  Truim .  Beinn  Edair  Boinne  River  Bregia 


Mouth  of  the  Avoca,  Co.  Wicklow. 

On  the  Nore,  Co.  Kilkenny. 

Dublin. 

(Ferdiad's  Ford)  Ardee. 

Trim. 

Howth. 

The  Boyne. 

Bray. 


358 


NOTES 


Bri  Leith    .  Brug  na  Boinne  Carraige 

Cerna 

Clarthe  Cleitech 

Conaille-Muirthemne 

Cniachan    .  Cuailgne  Cuilsilinne  .  Drium  Criadh  Dundealgan  Dun  Rudraige  Dun  Scathach  Dun  Sobairce 

Emain  Macha 

Esro 

Fearbile 

Fenien 

Gairech  and  Ilgaireth 

Hill  of  Brughean  Mor 

Hy  Maine  . 

Inver  Colptha 

Loch  Cuan . 

Loch  Riach 

Leodus,  Cadd,  and  Ork 

Magh  Ai 

Magh  Breagh 

Magh  Mucrime 

Magh  Slecht 

Muirthemne 

Road  of  Midluachair 

Sionnan 

Sleamhain  of  Meath  Slieve  Breagh  Slieve  Cuilinn  Slieve  Fuad 


In  Co.  Longford. 

On  the  Boyne. 

Kerry.  /Probably   River   Muilchean,  Co.  \      Limerick. 

Clara,  near  Mullingar. 

On  the  Boyne.  /Between   the  Cooley   Mountains  \     and  the  Boyne. 

In  Co.  Roscommon. 

Cooley,  Co.  Louth. 

South-west  of  Kells. 

Drumcree,  Co.  Westmeath. 

Dundalk. 

Dundrum,  Co.  Down. 

Isle  of  Skye. 

Dunseveiick,  Co.  Antrim. 

Navan  fort,  near  Armagh.  A  description  and  plan  of  Emain  Macha  are  given  by  D'Arbois  de  Jubainville  in  Revue  Celtique,  vol.  xvi. 

Ballyshannon. 

In  Co.  Westmeath. 

At  Slieve  na  Man,  Co.  Tipperary. 

Two  hills  near  Mullingar.  /In     Parish     of    Drumany,     Co,  \^     Westmeath. 

/A  part  of  Roscommon,  bordering  (^     Sligo  and  Mayo. 

Estuary  of  the  Boyne. 

Strangford  Loch. 

In  Co.  Galway. 

Lewis,  Shetland,  and  Orkney. 

In  Co.  Roscommon. 

In  East  Meath. 

Near  Athenry,  Co.  Galway. 

Near  Ballymagauran,  Co.  Cavan.  fThe  part  of  Co.  Louth  bordering  -!  the  sea,  between  the  Boyne  1^     and  Dundalk. 

/The     north-eastern     road     from  \     Teamhair. 

The  Shannon. 

Near  Mullingar. 

Co.  Louth. 

Co.  Londonderry. 

Co.  Armagh. 


NOTES  359 


Slieve  Mis  . 

Slieve  Suidhe  Laighen 

Scigger  Isles 

Sudiam 

Tailltin 

Teamhair    . 

Tuathmumain 

Uaran  Garad 

Usnech 

Wave  of  Assaroe  .  Wave  of  Cliodna  .  Wave  of  Inbhir 


Co.  Kerry. 

Mount  Leinster. 

Faroe  Isles. 

Sweden. 

Telltown. 

Tara,  Co.  Meath. 

Thomond. 

River  Cruind.  /The    Hill    of    Usnogh  in  West  V     Meath. 

At  Ballyshannon. 

At  Glandore,  Co.  Cork. 

Mouth  of  the  Bann. 


The  following  is  a  list  of  the  authorities  I  have  been  chiefly  helped  by  in  putting  these  stories  together.  But  I  cannot  make  it  quite  accurate,  for  I  have  sometimes  transferred  a  mere  phrase,  sometimes  a  whole  passage  from  one  story  to  another,  where  it  seemed  to  fit  better.  I  have  occasionally  used  Scottish  Gaelic  versions,  as  in  the  account  of  Deirdre's  birth,  and  the  manner  of  her  death,  and  in  a  part  of  "The  Only  Son  of  Aoife."  "  O'Curry  "  stands  for  his  two  books,  "The  Manners  and  Customs  of  Ancient  Ireland,"  and  "MS.  Materials  for  Ancient  Irish  History,"  and  his  contributions  to  Atlantis. 

Birth  of  Cuchulain.— O'Curry ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopee  Celtiqtie  ;  Nutt,  Voj/a^e  of  Bran ;  Kuno  Meyer,  Revtte  Celtiqtie ;  Duvau,  Revue  Celtique ;  Windisch,  Irische  Texte ;  Stokes,  Irische  Texte. 

Boy  Deeds  of  Cuchlain.— Same  as  "War  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne." 

Courting  of  Emer. — Kuno  Meyer,  Revue  Celtique;  Kuno  Meyer,  Archceological  Review ;  Dr  Douglas  Hyde,  Literary  History  of  Ireland ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopie  Celtique  ;  O'Curry. 

Bricriu's  Feast,  and  The  Championship  of  Ulster. — Text,  with  Henderson's  translation,  published  by  Irish  Texts  Society ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopee  Celtique ;  O'Curry  ;  Windisch,  Irische  Texte. 

The  High  King  of  Ireland. — Whitley  Stokes,  Revue  Celtique;  O'Curry  ;  Zimmer,  Keltische  Studien. 

Fate  of  the  Children  of  Usnech, — Text  and  Translations  published  by  the  Society  for  the  Preservation  of  the  Irish  Language  ;  Hyde,  Literary  History  of  Ireland ;  Hyde,  Zeitschrift  Celt.  Philologie;  O'Curry  ;  Whitley  Stokes,  Irische  Texte ;  Windisch,  Irische  Texte;  Cameron,  Reliquae   Celticae ;  O'Flanagan,   Transactions  of  Gaelic 


36o  NOTES 

Society ;  O'Flanagan,  Reltquae  Celticae ;  Carmichael,  Transactions  of  Gaelic  Society ;  Ultonian  Ballads ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopie  Celtiqtie  ;  Dottin,  Revue  Celtiqiie. 

The  Dream  of  Angus. — Miiller,  Revue  Celtique. 

Cruachan. — Kuno  Meyer,  Revue  Celtique 