[BHD-cuchulain  —  part 2 of 5, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

on  her  breasts  and  on  her  shoulders.  The  sunlight  was  falling  on  her,  so  that  the  gold  and  the  green  silk  were  shining  out.  Two  plaits  of  hair  she  had,  four  locks  in  each  plait,  and  a  bead  at  the  point  of  every  lock,  and  the  colour  of  her  hair  was  like  yellow  flags  in  summer,  or  like  red  gold  after  it  is  rubbed. 

There  she  was,  letting  down  her  hair  to  wash  it,  and  her  arms  out  through  the  sleeve-holes  of  her  shift.  Her  soft  hands  were  as  white  as  the  snow  of  a  single  night,  and  her  eyes  as  blue  as  any  blue  flower,  and  her  lips  as  red  as  the  berries  of  the  rowan-tree,  and  her  body  as  white  as  the  foam  of  a  wave.  The  bright  light  of  the  moon   was   in  her  face,  the   highness  of  pride  in    her 

82 


ETA  IN  83 

eyebrows,  a  dimple  of  delight  in  each  of  her  cheeks,  the  light  of  wooing  in  her  eyes,  and  when  she  walked  she  had  a  step  that  was  steady  and  even,  like  the  walk  of  a  queen. 

Of  all  the  women  of  the  world  she  was  the  best  and  the  nicest  and  the  most  beautiful  that  had  ever  been  seen,  and  it  is  what  King  Eochaid  and  his  people  thought,  that  she  was  from  the  hills  of  the  Sidhe.  It  is  of  her  it  was  said,  "  All  are  dear  and  all  are  shapely  till  they  are  put  beside  Etain." 

Then  Eochaid  sent  his  people  to  bring  her  to  him,  and  when  she  came,  he  said,  "  Who  are  you  yourself,  and  where  do  you  come  from  ? "  "  It  is  easy  to  say  that,"  she  said  ;  "  I  am  Etain,  daughter  of  Etar,  king  of  the  Riders  of  the  Sidhe.  And  I  have  been  in  this  place  ever  since  I  was  born,  twenty  years  ago,  in  a  hill  of  the  Sidhe,  and  kings  and  great  men  among  them  have  been  asking  my  love,  but  they  got  nothing  from  me,  for  since  the  time  I  could  first  speak  I  have  loved  yourself,  and  given  you  a  child's  love,  because  of  the  great  talk  I  heard  of  your  grandeur.  And  when  I  saw  you  now  I  knew  you  by  all  I  had  heard  of  you  ;  and  so  I  have  reached  to  you  at  last." 

"  It  is  no  bad  friend  you  have  been  looking  for,"  said  Eochaid,  "  but  there  will  be  a  welcome  before  you,  and  I  will  leave  every  other  woman  for  you,  and  it  is  with  yourself  I  will  live  from  this  out,  so  long  as  you  keep  good  behaviour." 

Then  he  gave  her  the  bride  price,  and  she  lived  with  him  till  he  died.  But  one  time  she  was  brought  away  from  him  by  Midhir,  and  Eochaid  brought  her  back  by  force,  and  the  Sidhe  had  no  good  will  towards  him  after  that,  but  brought  a  revenge  on  his  house,  and  on  his  grandson,  Conaire. 

They  had  one  daughter,  that  was  called  by  the  same  name  as  her  mother,  Etain,  and  that  was  married  to 


84  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

Cormac,  king  of  Ulster.  And,  like  her  mother,  she  had  but  the  one  daughter,  and  there  was  vexation  on  Cormac  when  she  had  no  son,  and  he  bade  two  of  his  serving-men  to  bring  the  child  away  out  of  his  sight,  and  to  do  away  with  her.  So  they  brought  her  to  a  pit,  but  when  they  were  putting  her  in,  she  smiled  a  laughing  smile  at  them,  and  they  had  not  the  heart  to  harm  her.  So  they  brought  her  to  a  calf-shed  belong-  ing to  the  herds  that  minded  the  cattle  of  Eterscel,  great-grandson  of  lar,  king  of  Teamhair ;  and  they  cared  her  well  there,  and  there  was  not  a  king's  daughter  in  Ireland  was  nicer  than  herself.  And  they  made  a  little  house  of  wicker-work  for  her,  with  no  door,  but  only  a  window  high  up  in  it. 

King  Eterscel's  people  thought  it  was  provisions  the  herds  used  to  keep  in  that  house.  But  one  day  a  man  of  them  got  up  and  looked  in  through  the  window,  and  what  he  saw  was  the  nicest  and  the  most  beautiful  young  girl  of  the  whole  world. 

When  King  Eterscel  heard  that,  he  sent  his  people  to  break  into  the  house  and  to  bring  her  away,  and  ask  no  leave  of  the  cowherds.  For  he  had  no  child,  and  it  is  what  his  Druids  had  foretold,  that  it  was  a  woman  of  unknown  race  would  bear  him  a  son  ;  and  he  was  sure  this  was  the  woman  that  had  been  foretold  for  him. 

But  before  the  king's  messengers  reached  the  house  in  the  morning,  Etain  saw  a  bird  coming  in  at  the  window.  And  when  it  came  in,  it  left  its  birdskin  on  the  floor,  and  what  she  saw  was  a  man  before  her.  And  he  said,  "  The  king  is  sending  messengers  to  bring  you  to  him,  that  he  may  have  a  son.  But  it  is  to  me  you  will  bear  a  son,  and  no  bird  must  ever  be  killed  by  him.  And  his  name  will  be  Conaire,  son  of  Mess  Buachall,  that  is,  son  of  the  cowherd's  foster-child." 

Then  she  was  brought  away  to  the  king,  and  the  herds 


THEBULLFEAST  85 

that  had  fostered  her  went  with  her,  and  they  all  got  good  treatment.  And  it  is  what  she  asked,  when  her  son  Conaire  was  born,  that  he  might  be  brought  up  between  three  households,  the  household  of  her  own  fosterers,  and  of  the  two  honey-worded  Maines,  and  her  own.  And  she  said  that  if  any  of  the  men  of  Ireland  had  a  mind  to  give  help  in  his  bringing  up,  they  should  give  it  to  those  three  households. 

So  it  was  like  that  the  boy  was  reared,  and  there  were  five  other  boys  reared  along  with  him,  Ferger,  Fergel,  Ferogain,  Ferobain,  and  Lomna  Druth  the  Fool,  of  the  house  of  Dond  Dessa,  the  champion  of  the  army  from  Muclesi.  And  they  all  used  the  same  food,  and  their  clothing  and  their  armour  and  the  colour  of  their  horses  were  the  same. 

And  after  a  while  King  Eterscel  died,  and  there  was  a  bull  feast  made  ready  at  Teamhair,  as  the  custom  was,  to  find  out  by  it  the  best  man  for  the  kingship. 

It  is  this  way  the  bull  feast  was  made.  A  white  bull  was  killed,  and  one  man  would  eat  his  fill  of  the  meat  and  of  the  broth,  and  in  his  sleep  after  that  meal,  a  charm  of  truth  would  be  said  over  him  by  four  Druids.  And  whoever  he  would  see  in  his  sleep  would  be  king,  and  he  would  tell  them  his  appearance  ;  and  if  he  told  what  was  not  true,  his  lips  would  perish.  And  what  the  dreamer  saw  in  his  sleep  this  time  was  a  young  man,  and  he  naked,  and  having  a  stone  in  his  sling,  passing  the  road  to  Teamhair. 

Now  just  at  that  time  Conaire  was  out  playing  games  near  the  Life  River  with  his  foster-brothers,  and  the  cowherds  that  had  reared  him  came  and  bid  him  go  up  to  Teamhair  to  attend  the  bull  feast  that  was  going  on  there. 

So  he  left  his  foster-brothers  at  their  games,  and  turned  his  chariot  and  went  on  till  he  came  to  Ath  Cliath.     And  there  he  saw  great  white  speckled  birds, 


86  HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

the  best  in  size  and  appearance  he  had  ever  seen,  and  he  followed  after  them  till  his  horses  were  tired,  but  he  could  not  come  up  with  them,  for  they  always  kept  just  out  of  his  reach.  Then  he  got  down  from  his  chariot  and  took  his  sling  and  followed  them  to  the  strand,  and  they  went  into  the  sea  and  were  swimming  on  the  waves,  and  he  went  after  them  to  take  hold  of  them.  Then  they  left  their  birdskins,  and  it  was  men  he  saw  before  him,  and  they  turning  to  face  him  with  spears  and  swords. 

But  one  of  them  took  him  under  his  protection  and  said,  "  I  am  Nemglan,  king  of  your  father's  birds,  and  there  was  a  command  put  on  you  never  to  make  a  cast  at  birds,  for  there  is  not  one  here  but  should  be  dear  to  you."  "  I  never  knew  of  that  command  till  this  day,"  said  Conaire.  Then  Nemglan  said,  "  What  you  have  to  do  is  to  go  to  Teamhair  to-night,  to  the  bull  feast,  and  it  is  through  it  you  will  be  made  king,  for  it  is  a  man  that  will  go  naked,  and  having  a  sling  and  a  stone  in  his  hand,  along  one  of  the  roads  to  Teamhair,  towards  the  end  of  the  night,  that  will  be  king. 

"  And  your  bird  reign  will  be  great,"  he  said.  "  But  there  is  geasa^  that  is  a  bond,  on  you  not  to  do  these  things  : 

"  Do  not  go  righthandwise  round  Teamhair,  and  lefthandwise  round  Bregia ;  do  not  hunt  the  evil  beasts  of  Cerna ;  do  not  go  out  beyond  Teamhair  every  ninth  night ;  do  not  settle  the  quarrel  of  two  of  your  own  people  ;  let  no  robbery  be  done  in  your  reign  ;  do  not  sleep  in  a  house  you  can  see  the  firelight  shining  from  after  sunset ;  do  not  let  one  woman  or  one  man  come  into  the  house  where  you  are  after  sunset ;  do  not  let  three  Reds  go  before  you  to  the  House  of  Red." 

Then  Conaire  set  out  for  Teamhair,  naked,  and  having  a    stone    in    his   sling.     And    on   every   one   of 


CONA  I  RE'S   REIGN  87 

the  four  roads  to  Teamhair  there  were  three  kings  waiting,  and  having  clothing  with  them,  for  the  king  that  was  foretold.  And  when  the  three  kings  on  Conaire's  road  saw  him  coming,  they  met  him,  and  put  royal  clothes  on  him,  and  brought  him  in  a  chariot  to  Teamhair.  But  the  people  of  Teamhair  said  when  they  saw  him :  "  Our  bull  feast  and  our  charm  of  truth  were  not  worth  much,  when  it  is  only  a  young,  beardless  lad  they  have  brought  us ! " 

"  That  is  no  matter,"  said  Conaire,  "  for  it  is  no  dis-  grace for  you  to  have  a  young  king,  when  my  father  and  my  grandfather  held  the  same  place."  "That  is  true,"  they  all  said  then,  and  they  gave  him  the  king-  ship, and  he  said,  "  I  will  learn  of  wise  men,  that  I  myself  may  be  wise." 

Now  there  was  great  plenty  in  Ireland  through  his  reign  ;  seven  ships  coming  at  the  one  time  to  Inver  Colptha,  and  corn  and  nuts  up  to  the  knees  in  every  harvest,  and  the  trees  bending  from  the  weight  of  fruit,  and  the  Buais  and  the  Boinne  full  of  fish  every  summer,  and  that  much  law  and  peace  and  good-will  among  the  people,  that  each  one  thought  the  other's  voice  as  sweet  as  the  strings  of  harps.  And  the  wolves  themselves  were  held  by  hostages  not  to  kill  more  than  one  calf  in  every  pen.  There  was  no  thunder  or  storm  in  his  reign,  and  from  spring  to  harvest  there  was  not  as  much  wind  as  would  stir  a  cow's  tail,  and  the  cattle  were  without  keepers  because  of  the  greatness  of  peace.  And  in  his  reign  there  were  the  three  crowns  in  Ireland,  the  crown  of  flowers,  the  crown  of  acorns,  and  the  crown  of  wheatears. 

But  after  a  while  there  began  to  be  discontent  on  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa,  because  they  were  hindered  from  the  robbery  and  killing  there  used  to  be  in  the  old  time.  And  to'  vex  the  king,  and  to  see  what  would  he  do,  they  stole  three  things,  a  pig  and  a  bullock  and  a 


88  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

cow,  from  the  same  man  every  year  for  three  years.  And  every  year  the  countryman  would  come  to  the  king  to  make  his  complaint,  and  every  year  the  king  would  say,  "  It  is  to  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  you  should  go,  for  it  is  they  took  the  beasts."  But  when-  ever he  would  go  and  speak  to  them,  they  would  go  near  to  kill  him,  and  he  would  not  go  back  to  the  king  for  fear  he  might  be  vexed. 

So  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  went  on  with  their  robbery,  and  three  times  fifty  other  young  men  joined  with  them,  sons  of  the  great  men  of  Ireland. 

But  one  time  they  went  doing  their  bad  work  in  Connaught,  and  they  followed  a  swineherd  that  ran  from  them,  and  he  called  out  for  help,  and  the  people  gathered  to  him,  and  the  robbers  were  taken  and  brought  back  to  Teamhair. 

King  Conaire  was  asked  to  give  judgment  then,  and  it  is  what  he  said,  "  Let  every  father  of  a  robber  put  his  own  son  to  death,  but  let  my  foster-brothers  be  spared."  "  Give  us  leave,"  said  all  the  people,  "  and  we  will  put  them  to  death  for  you."  "  I  will  not  consent  to  that,  indeed,"  said  Conaire.  ''  Their  life  must  be  spared.  But  if  they  must  do  robbery,"  he  said,  "  let  them  go  across  the  sea,  and  do  it  on  the  men  of  Alban." 

So  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  and  their  men  were  driven  out  of  the  country,  and  some  of  the  Maines  went  with  them,  the  sons  of  Ailell  and  Maeve,  and  three  great  fighting  men  of  Leinster,  that  were  called  the  Three  Red  Hounds  of  Cualu,  and  they  brought  a  troop  of  wild  restless  men  with  them. 

They  set  out  then  in  their  ships,  and  when  they  were  out  on  the  rough  sea,  they  met  with  the  ship  of  Ingcel,  the  One-Eyed,  grandson  of  Cormac  of  Britain.  They  were  going  to  make  an  attack  on  him,  but  Ingcel  said,  "  It  would  be  best  for  us  to  come  to  an  agreement  together,  for  you  have  been  driven  out  of  Ireland,  and  I 


CONAIRE   BREAKS    HIS   BONDS    89 

myself  have  been  driven  out  from  Britain.  Let  us  make  this  agreement,"  he  said.  "  Let  you  come  and  spoil  the  people  of  my  country,  and  then  I  will  go  back  with  you  and  spoil  the  people  of  your  country." 

So  they  agreed  to  that,  and  they  cast  lots  as  to  where  they  would  go  first,  and  it  is  how  the  lot  fell,  that  they  should  go  first  to  Britain  with  Ingcel.  And  when  they  got  there  it  chanced  that  the  father  and  mother  and  the  seven  brothers  of  Ingcel  had  been  sent  for  to  the  house  of  the  king  of  the  district,  and  Ingcel  and  his  comrades  made  an  attack  on  them,  and  killed  them  all  in  the  one  night. 

Then  they  made  for  Alban,  and  there  they  did  every  sort  of  destruction  and  robbery.  And  at  last  they  turned  back  again  to  Ireland,  that  Ingcel  might  spoil  their  people  the  same  way  as  they  had  spoiled  his. 

Now  just  at  that  time  peace  was  after  being  broken  in  Ireland  by  the  two  Carbres  that  were  at  war  with  one  another  in  Tuathmumain  of  Munster,  and  no  one  was  able  to  put  an  end  to  their  quarrel  till  Conaire  himself  went  there  to  make  peace.  And  he  did  that,  although  by  doing  it  he  broke  two  of  the  bonds  put  on  him  by  the  Man  of  the  Waves.  And  on  his  way  back  to  Teamhair,  when  he  was  passing  Usnach  in  Meath,  he  and  his  people  thought  they  saw  fighting  from  east  to  west,  and  from  north  to  south,  and  armies  of  naked  men,  and  the  country  of  the  Ua  Neills  like  a  cloud  of  fire  around  them. 

"  What  is  that  ?  "  said  Conaire.  "  It  is  easy  to  know  that,"  said  his  people.  "  The  king's  law  has  broken  down,  and  the  country  is  on  fire."  "  What  way  had  we  best  go  ?  "  said  Conaire.  "  To  the  north-west,"  said  his  people. 

So  then  they  went  righthandways  round  Teamhair,  and  lefthandways  round  Bregia,  and  that  was  another  breaking  of  his  bonds,  and  they  met  with  beasts  and 


90  HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

hunted  them,  and  he  did  not  know  till  afterwards  that  they  were  the  evil  beasts  of  Cerna. 

And  it  was  the  Sidhe  had  made  that  Druid  mist  of  smoke  about  him,  because  he  had  begun  to  break  his  bonds. 

Great  fear  came  on  Conaire  then,  and  he  did  not  know  what  way  would  be  best  to  go,  and  they  went  on  by  the  sea-coast,  towards  the  south  by  the  road  of  Cualu.  And  then  Conaire  said,  "  Where  shall  we  go  to  spend  the  night  ?  " 

"  I  can  say  this  truly,"  said  Mac  Cecht,  one  of  his  fighting  men,  he  that  kept  three  of  the  Fomor  as  hostages  at  the  king's  court,  the  way  their  people  would  not  spoil  corn  or  milk  in  Ireland  through  his  reign  ;  "  it  is  oftener  the  men  of  Ireland  have  been  quarrelling  to  have  you  in  the  house,  than  you  have  been  straying  about,  look-  ing for  a  lodging."  "  I  have  a  friend  not  far  from  this,"  said  Conaire,  "  if  we  but  knew  the  way  to  his  house."  "  What  is  his  name  ?  "  said  Mac  Cecht.  "  Da  Derga  of  Leinster,  that  keeps  the  great  Inn,"  said  Conaire.  "  He  came  to  ask  a  gift  of  me,  and  it  is  not  a  refusal  he  met  with.  I  gave  him  a  hundred  head  of  cattle,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  fat  swine,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  cloaks  of  fine  cloth,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  swords  and  spears,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  red-gilded  brooches,  I  gave  him  ten  vats  of  good  brown  ale,  I  gave  him  three  times  nine  white  hounds  in  silver  chains,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  swift  horses.  I  would  give  him  the  same  if  he  would  come  again.  He  will  make  a  return  to  me  to-night,  for  it  would  be  a  strange  thing,  he  to  begrudge  me  anything  when  I  come  to  his  house." 

"  When  I  knew  his  house,"  said  Mac  Cecht,  "  the  road  we  are  in  now  led  straight  to  it.  Seven  doorways  there  are  in  it,  and  seven  sleeping-rooms  between  every  two  doorways."  "  We  will  go  to  the  house  with  all  our  people,"  said  Conaire.     "If  that  is  so,"  said  Mac  Cecht, 


THETHREEREDMEN  91 

"  I  will  go  on  first  till  I  light  a  fire  in  the  house  before  you." 

They  went  on  then  towards  Ath  Cliath,  and  pre-  sently a  man  with  hair  cut  short,  with  a  dreadful  appearance,  with  but  one  hand  and  one  foot  and  one  eye,  overtook  them.  A  forked  pole  of  black  iron  he  had  in  his  hand,  and  on  his  back  a  black-bristled  singed  pig,  and  it  squealing ;  and  there  was  a  woman  coming  after  him,  ugly  and  big-mouthed.  "  Welcome  to  you,  my  master,  Conaire,"  he  said.  "  It  is  long  we  have  known  of  your  coming."  "  Who  gives  that  welcome  ?  "  said  Conaire.  "  Fer  Coille,  the  Man  of  the  Wood,"  he  said,  "  and  his  black  pig  with  him,  that  you  may  not  be  fasting  to-night,  for  you  are  the  best  king  that  ever  came  into  the  world."  "  Leave  me  for  to-night,"  said  Conaire,  "and  I  will  go  to  you  any  other  night  that  pleases  you."  "  We  will  not,"  said  he  ;  "  but  we  will  go  to  the  place  you  will  be  in  to-night,  O  fair  little  master,  Conaire." 

So  he  went  on  towards  the  Inn,  and  his  wife  behind  him,  and  his  black  pig  squealing  on  his  back. 

After  that  Conaire  saw  before  him  three  horsemen  going  towards  the  Inn.  Red  cloaks  they  had,  and  red  shields,  and  red  spears  in  their  hands,  and  they  riding  on  red  horses. 

"What  men  are  these  before  me?"  said  Conaire.  "It  is  in  my  bonds  not  to  let  them  go  before  me  ;  three  Reds  to  the  House  of  Red,  that  is,  of  Derga.  Who  will  follow  them  and  bid  them  to  come  back  and  to  follow  after  me  ? "  "I  will  follow  them,"  said  Lefriflaith,  Conaire's  son. 

So  he  struck  his  horse  and  went  after  them,  but  he  could  not  come  up  with  them.  So  he  called  to  them  to  turn  back,  and  not  to  go  on  before  the  king.  And  he  did  this  three  times,  and  the  third  time  one  of  the  three  men  turned  his  head  and  said,  "  There  is  great 


92  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

news  before  us,  my  son ;  wetting  of  swords,  destroying  of  life,  shields  with  broken  bosses,  after  the  fall  of  night.  Our  horses  are  tired  ;  we  are  riding  the  horses  of  the  Sidhe  ;  although  we  are  alive  we  are  dead."  And  with  that  they  went  from  him,  and  he  went  back  to  his  father. 

"  You  did  not  keep  back  the  men,"  said  Conaire.  "  It  was  not  my  fault,  indeed,"  said  Lefriflaith.  Then  he  told  the  answer  they  had  given  him,  and  Conaire  and  his  people  were  not  well  pleased  to  hear  that,  and  uneasiness  came  on  them.  "  All  my  bonds  are  ended  to-night,"  said  Conaire,  "  and  those  three  Reds  before  me  are  sent  by  the  Sidhe." 

Now  while  he  and  his  people  were  in  the  road  of  Cualu  going  towards  the  Inn,  Ingcel  and  the  outlaws  of  Ireland  were  come  in  their  ships  to  the  coast  of  Bregia  against  Etair.  And  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  said,  "  Strike  the  sails  now,  and  let  some  light-footed  messenger  go  on  shore  and  see  can  we  keep  our  bargain  with  Ingcel,  and  give  him  a  spoil  for  the  spoil  he  gave  us."  "  Let  some  man  go,"  said  Ingcel,  "  that  has  the  gift  of  hearing  and  of  far  sight  and  of  judgment." 

"  I  have  the  gift  of  hearing,"  said  Maine  Milscothach.  "  I  have  the  gift  of  far  sight  and  of  judgment,"  said  Maine  Andoe.  "  It  is  as  well  for  you  to  go,  so,"  said  the  others. 

So  they  landed  and  went  on  till  they  came  to  Beinn  Etair,  and  they  stopped  there  to  try  what  they  might  see  and  hear.  "  Be  quiet  now,"  said  Maine  Milscothach,  "  and  listen."  "  What  do  you  hear  ? "  said  Maine  Andoe.  "  I  hear  the  coming  of  a  king,"  he  said,  "  and  look  now  and  tell  me  what  you  see."  "  I  see,"  he  said,  "  a  great  company  of  men,  travelling  over  hills  and  rivers.  Clothes  of  every  colour  they  have,  and  grey  spears  over  their  chariots,  and  swords  with 


THELONEWOMAN  93 

ivory  hilts  beside  them,  and  silver  shields  ;  and  I  swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,"  he  said,  "the  horses  they  have  with  them  are  the  horses  of  some  good  lord.  And  it  is  my  opinion  that  it  is  Conaire,  son  of  Eterscel,  and  a  good  share  of  the  men  of  Ireland  with  him,  that  is  travelling  the  road." 

With  that  they  went  back  and  told  their  comrades  what  they  had  heard  and  seen.  And  when  they  heard  it  they  brought  the  boats  to  shore  and  landed  on  the  strand  of  Furbuithe.  And  it  was  just  at  the  same  moment  Mac  Cecht  was  striking  a  spark  to  kindle  a  fire  at  the  Inn  before  the  High  King. 

Then  Conaire  came  to  the  lawn  of  the  Inn,  and  he  went  in,  and  his  people,  and  they  took  their  seats,  and  the  three  Red  Men  sat  down  along  with  them,  and  the  Man  of  the  Wood  that  was  a  swineherd  of  the  Sidhe  with  his  squealing  pig. 

And  Da  Derga  came  to  them  with  three  times  fifty  fighting  men,  every  one  of  them  having  a  long  head  of  hair  and  a  short  cloak  and  a  great  blackthorn  stick  with  bands  of  iron  in  his  hand.  "  Welcome,  my  master,  Conaire,"  said  Da  Derga,  "  and  if  you  were  to  bring  the  whole  of  the  men  of  Ireland  with  you,  there  would  be  a  welcome  before  them  all." 

After  the  fall  of  evening  they  saw  a  lone  woman  coming  to  the  door  of  the  Inn  ;  long  hair  she  had,  and  a  grey  woollen  cloak,  and  her  mouth  was  drawn  to  one  side  of  her  head.  She  came  and  leaned  up  against  the  doorpost,  and  she  threw  an  evil  eye  on  the  king  and  the  young  men  about  him.  "Well,  woman,"  said  Conaire,  "  if  you  have  the  Druid  sight,  what  is  it  you  see  for  us  ? "  "  It  is  what  I  see  for  you,"  she  said,  "  that  nothing  of  your  skin  or  of  your  flesh  will  escape  from  the  place  you  are  in,  except  what  the  birds  will  bring  away  in  their  claws.  And  let  me  come  into  the  house  now,"  she  said.     "  There  are  bonds  on  me,"  said 


94  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

Conaire,  "  not  to  let  one  woman  come  by  herself  into  the  house  after  the  setting  of  the  sun.  And  bring  her  out,"  he  said,  "  a  good  share  of  food  from  my  own  table,  but  let  her  stop  for  the  night  in  some  other  place." 

"If  the  king's  hospitality  is  gone  from  him,"  she  said,  "  and  if  it  is  the  way  with  him  not  to  have  room  in  his  house  for  one  lone  woman  to  be  fed  and  lodged,  I  will  go  and  get  food  and  lodging  from  some  better  man."  "  Let  her  in,  in  spite  of  my  bonds,"  said  Conaire,  when  he  heard  that.  So  they  let  her  in,  but  none  of  them  felt  easy  in  their  minds  after  what  she  had  said. 

Now  all  this  time  the  outlaws  were  on  their  way  to  the  Inn,  and  they  stopped  at  Leccaibcend  Slebe.  And  when  they  saw  the  great  light  that  was  shining  from  the  Inn  through  the  wheels  of  the  chariots  that  were  outside  the  doors,  Ingcel  said  to  Ferogain,  "  What  is  that  great  light  beyond?"  "It  is  what  I  think,"  said  Ferogain,  "  that  it  is  the  fire  of  Conaire,  the  High  King.  And  I  would  be  glad  he  not  to  be  there  to-  night, for  it  would  be  a  pity  if  harm  would  come  on  him,  or  his  life  be  shortened,  for  he  is  a  branch  in  its  blossom." 

"  It  is  good  luck  for  me,"  said  Ingcel,  "if  he  is  there.  Spoil  for  spoil.  It  is  no  worse  for  you  than  it  was  for  me  when  I  gave  up  my  father  and  mother  and  my  seven  brothers  and  the  king  of  my  country  into  your  hands."      "  That  is  true,  that  is  true,"  said  all  the  others. 

Then  every  man  of  them  brought  up  a  stone  from  the  strand  to  make  a  cairn,  as  they  were  used  to  do  before  they  would  make  an  attack  on  any  place,  to  know  by  it  afterwards  how  many  men  they  had  lost.  For  every  man  that  would  come  from  the  fight  would  take  his  stone  from  the  cairn,  and  the  stones  of  all  that  would  be  killed  would  be  left  there. 

After  that  they  held  a  council,  and  it  is  what  they  agreed,  that  one  man  should  go  and  spy  out  what  way 


INGCEL'S   REPORT  95 

things  were  at  the  Inn.  And  it  was  Ingcel  himself  went  to  do  that,  and  he  was  a  good  while  looking  in  by  the  seven  doors  of  the  house,  but  at  last  some  one  of  the  men  inside  caught  sight  of  him,  and  he  made  his  way  back  to  his  comrades,  where  they  were  all  sitting  down,  and  their  leaders  in  the  middle,  waiting  to  hear  his  news. 

"  Did  you  see  the  house,  Ingcel  ?  "  said  Ferogain.  "  I  did  see  it,"  said  Ingcel ;  "  and  whether  or  not  there  is  a  king  in  it,  it  is  a  royal  house,  and  I  will  take  it  as  my  share  when  the  time  comes."  "  You  may  do  that,"  said  Conaire's  foster-brothers.  "  But  we  will  not  go  against  it  before  we  know  who  is  in  it." 

"The  first  I  saw,"  said  Ingcel,  "was  a  large  man,  of  good  race,  with  bright  eyes,  with  hair  like  flax  ;  his  face  open,  wide  above  and  narrow  below  ;  with  modest  looks,  and  having  no  beard.  A  five-barbed  spear  in  his  hand,  and  a  shield  with  five  gold  circles  on  it.  Nine  men  he  had  about  him,  all  beautiful  and  all  alike,  so  that  you  would  think  they  had  the  one  father  and  mother.  Who  were  those  men,  Ferogain  ? "  he  said. 

"  It  is  easy  to  say  that,"  said  Ferogain.  "  That  was  Cormac  Conloingeas,  son  of  Conchubar,  the  best  fighter  behind  a  shield  in  all  Ireland,  but  he  is  modest  with  all  that.  And  those  were  his  nine  comrades  about  him  ;  they  have  never  put  men  to  death  because  of  their  poverty,  or  spared  them  because  of  their  riches.  He  is  a  good  leader  they  have  with  them.  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,  it  is  no  small  slaughter  they  will  make  before  the  Inn  to-night." 

"  It  is  a  pity  for  him  that  will  make  the  attack,"  said  Lomna  Druth,  the  Fool,  "because  of  that  man  only,  Cormac  Conloingeas.  And  if  I  had  my  way,"  he  said,  "  the  attack  would  not  be  made,  for  the  sake  of  that  man  alone  and  his  beauty  and  his  goodness." 

"You   will   not   be  able  to  hinder  it,  Lomna,"  said 


96  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

Ingcel.  '•  You  are  no  go-^a.  of  a  fighter ;  I  know  you  weii,  there  are  clouds  of  weakness  coming  on  yoiL  Xo  one,  whether  old  man  or  stoiy-teiler,  vi-ill  be  able  to  say  I  drew  back  from  this  fight  before  I  had  gone  through  with  it" 

"  It  is  well  enough  for  you,  Ingcel,"  said  Lomna  ;  "  you  will  escape  after  the  fight,  and  you  will  bring  away  the  head  of  a  strange  king  v^-ith  you,  but  as  for  myself,**  he  said,  "  it  is  my  head  will  be  the  first  to  be  tossed  to  and  fro  to-night" 

"  What  did  you  see  after  that  ?  "  said  Ferogain. 

"  I  saw  a  room  with  three  soft  young  boys  in  it  and  they  wearing  cloaks  of  silk  with  gold  brooches.  Long  jellow  hair  they  had,  as  curly  as  a  ram's  head  ;  a  golden  shield  and  a  candle  of  a  king's  house  over  each  of  them,  and  ever\-  one  in  the  house  humours  them-  Who  were  those,  Ferogain  ?  "  he  said 

But  Ferogain  was  cr>'ing  tears  down,  so  that  the  front  of  his  cloak  ^-as  wet,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  he  could  bring  out  his  voice,  '*  O  little  ones,*'  he  said  then,  "  I  have  good  reason  for  crying.  Those  are  the  three  sons  of  the  king,  Oball  and  Obline  and  Corpre  Findmor." 

"  There  is  grief  on  us  if  that  story  is  true,"  said  the  other  sons  of  Donn  Dessa ;  "  for  it  is  good  those  three  are.  They  are  as  mannerl}-  as  young  girls,  and  they  have  the  hearts  of  brothers,  and  the  courage  of  lions.  Who-  ever has  been  \^-ith  them  and  parts  from  them,  it  is  little  he  sleeps  or  eats  till  the  end  of  nine  days,  fretting  after  their  company.  It  is  a  pit>'  for  him  that  will  destroy  them." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  a  very  fair  man,  ha\-ing  a  golden  bush  of  hair,  the  size  of  a  reaping  basket  A  long,  hea\y  three-edged  sword  in  his  hand,  a  red  shield  speckled  with  rivets  of  white  bronze  between  plates  of  gold." 


CELTHAIR'S    SPEAR  97 

"  That  man  is  known  to  all  the  men  of  Ireland,"  said  Ferogain.  "  It  is  Conall  Cearnach,  son  of  Amergin,  and  he  is  the  man  Conaire  thinks  most  of  in  the  world ;  and  that  shield  in  his  hand  is  the  Lam-tapaid.  There  are  seven  doorways  in  that  inn,  and  when  the  attack  is  made,  Conall  Cearnach  will  be  at  every  one  of  them.  What  did  you  see  after  that,  Ingcel  ?  "  he  said. 

"  I  saw,"  he  said,  "  a  brown  big  man,  with  short  brown  hair  and  a  red  speckled  cloak,  and  a  black  shield  with  clasps  of  gold  ;  and  with  him  two  chief  men,  in  their  first  greyness,  and  black  swords  at  their  sides.  And  one  of  them  had  in  his  hand  a  great  spear,  with  fifty  rivets  through  it,  and  he  shook  it  over  his  head,  and  struck  the  haft  against  the  palm  of  his  hand  three  times,  and  then  he  plunged  it  into  a  great  pot  that  stood  before  them,  with  some  black  thing  in  it,  and  when  he  was  putting  it  in  there  were  flames  on  the  shaft.  Who  were  those  men,  Ferogain  ?  " 

"  That  brown  man  is  Muinremar,  son  of  Geirgind,  one  of  the  champions  of  the  Red  Branch.  And  another  is  Sencha,  the  beautiful  son  of  Ailell ;  and  the  man  with  the  spear  is  Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  and  the  spear  in  his  hand  is  Celthair's  Luin,  that  was  in  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  and  that  was  brought  from  the  east  by  the  three  children  of  Tuireann,  and  when  a  battle  is  coming  near,  it  flames  up  of  itself,  and  it  must  be  kept  quenched  in  a  vessel,  or  it  will  go  through  who-  ever has  it  in  his  hand." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  a  room  with  nine  men  in  it,  fair-haired  and  beautiful,  with  speckled  cloaks,  and  above  them  were  nine  bagpipes,  and  light  was  shining  from  the  ornaments  that  were  on  them." 

"  Those  are  the  nine  pipers  that  came  to  Conaire  out  of  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe  at  Bregia,"  said  Ferogain,  "  because  of  the  great  stories  about  him.  The  best  pipers  they  are  in  the  whole  world.     And  they  are  good  fighters,  but  to 

G 


98  HIGH   KING   OF   IRELAND 

fight  with  them  is  to  fight  with  a  shadow,  for  they  kill  but  cannot  be  killed,  because  they  are  from  the  Sidhe." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  three  very  big  men,  with  terrible  looks.  A  dress  of  rough  hair  they  had,  and  a  club  of  iron  with  chains  on  it  in  every  man's  hand.  There  was  sadness  on  them,  and  they  standing  alone,  and  every  one  in  the  house  avoiding  them.  Who  were  those,  Ferogain  ?  " 

Ferogain  was  silent  for  a  while,  and  he  said  then,  "  I  do  not  know  of  any  such  men  in  the  world,  unless  they  might  be  the  three  giants  Cuchulain  spared,  the  time  he  took  them  from  the  men  of  Falga,  he  would  not  let  them  be  killed  because  of  their  strangeness  ;  Conaire  bought  them  from  Cuchulain  after  that,  so  it  is  along  with  him  they  are." 

"  I  saw  nine  men  in  the  north  side  of  the  house,"  said  Ingcel,  "  having  very  yellow  manes  of  hair,  and  short  linen  dresses,  and  purple  cloaks  without  brooches ;  broad  spears,  and  red  curved  shields." 

"  I  know  those  men,"  said  Ferogain ;  "  three  royal  princes  of  Britain  that  are  with  the  king,  Oswald  and  his  two  foster-brothers,  Osbrit  of  the  Long  Hand  and  his  two  foster-brothers,  Lindas  and  his  two  foster-  brothers." 

"Three  red  men  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel;  "red  shields  above  them,  red  spears  in  their  hands,  their  three  red  horses  in  their  bridles  in  front  of  the  Inn." 

"  Those  are  the  three  champions  that  did  deceit  and  falsehood  among  the  Sidhe,"  said  Ferogain,  "  and  it  is*  the  punishment  was  put  on  them  by  the  king  of  the  Sidhe,  to  be  three  times  destroyed  by  the  King  of  Teamhair ;  and  Conaire  is  the  last  king  through  whom  they  will  be  destroyed  ;  yet  they  will  not  be  killed,  nor  will  they  kill  any  one.  It  is  to  work  out  their  own  destruction  they  are  come." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  a  big  man,  and  his 


CONAIRE   THE   KING  99 

hair  white,  and  the  shame  of  baldness  on  him,  and  gold  earrings  in  his  ears.  Nine  swords  he  had  in  his  hand,  and  nine  silver  shields,  and  nine  golden  apples.  He  was  throwing  each  of  them  upwards,  and  not  one  would  fall  on  the  ground,  but  each  of  them  rising  and  falling  past  each  other  like  bees  on  a  sunny  day.  But  as  I  looked  at  him,  he  let  all  fall  to  the  ground,  and  the  people  about  him  cried  out,  and  the  king  that  was  sitting  there  said  to  him,  'We  have  been  together  since  I  was  a  little  boy,  and  your  tricks  never  failed  till  to-night' 

"<  My  grief!'  he  said.  'Fair  master,  Conaire,  I  have  good  cause  for  it ;  an  unfriendly  eye  looked  at  me ;  there  is  some  bad  thing  in  front  of  the  Inn.' 

"  And  when  the  king  heard  that,  it  is  what  he  said  :  *  I  had  a  dream  in  my  sleep  a  while  ago,  of  the  howl-  ing of  my  dog  Ossar,  of  wounded  men,  of  a  wind  of  terror,  of  keening  that  overcame  laughter.' " 

"  That  was  Taulchinne,  Conaire's  juggler,"  said  Ferogain.  "  And  tell  me  now,"  he  said,  "  what  was  the  appearance  of  the  king?" 

"  Of  all  the  men  I  ever  saw  in  the  world,"  said  Ingcel,  "  he  is  the  best  in  shape,  and  the  most  beautiful ;  young  he  is,  and  wise  and  kinglike.  The  colour  of  his  hair  was  like  the  shining  of  purified  gold  ;  the  cloak  about  him  was  like  the  mist  of  a  May  morning,  changing  from  colour  to  colour,  every  colour  more  beautiful  than  another ;  a  wheel  brooch  of  gold  reaching  from  his  chin  to  his  waist ;  his  golden-hilted  sword  within  his  reach." 

"That  was  Conaire,  the  High  King,  indeed,"  said  Ferogain ;  "  and  it  is  he  is  the  greatest  and  the  best  and  the  comeliest  of  the  kings  of  the  whole  world,  and  there  is  no  fault  in  him,  either  as  to  wisdom  or  bravery  or  knowledge  or  words  or  worthiness.  Tender  he  is,  a  sleepy,  simple  man,  till  he  chances  on   some 


loo         HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

brave  thing  to  do,  but  when  his  anger  is  awaked,  the  champions  of  Ireland  and  of  Scotland  will  not  win  their  battle  so  long  as  he  is  against  them.  And  I  swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,  unless  drink  should  fail  him,  or  the  like,  that  man  alone  would  hold  the  Inn  till  help  would  gather  to  him  from  the  Wave  of  Cliodna  in  the  south,  to  the  Wave  of  Essruadh  in  the  north." 

"It  is  time  for  us  to  rise  up,"  said  Ingcel  then,  "and  to  get  on  to  the  house." 

So  with  that  the  outlaws  rose  up  and  went  on  to  the  Inn,  and  the  noise  of  their  voices  was  heard  about  it. 

"  Be  quiet  now  and  listen,"  said  Conaire.  "  What  is  that  we  hear  ?  " 

"  Fighting  men  about  the  house,"  said  Conall  Cearnach.  "  There  are  fighting  men  to  meet  them  here,"  said  Conaire.     "  They  will  be  wanted  to-night,"  said  Conall. 

Then  Lomna  Druth,  the  Fool,  broke  in  first  to  the  house,  and  the  doorkeepers  struck  off  his  head,  and  it  was  tossed  three  times  in  and  out  of  the  Inn,  just  as  he  himself  had  foretold. 

Then  they  all  attacked  one  another,and  Conaire  himself  went  out  with  his  people  and  killed  a  great  many  of  the  outlaws  outside.  And  three  times  the  Inn  was  set  on  fire,  and  three  times  it  was  put  out  again.  And  Conaire  got  to  his  arms  then,  for  he  had  not  got  them  in  the  first  attack,  and  he  went  out  again  and  made  a  great  slaughter,  so  that  the  outlaws  were  driven  back.  "  I  told  you,"  said  Ferogain,  "that  all  the  men  of  Ireland  and  of  Alban  could  not  take  the  house  till  Conaire's  rage  would  be  quenched."  "  It  is  short  his  time  will  be,"  said  the  Druids  that  were  along  with  the  outlaws.  And  what  they  put  on  him  by  their  enchantments  was  a  great  thirst,  so  that  he  went  back  to  the  house  and  called  for  a  drink.  ''  A  drink  to  me,  Mac  Cecht,"  he  said.  "  That  is  not  the  order  you  are  used  to  give  me,"  said 


CONAIRE'S   DEATH  loi 

Mac  Cecht.  "  What  I  have  to  do  is  to  keep  you  from  the  men  that  are  attacking  you  all  round  the  house  ;  ask  a  drink  of  your  steward  and  of  your  cup-bearers,"  he  said. 

Then  Conaire  called  to  his  cup-bearers  for  a  drink.  "  There  is  none,"  they  said,  "  for  every  drop  in  the  house  was  thrown  on  the  fire  to  put  it  out."  "  Get  me  a  drink,  Mac  Cecht,"  he  said  again  then  ;  "  for  if  I  am  to  die,  it  is  all  the  same  to  me  by  what  death  I  die." 

Then  Mac  Cecht  gave  a  choice  to  the  champions  of  Ireland  that  were  in  the  house,  would  they  go  out  and  look  for  a  drink  for  Conaire,  or  would  they  stop  in  the  house  and  defend  him.  And  Conall  Cearnach  called  out :  "  Leave  the  defence  of  the  king  to  us,  and  go  you  and  look  for  the  drink,  for  it  was  of  you  it  was  asked."  And  he  was  vexed  with  Mac  Cecht  for  putting  the  choice  to  them,  and  there  was  never  a  very  friendly  feeling  between  them  afterwards. 

Then  Mac  Cecht  went  to  look  for  a  drink,  and  he  brought  Conaire's  great  golden  cup  with  him,  and  an  iron  spit,  the  cauldron  spit,  in  his  other  hand. 

He  burst  out  on  the  outlaws,  and  attacked  them  with  blows  of  the  spit,  so  that  many  got  their  death ;  and  then  he  took  his  shield  and  made  a  round  with  his  sword  above  his  head,  and  cut  down  all  before  him,  and  got  through  the  whole  band. 

And  it  would  be  too  long  to  tell,  and  it  would  tire  the  hearers,  all  that  happened  after  that ;  the  people  of  the  Inn  coming  out  and  making  attacks,  and  some  of  them  getting  their  death,  and  the  most  part  making  their  escape.  And  at  last  there  were  none  left  in  the  Inn  with  Conaire  but  Conall,  and  Sencha,  and  Dubthach. 

Now  from  the  rage  that  was  on  Conaire,  and  the  greatness  of  the  fight  he  had  fought,  a  great  drouth  came  on  him  again,  and  such  a  fever  of  thirst,  and  no  drink  to  get,  that  he  died  of  it  in  the  end. 


102         HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

Then  the  other  three,  when  they  saw  the  High  King  was  dead,  went  out  and  cut  their  way  through  their  enemies,  and  got  away  with  their  lives,  but  if  they  did,  they  were  wounded,  and  hurt,  and  broken. 

And  Conall  Cearnach,  after  he  got  away,  went  on  to  his  father's  house,  and  but  half  his  shield  left  in  his  hand,  and  a  few  bits  left  of  his  two  spears.  And  he  found  Amergin,  his  father,  out  before  his  dun  in  Tailltin. 

"Those  are  fierce  wolves  that  have  hunted  you,  my  son,"  said  he.  "It  was  not  wolves  that  wounded  me,  but  a  sharp  fight  with  fighting-men,"  said  Conall.  "  Have  you  news  from  Da  Derga's  Inn  ? "  said  Amergin.  "  Is  your  lord  living  ?  "  "  He  is  not  living,"  said  Conall.  "  I  swear  b}'  the  gods  the  great  tribes  of  Ulster  swear  by,  the  man  is  a  coward  that  came  out  alive,  leaving  his  lord  dead  among  his  enemies,"  said  Amergin.  "  My  own  wounds  are  not  white,  old  hero,"  said  Conall.  And  with  that  he  showed  him  his  right  arm,  that  was  full  of  wounds.  "  That  arm  fought  there,  my  son,"  said  Amergin.  "That  is  true,"  said  Conall.  "There  are  many  in  front  of  the  Inn  now  it  gave  drinks  of  death  to  last  night" 

Now,  as  to  Mac  Cecht,  after  he  got  away  from  the  Inn,  he  went  on  to  the  well  of  Casair,  that  was  near  him  in  Crith  Cualann,  but  he  could  not  find  so  much  as  the  full  of  the  cup  of  water  in  it.  Then  he  went  on  through  the  night,  from  lake  to  lake,  and  from  river  to  river,  but  he  could  not  find  the  full  of  the  cup  of  water  in  any  one  of  them.  But  at  last  he  came  to  Uaran  Garad  on  Magh  Ai,  and  it  could  not  hide  itself  from  him,  and  he  filled  the  cup,  and  went  back  again,  and  reached  Da  Dergas  Inn  before  morning.  And  when  he  got  there,  he  saw  two  men,  and  they  striking  oflf  Conaire's  head  ;  and  Mac  Cecht  struck  oflf  the  head  of  one  of  them,  and  then  the  other   man  was   going   away  with 


THE    END   OF   CONAIRE  103 

the  king's  head,  and  he  took  up  a  stone  and  threw  it  at  him,  that  it  broke  his  back. 

Then  Mac  Cecht  stooped  down  and  poured  the  water  into  Conaire's  mouth  and  his  throat.  And  when  the  water  was  poured  in,  the  head  spoke  and  it  said  :  "  A  good  man  Mac  Cecht  is,  a  good  man,  a  good  champion  without  and  within.  He  gives  drink,  he  saves  a  king,  he  does  a  deed  ;  it  is  well  he  fought  at  the  door,  it  is  well  he  made  an  end  of  fighting  men.  It  is  good  I  would  be,  and  I  alive,  to  Mac  Cecht  of  the  great  name." 

And  it  was  after  that,  Mac  Cecht  brought  the  body  of  the  High  King  on  his  back  to  Teamhair,  and  buried  him  there  as  some  say.  And  he  himself  went  to  his  own  country,  into  Connaught.  And  the  place  he  stopped  in  was  called,  from  his  sharp  grief,  Magh  Bron-gear. 

And  there  was  no  High  King  chosen  to  rule  over  Ireland  for  a  good  many  years  after  that. 


VII  FATE    OF   THE   SONS   OF    USNACH 

"\TO\V  it  was  one  Fcdlimid,  son  of  Doll,  was  harper  '^  to  King  Conchubar,  and  he  had  but   one   child, 

and  this  is  the  story  of  her  birth. 

Cathbad,  the  Druid,  was  at  Fedlimid's  house  one  day.  "  Have  you  got  knowledge  of  the  future  ? "  said  Fedlimid.  "  I  have  a  little,"  said  Cathbad.  "  What  is  it  you  are  wanting  to  know?"  "I  was  not  asking  to  know  anything,"  said  Fedlimid,  "  but  if  you  know  of  anything  that  may  be  going  to  happen  me,  it  is  as  well  for  you  to  tell  me." 

Cathbad  went  out  of  the  house  for  a  while,  and  when  he  came  back  he  said  :  "  Had  you  ever  any  children?"  "I  never  had,"  said  Fedlimid,  "and  the  wife  I  have  had  none,  and  we  have  no  hope  ever  to  have  any ;  there  is  no  one  with  us  but  only  myself  and  my  wife."  "  That  puts  wonder  on  me,"  said  Cathbad,  "  for  I  see  by  Druid  signs  that  it  is  on  account  of  a  daughter  belonging  to  you,  that  more  blood  will  be  shed  than  ever  was  shed  in  Ireland  since  time  and  race  began.  And  great  heroes  and  bright  candles  of  the  Gael  will  lose  their  lives  because  of  her."  "  Is  that  the  foretelling  you  have  made  for  me  ?  "  said  Fedlimid,  and  there  was  anger  on  him,  for  he  thought  the  Druid  was  mocking  him  ;  "  if  that  is  all  you  can  say,  you  can  keep    it  for  yourself;    it  is  little  I  think  of  your  share 

104 


BIRTH   OF   DEIRDRE  105 

of  knowledge."  "  For  all  that/'  said  Cathbad,  "  I  am  certain  of  its  truth,  for  I  can  see  it  all  clearly  in  my  own  mind." 

The  Druid  went  away,  but  he  was  not  long  gone  when  Fedlimid's  wife  was  found  to  be  with  child.  And  as  her  time  went  on,  his  vexation  went  on  growing,  that  he  had  not  asked  more  questions  of  Cathbad,  at  the  time  he  was  talking  to  him,  and  he  was  under  a  smoulder-  ing care  by  day  and  by  night,  for  it  is  what  he  was  thinking,  that  neither  his  own  sense  and  understanding,  or  the  share  of  friends  he  had,  would  be  able  to  save  him,  or  to  make  a  back  against  the  world,  if  this  mis-  fortune should  come  upon  him,  that  would  bring  such  great  shedding  of  blood  upon  the  earth  ;  and  it  is  the  thought  that  came,  that  if  this  child  should  be  born,  what  he  had  to  do  was  to  put  her  far  away,  where  no  eye  would  see  her,  and  no  ear  hear  word  of  her. 

The  time  of  the  delivery  of  Fedlimid's  wife  came  on,  and  it  was  a  girl-child  she  gave  birth  to.  Fedlimid  did  not  allow  any  living  person  to  come  to  the  house  or  to  see  his  wife,  but  himself  alone. 

But  just  after  the  child  was  born,  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  came  in  again,  and  there  was  shame  on  Fedlimid  when  he  saw  him,  and  when  he  remembered  how  he  would  not  believe  his  words.  But  the  Druid  looked  at  the  child  and  he  said :  "  Let  Deirdre  be  her  name  ;  harm  will  come  through  her. 

"  She  will  be  fair,  comely,  bright-haired  ;  heroes  will  fight  for  her,  and  kings  go  seeking  for  her." 

And  then  he  took  the  child  in  his  arms,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  O  Deirdre,  on  whose  account  many  shall  weep,  on  whose  account  many  women  shall  be  envious,  there  will  be  trouble  on  Ulster  for  your  sake,  O  fair  daughter  of  Fedlimid. 

"Many  will  be  jealous  of  your  face,  O  flame  of  beauty  ;  for  your  sake  heroes  shall  go  to  exile.     For 


io6  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

your  sake  deeds  of  anger  shall  be  done  in  Emain ;  there  is  harm  in  your  face,  for  it  will  bring  banishment  and  death  on  the  sons  of  kings. 

"  In  your  fate,  O  beautiful  child,  are  wounds,  and  ill-  doings,  and  shedding  of  blood. 

"You  will  have  a  little  grave  apart  to  yourself;  you  will  be  a  tale  of  wonder  for  ever,  Deirdre." 

Cathbad  went  away  then,  and  he  sent  Levarcham,  daughter  of  Aedh,  to  the  house ;  and  Fedlimid  asked  her  would  she  take  the  venture  of  bringing  up  the  child,  far  away  where  no  eye  would  see  her,  and  no  ear  hear  of  her.  Levarcham  said  she  would  do  that,  and  that  she  would  do  her  best  to  keep  her  the  way  he  wished. 

So  Fedlimid  got  his  men,  and  brought  them  away  with  him  to  a  mountain,  wide  and  waste,  and  there  he  bade  them  to  make  a  little  house,  by  the  side  of  a  round  green  hillock,  and  to  make  a  garden  of  apple-trees  behind  it,  with  a  wall  about  it.  And  he  bade  them  put  a  roof  of  green  sods  over  the  house,  the  way  a  little  company  might  live  in  it,  without  notice  being  taken  of  them. 

Then  he  sent  Levarcham  and  the  child  there,  that  no  eye  might  see,  and  no  ear  hear  of  Deirdre.  He  put  all  in  good  order  before  them,  and  he  gave  them  pro-  visions, and  he  told  Levarcham  that  food  and  all  she  wanted  would  be  sent  from  year  to  year  as  long  as  she  lived. 

And  so  Deirdre  and  her  foster-mother  lived  in  the  lonely  place  among  the  hills  without  the  knowledge  or  the  notice  of  any  strange  person,  until  Deirdre  was  fourteen  years  of  age.  And  Deirdre  grew  straight  and  clean  like  a  rush  on  the  bog,  and  she  was  comely  beyond  comparison  of  all  the  women  of  the  world,  and  her  movements  were  like  the  swan  on  the  wave,  or  the  deer   on   the   hill.      She   was    the   young    girl   of   the 


THE   HUNTER'S   DREAM  107 

greatest  beauty  and  of  the  gentlest  nature  of  all  the  women  of  Ireland. 

Levarcham,  that  had  charge  of  her,  used  to  be  giving  Deirdre  every  knowledge  and  skill  that  she  had  herself  There  was  not  a  blade  of  grass  growing  from  root,  or  a  bird  singing  in  the  wood,  or  a  star  shining  from  heaven,  but  Deirdre  had  the  name  of  it.  But  there  was  one  thing  she  would  not  have  her  know,  she  would  not  let  her  have  friendship  with  any  living  person  of  the  rest  of  the  world  outside  their  own  house. 

But  one  dark  night  of  winter,  with  black  clouds  over-  head, a  hunter  came  walking  the  hills,  and  it  is  what  happened,  he  missed  the  track  of  the  hunt,  and  lost  his  way  and  his  comrades. 

And  a  heaviness  came  upon  him,  and  he  lay  down  on  the  side  of  the  green  hillock  by  Deirdre's  house.  He  was  weak  with  hunger  and  going,  and  perished  with  cold,  and  a  deep  sleep  came  upon  him.  While  he  was  lying  there  a  dream  came  to  the  hunter,  and  he  thought  that  he  was  near  the  warmth  of  a  house  of  the  Sidhe,  and  the  Sidhe  inside  making  music,  and  he  called  out  in  his  dream,  "  If  there  is  any  one  inside,  let  them  bring  me  in,  in  the  name  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon."  Deirdre  heard  the  voice,  and  she  said  to  Levarcham,  "  Mother,  mother,  what  is  that  ? "  But  Levarcham  said,  "  It  is  nothing  that  matters ;  it  is  the  birds  of  the  air  gone  astray,  and  trying  to  find  one  another.  But  let  them  go  back  to  the  branches  of  the  wood."  Another  troubled  dream  came  on  the  hunter,  and  he  cried  out  a  second  time.  "  What  is  that  ?  "  asked  Deirdre  again.  "  It  is  nothing  that  matters,"  said  Levarcham.  "  The  birds  of  the  air  are  looking  for  one  another  ;  let  them  go  past  to  the  branches  of  the  wood."  Then  a  third  dream  came  to  the  hunter,  and  he  cried  out  a  third  time,  if  there  was  any  one  in  the  hill  to  let  him  in  for  the  sake  of  the  Elements,  for  he  was  perished  with  cold  and  overcome  with   hunger.     "  Oh ! 


io8    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

what  is  that,  Levarcham  ? "  said  Deirdre.  "  There  is  nothing  there  for  you  to  see,  my  child,  but  only  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  they  lost  to  one  another,  but  let  them  go  past  us  to  the  branches  of  the  wood.  There  is  no  place  or  shelter  for  them  here  to-night."  "  Oh,  mother,"  said  Deirdre,  "  the  bird  asked  to  come  in  for  the  sake  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  and  it  is  what  you  yourself  told  me,  that  anything  that  is  asked  like  that,  it  is  right  for  us  to  give  it.  If  you  will  not  let  in  the  bird  that  is  perished  with  cold  and  overcome  with  hunger,  I  myself  will  let  it  in."  So  Deirdre  rose  up  and  drew  the  bolt  from  the  leaf  of  the  door,  and  let  in  the  hunter.  She  put  a  seat  in  the  place  for  sitting,  food  in  the  place  for  eating,  and  drink  in  the  place  for  drinking,  for  the  man  who  had  come  into  the  house.  "  Come  now  and  eat  food,  for  you  are  in  want  of  it,"  said  Deirdre.  "  Indeed  it  is  I  was  in  want  of  food  and  drink  and  warmth  when  I  came  into  this  house  ;  but  by  my  word,  I  have  forgotten  that  since  I  saw  yourself,"  said  the  hunter.  "  How  little  you  are  able  to  curb  your  tongue,"  said  Levarcham.  "  It  is  not  a  great  thing  for  you  to  keep  your  tongue  quiet  when  you  get  the  shelter  of  a  house  and  the  warmth  of  a  hearth  on  a  dark  winter  night."  "  That  is  so,"  said  the  hunter,  "  I  may  do  that  much,  to  keep  my  mouth  shut ;  but  I  swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,  if  some  others  of  the  people  of  the  world  saw  this  great  beauty  that  is  hidden  away  here,  they  would  not  leave  her  long  with  you."  "  What  people  are  those  ?  "  said  Deirdre.  "  I  will  tell  you  that,"  said  the  hunter ;  "  they  are  Naoise,  son  of  Usnach,  and  Ainnle  and  Ardan,  his  two  brothers."  "  What  is  the  appearance  of  these  men,  if  we  should  ever  see  them  ?  "  said  Deirdre.  "  This  is  the  appearance  that  is  on  those  three  men,"  said  the  hunter  :  *'  the  colour  of  the  raven  is  on  their  hair,  their  skin  is  like  the  swan  on  the  wave,  their  cheeks  like  the  blood  of  the  speckled  red  calf,  and  their  swiftness  and  their  leap  are  like  the 


CONCHUBAR   HEARS   OF   DEIRDRE  109 

salmon  of  the  stream  and  like  the  deer  of  the  grey  mountain  ;  and  the  head  and  shoulders  of  Naoise  are  above  all  the  other  men  of  Ireland."  "  However  they  may  be,"  said  Levarcham,  "  get  you  out  from  here,  and  take  another  road  ;  and  by  my  word,  Httle  is  my  thank-  fulness to  yourself,  or  to  her  that  let  you  in."  "  You  need  not  send  him  out  for  telling  me  that,"  said  Deirdre,  "  for  as  to  those  three  men,  I  myself  saw  them  last  night  in  a  dream,  and  they  hunting  upon  a  hill." 

The  hunter  went  away,  but  in  a  little  time  after  he  began  to  think  to  himself  how  Conchubar,  High  King  of  Ulster,  was  used  to  lie  down  at  night  and  to  rise  up  in  the  morning  by  himself,  without  a  wife  or  any  one  to  speak  to  ;  and  that  if  he  could  see  this  great  beauty  it  was  likely  he  would  bring  her  home  to  Emain,  and  that  he  himself  would  get  the  good-will  of  the  king  for  telling  him  there  was  such  a  queen  to  be  found  on  the  face  of  the  world. 

So  he  went  straight  to  King  Conchubar  at  Emain  Macha,  and  he  sent  word  in  to  the  king  that  he  had  news  for  him,  if  he  would  hear  it.  The  king  sent  for  him  to  come  in.  "  What  is  the  reason  of  your  journey  ?  "  he  said.  "  It  is  what  I  have  to  tell  you,  King,"  said  the  hunter,  "  that  I  have  seen  the  greatest  beauty  that  ever  was  born  in  Ireland,  and  I  am  come  to  tell  you  of  it." 

"  Who  is  this  great  beauty,  and  in  what  place  is  she  to  be  seen,  when  she  was  never  seen  before  you  saw  her,  if  you  did  see  her  ?  "  "I  did  see  her,  indeed,"  said  the  hunter,  "  but  no  other  man  can  see  her,  unless  he  knows  from  me  the  place  where  she  is  living."  "Will  you  bring  me  to  the  place  where  she  is,  and  you  will  have  a  good  reward  ? "  said  the  king.  "  I  will  bring  you  there,"  said  the  hunter.  "  Let  you  stay  with  my  house-  hold to-night,"  said  Conchubar,  "and  I  myself  and  my  people  will  go  with  you  early  on  the  morning  of  to-  morrow/'    "  I    will    stay,"    said    the    hunter,    and    he 


no  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

stayed   that   night   in    the    household    of    King    Con-  chubar. 

Then  Conchubar  sent  to  Fergus  and  to  the  other  chief  men  of  Ulster,  and  he  told  them  of  what  he  was  about  to  do.  Though  it  was  early  when  the  songs  and  the  music  of  the  birds  began  in  the  woods,  it  was  earlier  yet  when  Conchubar,  king  of  Ulster,  rose  up  with  his  little  company  of  near  friends,  in  the  fresh  spring  morn-  ing of  the  fresh  and  pleasant  month  of  May,  and  the  dew  was  heavy  on  every  bush  and  flower  as  they  went  out  towards  the  green  hill  where  Deirdre  was  living 

But  many  a  young  man  of  them  that  had  a  light  glad,  leaping  step  when  they  set  out,  had  but  a  tired,  slow,  failing  step  before  the  end,  because  of  the  length  and  the  roughness  of  the  way.  "  It  is  down  there  below,"  said  the  hunter,  "  in  the  house  in  that  valley,  the  woman  is  living,  but  I  myself  will  not  go  nearer  it  than  this. 

Conchubar  and  his  troop  went  down  then  to  the  green  hillock  where  Deirdre  was,  and  they  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  house.  Levarcham  called  out  that  neither  answer  nor  opening  would  be  given  to  any  one  at  all,  and  that  she  did  not  want  disturbance  put  on  herself  or  her  house.  "  Open,"  said  Conchubar,  "  in  the  name  of  the  High  King  of  Ulster."  When  Levar-  cham heard  Conchubar's  voice,  she  knew  there  was  no  use  trying  to  keep  Deirdre  out  of  sight  any  longer,  and  she  rose  up  in  haste  and  let  in  the  king,  and  as  many  of  his  people  as  could  follow  him. 

When  the  king  saw  Deirdre  before  him,  he  thought  in  himself  that  he  never  saw  in  the  course  of  the  day,  or  in  the  dreams  of  the  night,  a  creature  so  beautiful,  and  he  gave  her  his  full  heart's  weight  of  love  there  and  then.  It  is  what  he  did  ;  he  put  Deirdre  up  on  the  shoulders  of  his  men,  and  she  herself  and  Levarcham  were  brought  away  to  Emain  Macha. 


DEIRDRE   SEES   NAOISE  in 

With  the  love  that  Conchubar  had  for  Deirdre,  he  wanted  to  marry  her  with  no  delay,  but  when  her  leave  was  asked,  she  would  not  give  it,  for  she  was  young  yet,  and  she  had  no  knowledge  of  the  duties  of  a  wife,  or  the  ways  of  a  king's  house.  And  when  Conchubar  was  pressing  her  hard,  she  asked  him  to  give  her  a  delay  of  a  year  and  a  day.  He  said  he  would  give  her  that,  though  it  was  hard  for  him,  if  she  would  give  him  her  certain  promise  to  marry  him  at  the  year's  end.  She  did  that,  and  Conchubar  got  a  woman  teacher  for  her,  and  nice,  fine,  pleasant,  modest  maidens  to  be  with  her  at  her  lying  down  and  at  her  rising  up,  to  be  companions  to  her.  And  Deirdre  grew  wise  in  the  works  of  a  young  girl,  and  in  the  understand-  ing of  a  woman  ;  and  if  any  one  at  all  looked  at  her  face,  whatever  colour  she  was  before  that,  she  would  blush  crimson  red.  And  it  is  what  Conchubar  thought,  that  he  never  saw  with  the  eyes  of  his  body  a  creature  that  pleased  him  so  well. 

One  day  Deirdre  and  her  companions  were  out  on  a  hill  near  Emain  Macha,  looking  around  them  in  the  pleasant  sunshine,  and  they  saw  three  men  walking  together.  Deirdre  was  looking  at  the  men  and  wonder-  ing at  them,  and  when  they  came  near,  she  remembered  the  talk  of  the  hunter,  and  the  three  men  she  saw  in  her  dream,  and  she  thought  to  herself  that  these  were  the  three  sons  of  Usnach,  and  that  this  was  Naoise,  that  had  his  head  and  shoulders  above  all  the  men  of  Ireland.  The  three  brothers  went  by  without  turning  their  eyes  at  all  upon  the  young  girls  on  the  hillside,  and  they  were  singing  as  they  went,  and  whoever  heard  the  low  singing  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  it  was  enchantment  and  music  to  them,  and  every  cow  that  was  being  milked  and  heard  it,  gave  two-thirds  more  of  milk.  And  it  is  what  happened,  that  love  for  Naoise  came  into  the  heart  of  Deirdre,  so  that  she   could   not  but 


112  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

follow  him.  She  gathered  up  her  skirt  and  went  after  the  three  men  that  had  gone  past  the  foot  of  the  hill,  leaving  her  companions  there  after  her. 

But  Ainnle  and  Ardan  had  heard  talk  of  the  young  girl  that  was  at  Conchubar's  Court,  and  it  is  what  they  thought,  that  if  Naoise  their  brother  would  see  her,  it  is  for  himself  he  would  have  her,  for  she  was  not  yet  married  to  the  king.  So  when  they  saw  Deirdre  coming  after  them,  they  said  to  one  another  to  hasten  their  steps,  for  they  had  a  long  road  to  travel,  and  the  dusk  of  night  coming  on.  They  did  so,  and  Deirdre  saw  it,  and  she  cried  out  after  them,  "  Naoise,  son  of  Usnach,  are  you  going  to  leave  me  ?  "  "  What  cry  was  that  came  to  my  ears,  that  it  is  not  well  for  me  to  answer,  and  not  easy  for  me  to  refuse?"  said  Naoise.  "  It  was  nothing  but  the  cry  of  Conchubar's  wild  ducks,"  said  his  brothers  ;  "  but  let  us  quicken  our  steps  and  hasten  our  feet,  for  we  have  a  long  road  to  travel,  and  the  dusk  of  the  evening  coming  on."  They  did  so,  and  they  were  widening  the  distance  between  themselves  and  her.  Then  Deirdre  cried,  "  Naoise !  Naoise !  son  of  Usnach,  are  you  going  to  leave  me?"  "What  cry  was  it  that  came  to  my  ears  and  struck  my  heart,  that  it  is  not  well  for  me  to  answer,  or  easy  for  me  to  refuse  ? "  said  Naoise-  "  Nothing  but  the  cry  of  Conchubar's  wild  geese,"  said  his  brothers  ;  "  but  let  us  quicken  our  steps  and  hasten  our  feet,  the  darkness  of  night  is  coming  on."  They  did  so,  and  were  widening  the  distance  between  them-  selves and  her.  Then  Deirdre  cried  the  third  time,  "  Naoise !  Naoise  !  Naoise  !  son  of  Usnach,  are  you  going  to  leave  me  ?  "  "  What  sharp,  clear  cry  was  that,  the  sweetest  that  ever  came  to  my  ears,  and  the  sharpest  that  ever  struck  my  heart,  of  all  the  cries  I  ever  heard,"  said  Naoise.  "  What  is  it  but  the  scream  of  Conchubar's  lake  swans,"  said  his  brothers.  "  That  was  the  third  cry  of  some  person  beyond  there,"  said  Naoise,  "  and  I 


FLIGHT   OF   DEIRDRE  113 

swear  by  my  hand  of  valour,"  he  said,  "  I  will  go  no  further  until  I  see  where  the  cry  comes  from."  So  Naoise  turned  back  and  met  Deirdre,  and  Deirdre  and  Naoise  kissed  one  another  three  times,  and  she  gave  a  kiss  to  each  of  his  brothers.  And  with  the  confusion  that  was  on  her,  a  blaze  of  red  fire  came  upon  her,  and  her  colour  came  and  went  as  quickly  as  the  aspen  by  the  stream.  And  it  is  what  Naoise  thought  to  himself,  that  he  never  saw  a  woman  so  beautiful  in  his  life ;  and  he  gave  Deirdre,  there  and  then,  the  love  that  he  never  gave  to  living  thing,  to  vision,  or  to  creature,  but  to  herself  alone. 

Then  he  lifted  her  high  on  his  shoulder,  and  he  said  to  his  brothers  to  hasten  their  steps  ;  and  they  hastened  them. 

"  Harm  will  come  of  this,"  said  the  young  men.  "  Although  there  should  harm  come,"  said  Naoise,  "  I  am  willing  to  be  in  disgrace  while  I  live.  We  will  go  with  her  to  another  province,  and  there  is  not  in  Ireland  a  king  who  will  not  give  us  a  welcome."  So  they  called  their  people,  and  that  night  they  set  out  with  three  times  fifty  men,  and  three  times  fifty  women,  and  three  times  fifty  greyhounds,  and  Deirdre  in  their  midst. 

They  were  a  long  time  after  that  shifting  from  one  place  to  another  all  around  Ireland,  from  Essruadh  in  the  south,  to  Beinn  Etair  in  the  east  again,  and  it  is  often  they  were  in  danger  of  being  destroyed  by  Conchubar's  devices.  And  one  time  the  Druids  raised  a  wood  before  them,  but  Naoise  and  his  brothers  cut  their  way  through  it.  But  at  last  they  got  out  of  Ulster  and  sailed  to  the  country  of  Alban,  and  settled  in  a  lonely  place ;  and  when  hunting  on  the  mountains  failed  them,  they  fell  upon  the  cattle  of  the  men  of  Alban,  so  that  these  gathered  together  to  make  an  end  of  them.  But  the  sons  of  Usnach  called  to  the  king  of  Scotland,  and 

H 


114    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

he  took  them   into  his  friendship,  and   they  gave  him  their  help  when  he  went  out  into  battles  or  to  war. 

But  all  this  time  they  had  never  spoken  to  the  king  of  Deirdre,  and  they  kept  her  with  themselves,  not  to  let  any  one  see  her,  for  they  were  afraid  they  might  get  their  death  on  account  of  her,  she  being  so  beautiful. 

But  it  chanced  very  early  one  morning,  the  king's  steward  came  to  visit  them,  and  he  found  his  way  into  the  house  where  Naoise  and  Deirdre  were,  and  there  he  saw  them  asleep  beside  one  another.  He  went  back  then  to  the  king,  and  he  said  :  "  Up  to  this  time  there  has  never  been  found  a  woman  that  would  be  a  fitting  wife  for  you  ;  but  there  is  a  woman  on  the  shore  of  Loch  Ness  now,  is  well  worthy  of  you,  king  of  the  East.  And  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  make  an  end  of  Naoise,  for  it  is  of  his  wife  I  am  speaking."  "  I  will  not  do  that,"  said  the  king ;  "  but  go  to  her,"  he  said,  "and  bid  her  to  come  and  see  me  secretly."  The  steward  brought  her  that  message,  but  Deirdre  sent  him  away,  and  all  that  he  had  said  to  her,  she  told  it  to  Naoise  afterwards.  Then  when  she  would  not  come  to  him,  the  king  sent  the  sons  of  Usnach  into  every  hard  fight,  hoping  they  would  get  their  death,  but  they  won  every  battle,  and  came  back  safe  again.  And  after  a  while  they  went  to  Loch  Eitche,  near  the  sea,  and  they  were  left  to  themselves  there  for  a  while  in  peace  and  quietness.  And  they  settled  and  made  a  dwelling  house  for  themselves  by  the  side  of  Loch  Ness,  and  they  could  kill  the  salmon  of  the  stream  from  out  their  own  door,  and  the  deer  of  the  grey  hills  from  out  their  window.  But  when  Naoise  went  to  the  court  of  the  king,  his  clothes  were  splendid  among  the  great  men  of  the  army  of  Scotland,  a  cloak  of  bright  purple,  rightly  shaped,  with  a  fringe  of  bright  gold  ;  a  coat  of  satin  with  fifty  hooks  of  silver ;  a  brooch  on  which  were  a  hundred  polished  gems  ;  a  gold-hilted  sword  in 


CONCHUBAR'S   FEAST  115 

his  hand,  two  blue-green  spears  of  bright  points,  a  dagger  with  the  colour  of  yellow  gold  on  it,  and  a  hilt  of  silver.  But  the  two  children  they  had,  Gaiar  and  Aebgreine,  they  gave  into  the  care  of  Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea.  And  he  cared  them  well  in  Emhain  of  the  Apple  Trees,  and  he  brought  Bobaras  the  poet  to  give  learning  to  Gaiar.  And  Aebgreine  of  the  Sunny  Face  he  gave  in  marriage  afterwards  to  Rinn,  son  of  Eochaidh  Juil  of  the  Land  of  Promise. 

Now  it  happened  after  a  time  that  a  very  great  feast  was  made  by  Conchubar,  in  Emain  Macha,  for  all  the  great  among  his  nobles,  so  that  the  whole  company  were  easy  and  pleasant  together.  The  musicians  stood  up  to  play  their  songs  and  to  give  poems,  and  they  gave  out  the  branches  of  relationship  and  of  kindred.  These  are  the  names  of  the  poets  that  were  in  Emain  at  the  time,  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  son  of  Conall,  son  of  Rudraige ;  Geanann  of  the  Bright  Face,  son  of  Cathbad  ;  Ferceirtne,  and  Geanann  Black-Knee,  and  many  others,  and  Sencha,  son  of  Ailell. 

They  were  all  drinking  and  making  merry  until  Conchubar,  the  king,  raised  his  voice  and  spoke  aloud,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  I  desire  to  know  from  you,  did  you  ever  see  a  better  house  than  this  house  of  Emain,  or  a  hearth  better  than  my  hearth  in  any  place  you  were  ever  in  ? "  "  We  did  not,"  they  said.  "  If  that  is  so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  do  you  know  of  anything  at  all  that  is  wanting  to  you  ?  "  "  We  know  of  nothing,"  said  they.  "  That  is  not  so  with  me,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  know  of  a  great  want  that  is  on  you,  the  want  of  the  three  best  candles  of  the  Gael,  the  three  noble  sons  of  Usnach,  that  ought  not  to  be  away  from  us  for  the  sake  of  any  woman  in  the  world,  Naoise,  Ainnle,  and  Ardan  ;   for   surely   they  are  the  sons  of  a  king,  and 


ii6    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

they  would  defend  the  High  Kingship  against  the  best  men  of  Ireland."  "If  we  had  dared,"  said  they,  "it  is  long  ago  we  would  have  said  it,  and  more  than  that,  the  province  of  Ulster  would  be  equal  to  any  other  province  in  Ireland,  if  there  was  no  Ulsterman  in  it  but  those  three  alone,  for  it  is  lions  they  are  in  hardness  and  in  bravery."  "  If  that  is  so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  let  us  send  word  by  a  messenger  to  Alban,  and  to  the  dwelling-place  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  to  ask  them  back  again."  "  Who  will  go  there  with  the  message  ?  "  said  they  all.  "  I  cannot  know  that,"  said  Conchubar,  "  for  there  is  geasa,  that  is  bonds,  on  Naoise  not  to  come  back  with  any  man  only  one  of  the  three,  Conall  Cearnach,  or  Fergus,  or  Cuchulain,  and  I  will  know  now,"  said  he,  "  which  one  of  those  three  loves  me  best."  Then  he  called  Conall  to  one  side,  and  he  asked  him,  "  What  would  you  do  with  me  if  I  should  send  you  for  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  if  they  were  destroyed  through  me — a  thing  I  do  not  mean  to  do  ?  "  "  As  I  am  not  going  to  undertake  it,"  said  Conall,  "  I  will  say  that  it  is  not  one  alone  I  would  kill,  but  any  Ulsterman  I  would  lay  hold  of  that  had  harmed  them  would  get  shortening  of  life  from  me  and  the  sorrow  of  death."  "I  see  well,"  said  Conchubar,  "you  are  no  friend  of  mine,"  and  he  put  Conall  away  from  him-  Then  he  called  Cuchulain  to  him,  and  asked  him  the  same  as  he  did  the  other.  "  I  give  my  word,  as  I  am  not  going,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  if  you  want  that  of  me,  and  that  you  think  to  kill  them  when  they  come,  it  is  not  one  person  alone  that  would  die  for  it,  but  every  Ulsterman  I  could  lay  hold  of  would  get  shortening  of  life  from  me  and  the  sorrow  of  death."  "  I  see  well,"  said  Conchubar,  "  that  you  are  no  friend  of  mine."  And  he  put  Cuchulain  from  him.  And  then  he  called  Fergus  to  him,  and  asked  him  the  same  question,  and  Fergus  said,  "  Whatever  may  happen,  I  promise  your 


THE    MESSENGER  117 

blood  will  be  safe  from  me,  but  besides  yourself  there  is  no  Ulsterman  that  would  try  to  harm  them,  and  that  I  would  lay  hold  of,  but  I  would  give  him  shortening  of  life  and  the  sorrow  of  death."  "  I  see  well,"  said  Conchubar,  "  it  is  yourself  must  go  for  them,  and  it  is  to-morrow  you  must  set  out,  for  it  is  with  you  they  will  come,  and  when  you  are  coming  back  to  us  westward,  I  put  you  under  bonds  to  go  first  to  the  fort  of  Borach,  son  of  Cainte,  and  give  me  your  word  now  that  as  soon  as  you  get  there,  you  will  send  on  the  sons  of  Usnach  to  Emain,  whether  it  be  day  or  night  at  the  time."  After  that  the  two  of  them  went  in  together,  and  Fergus  told  all  the  company  how  it  was  under  his  charge  they  were  to  be  put. 

Then  Conchubar  went  to  Borach  and  asked  had  he  a  feast  ready  prepared  for  him.  "  I  have,"  said  Borach,  "  but  although  I  was  able  to  make  it  ready,  I  was  not  able  to  bring  it  to  Emain."  "  If  that  is  so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  give  it  to  Fergus  when  he  comes  back  to  Ireland,  for  it  is  geasa  on  him  not  to  refuse  your  feast."  Borach  promised  he  would  do  that,  and  so  they  wore  away  that  night. 

So  Fergus  set  out  in  the  morning,  and  he  brought  no  guard  nor  helpers  with  him,  but  himself  and  his  two  sons,  Fair-Haired  lollan,  and  Rough-Red  Buinne,  and  Cuillean,  the  shield-bearer,  and  the  shield  itself  They  went  on  till  they  got  to  the  dwelling-place  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  to  Loch  Eitche  in  Alba.  It  is  how  the  sons  of  Usnach  lived;  they  had  three  houses,  and  the  house  where  they  made  ready  the  food,  it  is  not  there  they  would  eat  it,  and  the  house  where  they  would  eat  it,  it  is  not  there  they  would  sleep. 

When  Fergus  came  to  the  harbour  he  let  a  great  shout  out  of  him.  And  it  is  how  Naoise  and  Deirdre  were,  they  had  a  chessboard  between  them,  and  they  playing  on  it.     Naoise  heard  the  shout,  and  he  said, 


ii8    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

"  That  is  the  shout  of  a  man  of  Ireland."  "  It  is  not,  but  the  cry  of  a  man  of  Alban,"  said  Deirdre.  She  knew  at  the  first  it  was  Fergus  gave  the  shout,  but  she  denied  it.  Then  Fergus  let  another  shout  out  of  him.  "  That  is  an  Irish  shout,"  said  Naoise  again.  "  It  is  not,  indeed,"  said  Deirdre,  "  let  us  go  on  playing."  Then  Fergus  gave  the  third  shout,  and  the  sons  of  Usnach  knew  this  time  it  was  the  shout  of  Fergus,  and  Naoise  said  to  Ardan  to  go  out  and  meet  him.  Then  Deirdre  told  him  that  she  herself  knew  at  the  first  shout  that  it  was  Fergus.  "  Why  did  you  deny  it,  then.  Queen  ? "  said  Naoise.  "  Because  of  a  vision  I  saw  last  night,"  said  Deirdre.  "  Three  birds  I  saw  coming  to  us  from  Emain  Macha,  and  three  drops  of  honey  in  their  mouths,  and  they  left  them  with  us,  and  three  drops  of  our  blood  they  brought  away  with  them."  "What  meaning  do  you  put  on  that.  Queen?"  said  Naoise.  "  It  is,"  said  Deirdre,  "  Fergus  that  is  coming  to  us  with  a  message  of  peace  from  Conchubar,  for  honey  is  not  sweeter  than  a  message  of  peace  sent  by  a  lying  man."  "  Let  that  pass,"  said  Naoise.  "  Is  there  anything  in  it  but  troubled  sleep  and  the  melancholy  of  woman  ?  And  it  is  a  long  time  Fergus  is  in  the  harbour.  Rise  up,  Ardan,  to  be  before  him,  and  bring  him  with  you  here."  And  Ardan  went  down  to  meet  him,  and  gave  a  fond  kiss  to  himself  and  to  his  two  sons.  And  it  is  what  he  said :  "  My  love  to  you,  dear  comrades."  After  that  he  asked  news  of  Ireland,  and  they  gave  it  to  him,  and  then  they  came  to  where  Naoise  and  Ainnle  and  Deirdre  were,  and  they  kissed  Fergus  and  his  two  sons,  and  they  asked  news  of  Ireland  from  them.  "It  is  the  best  news  I  have  for  you,"  said  Fergus,  "  that  Conchubar,  king  of  Ulster,  has  sworn  by  the  earth  beneath  him,  by  the  high  heaven  above  him,  and  by  the  sun  that  travels  to  the  west,  that  he  will  have  no  rest  by  day  nor  sleep  by 


DEIRDRE'S    DREAMS  119 

night,  if  the  sons  of  Usnach,  his  own  foster-brothers,  will  not  come  back  to  the  land  of  their  home  and  the  country  of  their  birth  ;  and  he  has  sent  us  to  ask  you  there."  "  It  is  better  for  them  to  stop  here,"  said  Deirdre,  "  for  they  have  a  greater  sway  in  Scotland  than  Conchubar  himself  has  in  Ireland."  "  One's  own  country  is  better  than  any  other  thing,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  no  man  can  have  any  pleasure,  however  great  his  good  luck  and  his  way  of  living,  if  he  does  not  see  his  own  country  every  day."  "  That  is  true,"  said  Naoise,  "  for  Ireland  is  dearer  to  myself  than  Alban,  though  I  would  get  more  in  Alban  than  in  Ireland."  "  It  will  be  safe  for  you  to  come  with  me,"  said  Fergus.  "  It  will  be  safe  indeed,"  said  Naoise,  "  and  we  will  go  with  you  to  Ireland  ;  and  though  there  were  no  trouble  beneath  the  sun,  but  a  man  to  be  far  from  his  own  land,  there  is  little  delight  in  peace  and  a  long  sleep  to  a  man  that  is  an  exile.  It  is  a  pity  for  the  man  that  is  an  exile ;  it  is  little  his  honour,  it  is  great  his  grief,  for  it  is  he  will  have  his  share  of  wandering." 

It  was  not  with  Deirdre's  will  Naoise  said  that,  and  she  was  greatly  against  going  with  Fergus.  And  she  said :  "  I  had  a  dream  last  night  of  the  three  sons  of  Usnach,  and  they  bound  and  put  in  the  grave  by  Con-  chubar of  the  Red  Branch."  But  Naoise  said  :  "  Lay  down  your  dream,  Deirdre,  on  the  heights  of  the  hills,  lay  down  your  dream  on  the  sailors  of  the  sea,  lay  down  your  dream  on  the  rough  grey  stones,  for  we  will  give  peace  and  we  will  get  it  from  the  king  of  the  world  and  from  Conchubar."  But  Deirdre  spoke  again,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  There  is  the  howling  of  dogs  in  my  ears  ;  a  vision  of  the  night  is  before  my  eyes,  I  see  Fergus  away  from  us,  I  see  Conchubar  without  mercy  in  his  dun ;  I  see  Naoise  without  strength  in  battle  ;  I  see  Ainnle  without  his  loud-sounding  shield  ;  I  see  Ardan  without  shield  or  breastplate,  and  the  Hill 


I20  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

of  Atha  without  delight.  I  see  Conchubar  asking  for  blood ;  I  see  Fergus  caught  with  hidden  lies  ;  I  see  Deirdre  crying  with  tears,  I  see  Deirdre  crying  with  tears." 

"  A  thing  that  is  unpleasing  to  me,  and  that  I  would  never  give  in  to,"  said  Fergus,  "  is  to  listen  to  the  howling  of  dogs,  and  to  the  dreams  of  women ;  and  since  Con-  chubar, the  High  King,  has  sent  a  message  of  friendship,  it  would  not  be  right  for  you  to  refuse  it."  "It  would  not  be  right,  indeed,"  said  Naoise,  "  and  we  will  go  with  you  to-morrow."  And  Fergus  gave  his  word,  and  he  said,  "  If  all  the  men  of  Ireland  were  against  you,  it  would  not  profit  them,  for  neither  shield  nor  sword  or  a  helmet  itself  would  be  any  help  or  protection  to  them  against  you,  and  I  myself  to  be  with  you."  "  That  is  true,"  said  Naoise,  "and  we  will  go  with  you  to  Ireland." 

They  spent  the  night  there  until  morning,  and  then  they  went  where  the  ships  were,  and  they  went  on  the  sea,  and  a  good  many  of  their  people  with  them,  and  Deirdre  looked  back  on  the  land  of  Alban,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  My  love  to  you,  O  land  to  the  east,  and  it  goes  ill  with  me  to  leave  you  ;  for  it  is  pleasant  are  your  bays  and  your  harbours  and  your  wide  flowery  plains  and  your  green-sided  hills ;  and  little  need  was  there  for  us  to  leave  you."  And  she  made  this  com-  plaint :  "  Dear  to  me  is  that  land,  that  land  to  the  east,  Alban,  with  its  wonders  ;  I  would  not  have  come  from  it  hither  but  that  I  came  with  Naoise. 

"  Dear  to  me,  Dun  Fiodhaigh  and  Dun  Fionn  ;  dear  is  the  dun  above  them  ;  dear  to  me  Inis  Droignach,  dear  to  me  Dun  Suibhne. 

"  O  Coin  Cuan !  Ochone  !  Coil  Cuan !  where  Ainnle  used  to  come.  My  grief!  it  was  short  I  thought  his  stay  there  with  Naoise  in  Western  Alban.  Glen  Laoi,  O  Glen  Laoi,  where  I  used  to  sleep  under  soft  coverings  ; 


BORACH'S   FEAST  121 

fish  and  venison  and  badger's  flesh,  that  was  my  portion  in  Glen  Laoi. 

"Glen  Masan,  my  grief!  Glen  Masan !  high  its  hart's-  tongue,  bright  its  stalks  ;  we  were  rocked  to  pleasant  sleep  over  the  wooded  harbour  of  Masan. 

"Glen  Archan,  my  grief!  Glen  Archan,  the  straight  valley  of  the  pleasant  ridge ;  never  was  there  a  young  man  more  light-hearted  than  my  Naoise  used  to  be  in  Glen  Archan. 

"Glen  Eitche,  my  grief!  Glen  Eitche,  it  was  there  I  built  my  first  house ;  beautiful  were  the  woods  on  our  rising ;  the  home  of  the  sun  is  Glen  Eitche. 

"  Glen-da-Rua,  my  grief!  Glen-da- Rua,  my  love  to  every  man  that  belongs  to  it ;  sweet  is  the  voice  of  the  cuckoo  on  the  bending  branch  on  the  hill  above  Glen-  da-Rua. 

"  Dear  to  me  is  Droighin  over  the  fierce  strand,  dear  are  its  waters  over  the  clean  sand ;  I  would  never  have  come  out  from  it  at  all  but  that  I  came  with  my  beloved ! " 

After  she  had  made  that  complaint  they  came  to  Dun  Borach,  and  Borach  gave  three  fond  kisses  to  Fergus  and  to  the  sons  of  Usnach  along  with  him.  It  was  then  Borach  said  he  had  a  feast  laid  out  for  Fergus,  and  that  it  was  geasa  for  him  to  leave  it  until  he  would  have  eaten  it.  But  Fergus  reddened  with  anger  from  head  to  foot,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  It  is  a  bad  thing  you  have  done,  Borach,  laying  out  a  feast  for  me,  and  Conchubar  to  have  made  me  give  my  word  that  as  soon  as  I  would  come  to  Ireland,  whether  it  would  be  by  day  or  in  the  night-time,  I  would  send  on  the  sens  of  Usnach  to  Emain  Macha."  "I  hold  you  under  bonds,"  said  Borach,  "to  stop  and  use  the  feast." 

Then  Fergus  asked  Naoise  what  should  he  do  about  the  feast.  "  You  must  choose,"  said  Deirdre,  "  whether  you  will  forsake  the  children  of  Usnach  or  the  feast,  and 


122  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

it  would  be  better  for  you  to  refuse  the  feast  than  to  forsake  the  sons  of  Usnach."     "  I  will  not  forsake  them,"  said    he,   "for    I    will    send    my  two  sons,  Fair-Haired  lollan    and   Rough-Red   Buinne,  with  them,  to  Emain  Macha."     "  On  my  word,"  said  Naoise,  "  that  is  a  great  deal    to   do    for   us ;   for    up   to   this    no   other    person  ever  protected    us  but   ourselves."     And    he  went   out  of  the   place  in  great  anger;  and  Ainnle,  and  Ardan,  and  Deirdre,  and  the  two  sons  of  Fergus  followed  him,  and   they   left    Fergus  dark    and  sorrowful  after  them.  But   for   all    that,  Fergus  was    full  sure  that  if  all  the  provinces   of  Ireland  would   go  into  one  council,  they  would    not  consent  to  break  the  pledge  he  had  given.  As  for  the  sons  of  Usnach,  they  went  on  their  way  by   every    short   road,    and    Deirdre   said   to  them,    "  I  will  give  you  a  good  advice,  Sons  of  Usnach,  though  you  may  not  follow  it."     "  What  is  that  advice,  Queen  ?  "  said    Naoise.     "  It   is,"   said  she,  "  to  go  to  Rechrainn,  between  Ireland  and  Scotland,  and  to  wait  there  until  Fergus  has  done  with  the  feast ;  and  that  will  be  the  keeping   of  his    word    to    Fergus,   and    it   will    be   the  lengthening  of  your  lives  to  you."     "  We  will  not  follow  that  advice,"  said  Naoise ;  and  the  children  of  Fergus  said    it   was    little   trust    she   had    in    them,   when    she  thought  they  would  not  protect  her,  though  their  hands  might  not  be  so  strong  as  the  hands  of  the  sons  of  Usnach ;  and  besides  that,  Fergus  had  given  them  his  word.     "  Alas !  it  is  sorrow  came  on  us  with  the  word  of  Fergus,"  said  Deirdre,  "  and  he  to  forsake  us  for  a  feast,"  and  she  made  this  complaint :  "  It  is   grief  to  me  that  ever  I  came  from  the  east  on  the  word  of  the  unthinking  son  of  Rogh.     It  is  only  lamentations  I  will  make.     Och  !  it  is  very  sorrowful  my  heart  is  ! 

"  My  heart  is  heaped  up  with  sorrow  ;  it  is  to-night  my  great  hurt  is.  My  grief!  my  dear  companions,  the  end  of  your  days  is  come." 


DEIRDRE'S   VISION  123 

And  it  is  what  Naoise  answed  her :  "  Do  not  say  that  in  your  haste,  Deirdre,  more  beautiful  than  the  sun.  Fergus  would  never  have  come  for  us  eastward  to  bring  us  back  to  be  destroyed." 

And  Deirdre  said,  *' My  grief!  I  think  it  too  far  for  you,  beautiful  sons  of  Usnach,  to  have  come  from  Alban  of  the  rough  grass  ;  it  is  lasting  will  be  its  life-long  sorrow." 

After  that  they  went  forward  to  Finncairn  of  the  watch-tower  on  sharp-peaked  Slieve  Fuad,  and  Deirdre  stayed  after  them  in  the  valley,  and  sleep  fell  on  her  there. 

When  Naoise  saw  that  Deirdre  was  left  after  them,  he  turned  back  as  she  was  rising  out  of  her  sleep,  and  he  said,  "What  made  you  wait  after  us,  Queen?"  "  Sleep  that  was  on  me,"  said  Deirdre ;  "  and  I  saw  a  vision  in  it."  "What  vision  was  that?"  said  Naoise.  "  It  was,"  she  said,  "  Fair-Haired  lollan  that  I  saw  with-  out his  head  on  him,  and  Rough-Red  Buinne  with  his  head  on  him ;  and  it  is  without  help  of  Rough-Red  Buinne  you  were,  and  it  is  with  the  help  of  Fair- Haired  lollan  you  were."     And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  It  is  a  sad  vision  has  been  shown  to  me,  of  my  four  tall,  fair,  bright  companions  ;  the  head  of  each  has  been  taken  from  him,  and  no  help  to  be  had  one  from  another." 

But  when  Naoise  heard  this  he  reproached  her,  and  said,  "  O  fair,  beautiful  woman,  nothing  does  your  mouth  speak  but  evil.  Do  not  let  the  sharpness  and  the  great  misfortune  that  come  from  it  fall  on  your  friends."  And  Deirdre  answered  him  with  kind,  gentle  words,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  It  would  be  better  to  me  to  see  harm  come  on  any  other  person  than  upon  any  one  of  you  three,  with  whom  I  have  travelled  over  the  seas  and  over  the  wide  plains ;  but  when  I  look  on  you,  it  is  only  Buinne  I  can  see  safe  and  whole,  and 


124    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

I  know  by  that  his.  Hfe  will  be  longest  among  you  ;  and  indeed  it  is  I  that  am  sorrowful  to-night." 

After  that  they  came  forward  to  the  high  willows,  and  it  was  then  Deirdre  said,  "  I  see  a  cloud  in  the  air,  and  it  is  a  cloud  of  blood  ;  and  I  would  give  you  a  good  advice,  sons  of  Usnach,"  she  said.  "  What  is  that  advice  ? "  said  Naoise.  "  To  go  to  Dundealgan  where  Cuchulain  is,  until  Fergus  has  done  with  the  feast,  and  to  be  under  the  protection  of  Cuchulain,  for  fear  of  the  treachery  of  Conchubar."  "  Since  there  is  no  fear  on  us,  we  will  not  follow  that  advice,"  said  Naoise.  And  Deirdre  complained,  and  it  is  what  she  said :  "  O  Naoise,  look  at  the  cloud  I  see  above  us  in  the  air ;  I  see  a  cloud  over  green  Macha,  cold  and  deep  red  like  blood.  I  am  startled  by  the  cloud  that  I  see  here  in  the  air ;  a  thin,  dreadful  cloud  that  is  like  a  clot  of  blood.  I  give  a  right  advice  to  the  beautiful  sons  of  Usnach  not  to  go  to  Emain  to-night,  because  of  the  danger  that  is  over  them. 

"We  will  go  to  Dundealgan,  where  the  Hound  of  the  Smith  is  ;  we  will  come  to-morrow  from  the  south  along  with  the  Hound,  Cuchulain." 

But  Naoise  said  in  his  anger  to  Deirdre,  "  Since  there  is  no  fear  on  us,  we  will  not  follow  your  advice."  And  Deirdre  turned  to  the  grandsons  of  Rogh,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  It  is  seldom  until  now,  Naoise,  that  yourself  and  myself  were  not  of  the  one  mind.  And  I  say  to  you,  Naoise,  that  you  would  not  have  gone  against  me  like  this,  the  day  Manannan  gave  me  the  cup  in  the  time  of  his  great  victory." 

After  that  they  went  on  to  Emain  Macha.  "  Sons  of  Usnach,"  said  Deirdre,  "  I  have  a  sign  by  which  you  will  know  if  Conchubar  is  going  to  do  treachery  on  you."  "What  sign  is  that?"  said  Naoise.  "If  you  are  let  come  into  the  house  where  Conchubar  is,  and  the  nobles  of  Ulster,  then  Conchubar  is  not  going  to  do  treachery 


THE   RETURN   TO   EMAIN  125 

on  you.  But  if  it  is  in  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  you  are  put,  then  he  is  going  to  do  treachery  on  you." 

After  that  they  came  to  Emain  Macha,  and  they  took  the  handwood  and  struck  the  door,  and  the  doorkeeper  asked  who  was  there.  They  told  him  that  it  was  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  Deirdre,  and  the  two  sons  of  Fergus  were  there. 

When  Conchubar  heard  that,  he  called  his  stewards  and  serving  men  to  him,  and  he  asked  them  how  was  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  for  food  and  for  drink.  They  said  that  if  all  the  seven  armies  of  Ulster  would  come  there,  they  would  find  what  would  satisfy  them.  "  If  that  is  so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  bring  the  sons  of  Usnach  into  it." 

It  was  then  Deirdre  said,  "It  would  have  been  better  for  you  to  follow  my  advice,  and  never  to  have  come  to  Emain,  and  it  would  be  right  for  you  to  leave  it,  even  at  this  time."  "  We  will  not,"  said  Fair-Haired  loUan,  ''  for  it  is  not  fear  or  cowardliness  was  ever  seen  on  us,  but  we  will  go  to  the  house."  So  they  went  on  to  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  the  stewards  and  the  serving-men  with  them,  and  well-tasting  food  was  served  to  them,  and  pleasant  drinks,  till  they  were  all  glad  and  merry,  except  only  Deirdre  and  the  sons  of  Usnach ;  for  they  did  not  use  much  food  or  drink,  because  of  the  length  and  the  greatness  of  their  journey  from  Dun  Borach  to  Emain  Macha.  Then  Naoise  said,  "  Give  the  chessboard  to  us  till  we  go  playing."  So  they  gave  them  the  chessboard  and  they  began  to  play. 

It  was  just  at  that  time  Conchubar  was  asking,  "  Who  will  I  send  that  will  bring  me  word  of  Deirdre,  and  that  will  tell  me  if  she  has  the  same  appearance  and  the  same  shape  she  had  before,  for  if  she  has,  there  is  not  a  woman  in  the  world  has  a  more  beautiful  shape  or  appearance  than  she  has,  and  I  will  bring  her  out  with  edge  of  blade  and  point  of  sword  in  spite  of  the 


126  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USN  AC  H 

sons  of  Usnach.  sfood  thoucrh  thev  be.  But  if  not,  let  Naoise  have  her  for  himself."  ''  I  myself  will  go  there,"  said  Levarcham,  *'  and  I  will  bring  you  word  of  that."  x\nd  it  is  how  it  was,  Deirdre  was  dearer  to  her  than  any  other  person  in  the  world  ;  for  it  was  often  she  went  through  the  world  looking  for  Deirdre  and  bring-  ing news  to  her  and  from  her.  So  Levarcham  went  over  to  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  near  it  she  saw  a  great  troop  of  armed  men,  and  she  spoke  to  them,  but  they  made  her  no  answer,  and  she  knew  by  that  it  was  none  of  the  men  of  Ulster  were  in  it,  but  men  from  some  strange  country  that  Conchubar's  messengers  had  brought  to  Emain. 

And  then  she  went  in  where  Naoise  and  Deirdre  were,  and  it  is  how  she  found  them,  the  polished  chessboard  between  them,  and  they  playing  on  it ;  and  she  gave  them  fond  kisses,  and  she  said :  "  You  are  not  doing  well  to  be  playing  ;  and  it  is  to  bring  Conchubar  word  if  Deirdre  has  the  same  shape  and  appearance  she  used  to  have  that  he  sent  me  here  now ;  and  there  is  grief  on  me  for  the  deed  that  will  be  done  in  Emain  to-night,  treacher)-  that  will  be  done,  and  the  killing  of  kindred,  and  the  three  bright  candles  of  the  Gael  to  be  quenched,  and  Emain  will  not  be  the  better  of  it  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,"  and  she  made  this  complaint  sadly  and  wearily : 

"  My  heart  is  hea\y  for  the  treachery  that  is  being  done  in  Emain  this  night ;  on  account  of  this  treachery,  Emain  will  never  be  at  peace  from  this  out. 

''  The  three  that  are  most  king-like  to-day  under  the  sun ;  the  three  best  of  all  that  live  on  the  earth,  it  is  grief  to  me  to-night  they  to  die  for  the  sake  of  any  woman.  Naoise  and  Ainnle  whose  deeds  are  known,  and  Ardan,  their  brother ;  treachery  is  to  be  done  on  the  young,  bright-faced  three  ;  it  is  not  I  that  am  not  sorrowful  to-night." 


GELBAN  127 

When  she  had  made  this  complaint,  Levarcham  said  to  the  sons  of  Usnach  and  to  the  children  of  Fergus  to  shut  close  the  doors  and  the  windows  of  the  house  and  to  do  bravery.  "  And  oh,  sons  of  Fergus,"  she  said,  "  defend  your  charge  and  your  care  bravely  till  Fergus  comes,  and  you  will  have  praise  and  a  blessing  for  it."  And  she  cried  with  many  tears,  and  she  went  back  to  where  Conchubar  was,  and  he  asked  news  of  Deirdre  of  her.  And  Levarcham  said,  "  It  is  good  news  and  bad  news  I  have  for  you."  "  What  news  is  that  ? "  said  Conchubar.  "  It  is  the  good  news,"  she  said,  "  the  three  sons  of  Usnach  to  have  come  to  you  and  to  be  over  there,  and  they  are  the  three  that  are  bravest  and  mightiest  in  form  and  in  looks  and  in  countenance,  of  all  in  the  world ;  and  Ireland  will  be  yours  from  this  out,  since  the  sons  of  Usnach  are  with  you  ;  and  the  new^s  that  is  worst  with  me  is,  the  woman  that  was  best  of  the  women  of  the  world  in  form  and  in  looks,  going  out  of  Emain,  is  without  the  form  and  without  the  appearance  she  used  to  have." 

When  Conchubar  heard  that,  much  of  his  jealousy  went  backward,  and  he  was  drinking  and  making  merry  for  a  while,  until  he  thought  on  Deirdre  again  the  second  time,  and  on  that  he  asked,  "Who  will  I  get  to  bring  me  word  of  Deirdre  ?  "  But  he  did  not  find  any  one  would  go  there.  And  then  he  said  to  Gelban,  the  merry,  pleasant  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlann  :  "  Go  over  and  bring  me  word  if  Deirdre  has  the  same  shape  and  the  same  appearance  she  used  to  have,  for  if  she  has,  there  is  not  on  the  ricige  of  the  world  or  on  the  waves  of  the  earth,  a  woman  more  beautiful  than  herself" 

So  Gelban  went  to  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  he  found  the  doors  and  the  windows  of  the  fort  shut,  and  fear  came  on  him.  And  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  It  is  not  an  easy  road  for  any  one  that  would  get  to  the   sons   of  Usnach,  for   I    think  there  is  very  great 


128  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

anger  on  them."  And  after  that  he  found  a  window  that  was  left  open  by  forgetfulness  in  the  house,  and  he  was  looking  in.  Then  Deirdre  saw  him  through  the  window,  and  when  she  saw  him  looking  at  her,  she  went  into  a  red  blaze  of  blushes,  and  Naoise  knew  that  some  one  was  looking  at  her  from  the  window,  and  she  told  him  that  she  saw  a  young  man  looking  in  at  them.  It  is  how  Naoise  was  at  that  time,  with  a  man  of  the  chessmen  in  his  hand,  and  he  made  a  fair  throw  over  his  shoulder  at  the  young  man,  that  put  the  eye  out  of  his  head.  The  young  man  went  back  to  where  Conchubar  was.  "  You  were  merry  and  pleasant  going  out,"  said  Conchubar,  "  but  you  are  sad  and  cheerless  coming  back."  And  then  Gelban  told  him  the  story  from  beginning  to  end.  "  I  see  well,"  said  Conchubar,  "  the  man  that  made  that  throw  will  be  king  of  the  world,  unless  he  has  his  life  shortened.  And  what  appearance  is  there  on  Deirdre  ?  "  he  said.  "  It  is  this,"  said  Gelban,  "  although  Naoise  put  out  my  eye,  I  would  have  wished  to  stay  there  looking  at  her  with  the  other  eye,  but  for  the  haste  you  put  on  me ;  for  there  is  not  in  the  world  a  woman  is  better  of  shape  or  of  form  than  herself." 

When  Conchubar  heard  that,  he  was  filled  with  jealousy  and  with  envy,  and  he  bade  the  men  of  his  army  that  were  with  him,  and  that  had  been  drink-  ing at  the  feast,  to  go  and  attack  the  place  were  the  sons  of  Usnach  were.  So  they  went  forward  to  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  they  gave  three  great  shouts  around  it,  and  they  put  fires  and  red  flames  to  it.  When  the  sons  of  Usnach  heard  the  shouts,  they  asked  who  those  men  were  that  were  about  the  house.  "  Conchubar  and  the  men  of  Ulster,"  they  all  said  together.  "  Is  it  the  pledge  of  Fergus  you  would  break  ?  "  said  Fair-Haired  loUan.  "  On  my  word,"  said  Conchubar,  "there  will  be  sorrow  on  the  sons  of  Usnach,   Deirdre   to   be   with  them."     "That  is  true," 


FAIR-HAIRED    lOLLAN  129 

said  Deirdre,  "  Fergus  had  deceived  you."  "  By  my  oath,"  said  Rough-Red  Buinne,  "  if  he  betrayed,  we  will  not  betray."  It  was  then  Buinne  went  out  and  killed  three-fifths  of  the  fighting  men  outside,  and  put  great  disturbance  on  the  rest ;  and  Conchubar  asked  who  was  there,  and  who  was  doing  destruction  on  his  men  like  that.  "  It  is  I,  myself,  Rough-Red  Buinne,  son  of  Fergus,"  said  he.  "  I  will  give  you  a  good  gift  if  you  will  leave  off,"  said  Conchubar.  "What  gift  is  that  ?  "  said  Rough-Red  Buinne.  "  A  hundred  of  land,"  said  Conchubar.  "  What  besides  ? "  said  Rough-Red  Buinne.  "  My  own  friendship  and  my  counsel,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  will  take  that,"  said  Rough-Red  Buinne.  It  was  a  good  mountain  that  was  given  him  as  a  reward,  but  it  turned  barren  in  the  same  night,  and  no  green  grew  on  it  again  for  ever,  and  it  used  to  be  called  the  Mountain  of  the  Share  of  Buinne. 

Deirdre  heard  what  they  were  saying.  "  By  my  word,"  she  said,  "  Rough-Red  Buinne  has  forsaken  you,  and  in  my  opinion,  it  is  like  the  father  the  son  is."  "I  give  my  word,"  says  Fair-Haired  lollan,  "that  is  not  so  with  me ;  as  long  as  this  narrow,  straight  sword  stays  in  my  hand,  I  will  not  forsake  the  sons  of  Usnach." 

After  that,  Fair-Haired  lollan  went  out,  and  made  three  courses  around  the  house,  and  killed  three-fifths  of  heroes  outside,  and  he  came  in  again  where  Naoise  was,  and  he  playing  chess,  and  Ainnle  with  him.  So  lollan  went  out  the  second  time,  and  made  three  other  courses  round  the  fort,  and  he  brought  a  lighted  torch  with  him  on  the  lawn,  and  he  went  destroying  the  hosts,  so  that  they  dared  not  come  to  attack  the  house.  And  he  was  a  good  son,  Fair-Haired  lollan,  for  he  never  refused  any  person  on  the  ridge  of  the  world  anything  that  he  had,  and  he  never  took  wages  from  any  person  but  only  Fergus. 

I 


130    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

It  was  then  Conchubar  said  :  '•'  What  place  is  my  own  son,  Fiacra  the  Fair?"  "I  am  here,  High  Prince,"  said  Fiacra.  "  By  my  word,"  said  Conchubar,  "  it  is  on  the  one  night  yourself  and  lollan  were  born,  and  as  it  is  the  arms  of  his  father  he  has  with  him,  let  you  take  my  arms  with  you,  that  is,  my  shield,  the  Ochain,  my  two  spears,  and  my  great  sword,  the  Gorm  Glas,  the  Blue  Green — and  do  bravery  and  great  deeds  with  them." 

Then  Fiacra  took  Conchubar's  arms,  and  he  and  Fair-Haired  lollan  attacked  one  another,  and  they  made  a  stout  fight,  one  against  the  other.  But  however  it  was.  Fair- Haired  lollan  put  down  Fiacra,  so  that  he  made  him  lie  under  the  shelter  of  his  shield,  till  it  roared  for  the  greatness  of  the  strait  he  was  in  ;  for  it  was  the  way  with  the  Ochain,  the  shield  of  Con-  chubar, to  roar  when  the  person  on  whom  it  would  be  was  in  danger  ;  and  the  three  chief  waves  of  Ireland,  the  Wave  of  Tuagh,  the  Wave  of  Cliodna,  and  the  Wave  of  Rudraige,  roared  in  answer  to  it. 

It  was  at  that  time  Conall  Cearnach  was  at  Dun  Sobairce,  and  he  heard  the  Wave  of  Tuagh.  "  True  it  is,"  said  Conall,  '*  Conchubar  is  in  some  danger,  and  it  is  not  right  for  me  to  be  here  listening  to  him." 

Conall  rose  up  on  that,  and  he  put  his  arms  and  his  armour  on  him,  and  came  forward  to  where  Conchubar  was  at  Emain  Macha,  and  he  found  the  fight  going  on  on  the  lawn,  and  Fiacra,  the  son  of  Conchubar,  greatly  pressed  by  Fair-Haired  lollan,  and  neither  the  king  of  Ulster  nor  any  other  person  dared  to  go  between  them.  But  Conall  went  aside,  behind  Fair-Haired  lollan  and  thrust  his  sword  through  him.  "  Who  is  it  has  wounded  me  behind  my  back  ?  "  said  Fair-Haired  lollan.  •'  Whoever  did  it,  by  my  hand  of  valour,  he  would  have  got  a  fair  fight,  face  to  face,  from  myself"  ''  Who  are  you    yourself?"     said    Conall.     "I    am    lollan,  son   of 


THE   APPEAL   TO   CONCHUBAR    131 

Fergus,  and  are  you  yourself  Conall  ?  "  "  It  is  I/'  said  Conall.  "  It  is  evil  and  it  is  heavy  the  work  you  have  done,"  said  lollan,  "  and  the  sons  of  Usnach  under  my  protection."  "Is  that  true?"  said  Conall.  "  It  is  true,  indeed,"  said  lollan.  "  By  my  hand  of  valour,"  said  Conall,  "  Conchubar  will  not  get  his  own  son  alive  from  me  to  avenge  it,"  and  he  gave  a  stroke  of  the  sword  to  Fiacra,  so  that  he  struck  his  head  off,  and  he  left  them  so.  The  clouds  of  death  came  upon  Fair-  Haired  lollan  then,  and  he  threw  his  arms  towards  the  fortress,  and  called  out  to  Naoise  to  do  bravery,  and  after  that  he  died. 

It  is  then  Conchubar  himself  came  out  and  nineteen  hundred  men  with  him,  and  Conall  said  to  him  :  "  Go  up  now  to  the  doorway  of  the  fort,  and  see  where  your  sister's  children  are  lying  on  a  bed  of  trouble."  And  when  Conchubar  saw  them  he  said  :  "  You  are  not  sister's  children  to  me  ;  it  is  not  the  deed  of  sister's  children  you  have  done  me,  but  you  have  done  harm  to  me  with  treachery  in  the  sight  of  all  the  men  of  Ireland."  i\nd  it  is  what  Ainnle  said  to  him  :  "  Although  we  took  well-shaped,  soft-handed  Deirdre  from  you,  yet  we  did  a  little  kindness  to  you  at  another  time,  and  this  is  the  time  to  remember  it.  That  day  your  ship  was  breaking  up  on  the  sea,  and  it  full  of  gold  and  silver,  we  gave  you  up  our  own  ship,  and  ourselves  went  swimming  to  the  harbour."  But  Conchubar  said  :  "  If  you  did  fifty  good  deeds  to  me,  surely  this  would  be  my  thanks  ;  I  would  not  give  you  peace,  and  you  in  distress,  but  every  great  want  I  could  put  on  you." 

And  then  Ardan  said  :  ''  We  did  another  little  kind-  ness to  you,  and  this  is  the  time  to  remember  it  ;  the  day  the  speckled  horse  failed  you  on  the  green  of  Dundealgan,  it  was  we  gave  you  the  grey  horse  that  would  bring  you  fast  on  your  road." 

But   Conchubar  said  :  "  If  you  had   done  fifty  good 


132    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

deeds  to  me,  surely  this  would  be  my  thanks  ;  I  would  not  give  you  peace,  and  you  in  distress,  but  every  great  want  I  could  put  on  you." 

And  then  Naoise  said  :  "  We  did  you  another  good  deed,  and  this  is  the  time  to  remember  it ;  we  have  put  you  under  many  benefits  ;  it  is  strong  our  right  is  to  your  protection. 

"  The  time  when  Murcael,  son  of  Brian,  fought  the  seven  battles  at  Beinn  Etair,  we  brought  you,  without  fail,  the  heads  of  the  sons  of  the  king  of  the  South-  East." 

But  Conchubar  said  :  "  If  you  had  done  me  fifty  good  deeds,  surely  this  is  my  thanks  ;  I  would  not  give  you  peace  in  your  distress,  but  every  great  want  I  could  put  upon  you. 

"  Your  death  is  not  a  death  to  me  now,  young  sons  of  Usnach,  since  he  that  was  innocent  fell  by  you,  the  third  best  of  the  horsemen  of  Ireland." 

Then  Deirdre  said  :  "  Rise  up,  Naoise,  take  your  sword,  good  son  of  a  king,  mind  yourself  well,  for  it  is  not  long  that  life  will  be  left  in  your  fair  body." 

It  is  then  all  Conchubar's  men  came  about  the  house,  and  they  put  fires  and  burning  to  it.  Ardan  went  out  then,  and  his  men,  and  put  out  the  fires  and  killed  three  hundred  men.  And  Ainnle  went  out  in  the  third  part  of  the  night,  and  he  killed  three  hundred,  and  did  slaughter  and  destruction  on  them. 

And  Naoise  went  out  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  night,  and  drove  away  all  the  army  from  the  house. 

He  came  into  the  house  after  that,  and  it  is  then  Deirdre  rose  up  and  said  to  him  :  "  By  my  word,  it  is  well  you  won  your  way  ;  and  do  bravery  and  valour  from  this  out,  and  it  was  bad  advice  you  took  when  you  ever  trusted  Conchubar." 

As  for  the  sons  of  Usnach,  after  that  they  made  a  good  protection  with  their  shields,  and  they  put  Deirdre  in  the 


THE   DRUID   SEA  133 

middle  and  linked  the  shields  around  her,  and  they  gave  three  leaps  out  over  the  walls  of  Emain,  and  they  killed  three  hundred  men  in  that  sally. 

When  Conchubar  saw  that,  he  went  to  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Go,  Cathbad,  to  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  work  enchantment  on  them  ;  for  unless  they  are  hindered  they  will  destroy  the  men  of  Ulster  for  ever  if  they  go  away  in  spite  of  them  ;  and  I  give  the  word  of  a  true  hero,  they  will  get  no  harm  from  me,  but  let  them  only  make  agreement  with  me."  When  Cath-  bad heard  that,  he  agreed,  believing  him,  and  he  went  to  the  end  of  his  arts  and  his  knowledge  to  hinder  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  he  worked  enchantment  on  them,  so  that  he  put  the  likeness  of  a  dark  sea  about  them,  with  hindering  waves.  And  when  Naoise  saw  the  waves  rising  he  put  up  Deirdre  on  his  shoulder,  and  it  is  how  the  sons  of  Usnach  were,  swimming  on  the  ground  as  they  were  going  out  of  Emain  ;  yet  the  men  of  Ulster  did  not  dare  to  come  near  them  until  their  swords  had  fallen  from  their  hands.  But  after  their  swords  fell  from  their  hands,  the  sons  of  Usnach  were  taken.  And  when  they  were  taken,  Conchubar  asked  of  the  children  of  Durthacht  to  kill  them.  But  the  children  of  Durthacht  said  they  would  not  do  that.  There  was  a  young  man  with  Conchubar  whose  name  was  Maine,  and  his  surname  Rough-Hand,  son  of  the  king  of  the  fair  Norwegians,  and  it  is  Naoise  had  killed  his  father  and  his  two  brothers  ;  Athrac  and  Triathrach  were  their  names.  And  he  said  he  himself  would  kill  the  sons  of  Usnach.  "  If  that  is  so,"  said  Ardan,  "  kill  me  the  first,  for  I  am  younger  than  my  brothers,  so  that  I  will  not  see  my  brothers  killed."  "  Let  him  not  be  killed  but  myself,"  said  Ainnle.  "  Let  that  not  be  done,"  said  Naoise,  "  for  I  have  a  sword  that  Manannan,  son  of  Lir,  gave  me,  and  the  stroke  of  it  leaves  nothing  after  it,  track  nor  trace ;  and  strike  the   three  of  us  together,  and  we  will  die  at  the 


134    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

one  time."  ''  That  is  well,"  said  they  all,  "  and  let  you  lay  down  your  heads,"  they  said.  They  did  that,  and  Maine  gave  a  strong  quick  blow  of  the  sword  on  the  three  necks  together  on  the  block,  and  struck  the  three  heads  off  them  with  one  stroke  ;  and  the  men  of  Ulster  gave  three  loud  sorrowful  shouts,  and  cried  aloud  about  them  there. 

As  for  Deirdre,  she  cried  pitifully,  wearily,  and  tore  her  fair  hair,  and  she  was  talking  on  the  sons  of  Usnach  and  on  Alban,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  A  blessing  eastward  to  Alban  from  me  ;  good  is  the  sight  of  her  bays  and  valleys,  pleasant  was  it  to  sit  on  the  slopes  of  her  hills,  where  the  sons  of  Usnach  used  to  be  hunting. 

"  One  day,  when  the  nobles  of  Scotland  were  drinking  with  the  sons  of  Usnach,  to  whom  they  owed  their  affection,  Naoise  gave  a  kiss  secretly  to  the  daughter  of  the  lord  of  Duntreon.  He  sent  her  a  frightened  deer,  wild,  and  a  fawn  at  its  foot ;  and  he  went  to  visit  her  coming  home  from  the  host  of  Inverness,  When  myself  heard  that,  my  head  filled  full  of  jealousy  ;  I  put  my  boat  on  the  waves,  it  was  the  same  to  me  to  live  or  to  die.  They  followed  me  swimming,  Ainnle  and  Ardan,  that  never  said  a  lie ;  they  turned  me  back  again,  two  that  would  give  battle  to  a  hundred  ;  Naoise  gave  me  his  true  word,  he  swore  three  times  with  his  arms  as  witness,  he  would  never  put  vexation  on  me  again,  until  he  would  go  from  me  to  the  hosts  of  the  dead. 

"  Och !  if  she  knew  to-night,  Naoise  to  be  under  a  covering  of  clay,  it  is  she  would  cry  her  fill,  and  it  is  I  would  cry  along  with  her." 

After  she  had  made  this  complaint,  seeing  they  were  all  taken  up  with  one  another,  Deirdre  came  forward  on  the  lawn,  and  she  was  running  round  and  round,  up  and  down,  from  one  to  another,  and  Cuchulain  met 


DEIRDRE'S   LAMENT  135 

her,  and  she  told  him  the  story  from  first  to  last,  how  it  had  happened  to  the  sons  of  Usnach.  It  is  sorrow-  ful Cuchulain  was  for  that,  for  there  was  not  in  the  world  a  man  was  dearer  to  him  than  Naoise.  And  he  asked  who  killed  him.  "  Maine  Rough- Hand,"  said  Deirdre.  Then  Cuchulain  went  away,  sad  and  sorrow-  ful, to  Dundealgan. 

After  that  Deirdre  lay  down  by  the  grave,  and  they  were  digging  earth  from  it,  and  she  made  this  lament  after  the  sons  of  Usnach  : 

"  Long  is  the  day  without  the  sons  of  Usnach  ;  it  was  never  wearisome  to  be  in  their  company  ;  sons  of  a  king  that  entertained  exiles  ;  three  lions  of  the  Hill  of  the  Cave. 

"  Three  darlings  of  the  women  of  Britain  ;  three  hawks  of  Slieve  Cuilenn  ;  sons  of  a  king  served  by  valour,  to  whom  warriors  did  obedience.  The  three  mighty  bears  ;  three  lions  of  the  fort  of  Conrach  ;  three  sons  of  a  king  who  thought  well  of  their  praise  ;  three  nurslings  of  the  men  of  Ulster. 

"  Three  heroes  not  good  at  homage  ;  their  fall  is  a  cause  of  sorrow  ;  three  sons  of  the  sister  of  a  king  ;  three  props  of  the  army  of  Cuailgne. 

"  Three  dragons  of  Dun  Monad,  the  three  valiant  men  from  the  Red  Branch ;  I  myself  will  not  be  living  after  them,  the  three  that  broke  hard  battles. 

"  Three  that  were  brought  up  by  Aoife,  to  whom  lands  were  under  tribute  ;  three  pillars  in  the  breach  of  battle  ;  three  pupils  that  were  with  Scathach. 

"  Three  pupils  that  were  with  Uathach ;  three  champions  that  were  lasting  in  might  ;  three  shin-  ing sons  of  Usnach  ;  it  is  weariness  to  be  without  them. 

"  The  High  King  of  Ulster,  my  first  betrothed,  I  forsook  for  love  of  Naoise  ;  short  my  life  will  be  after  him  ;  I  will  make  keening  at  their  burial. 


136    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

"That  I  would  live  after  Naoise  let  no  one  think  on  the  earth  ;  I  will  not  go  on  living  after  Ainnle  and  after  Ardan. 

"  After  them  I  myself  will  not  live ;  three  that  would  leap  through  the  midst  of  battle ;  since  my  be-  loved is  gone  from  me  I  will  cry  my  fill  over  his  grave. 

"  O  young  man,  digging  the  new  grave,  do  not  make  the  grave  narrow  ;  I  will  be  along  with  them  in  the  grave,  making  lamentation  and  ochones ! 

"  Many  the  hardship  I  met  with  along  with  the  three  heroes  ;  I  suffered  want  of  house,  want  of  fire,  it  is  myself  that  used  not  to  be  troubled. 

"  Their  three  shields  and  their  spears  made  a  bed  for  me  often.  O  young  man,  put  their  three  swords  close  over  their  grave. 

"  Their  three  hounds,  their  three  hawks,  will  be  from  this  time  without  huntsmen ;  three  helpers  of  every  battle ;    three  pupils  of  Conall  Cearnach. 

"  The  three  leashes  of  those  three  hounds  have  brought  a  sigh  from  my  heart ;  it  is  I  had  the  care  of  them,  the  sight  of  them  is  a  cause  of  grief 

"  I  was  never  one  day  alone  to  the  day  of  the  making  of  this  grave,  though  it  is  often  that  myself  and  your-  selves were  in  loneliness. 

"  My  sight  is  gone  from  me  with  looking  at  the  grave  of  Naoise ;  it  is  short  till  my  life  will  leave  me,  and  those  who  would  have  keened  me  do  not  live. 

"  Since  it  is  through  me  they  were  betrayed  I  will  be  tired  out  with  sorrow ;  it  is  a  pity  I  was  not  in  the  earth  before  the  sons  of  Usnach  were  killed. 

"  Sorrowful  was  my  journey  with  Fergus,  betraying  me  to  the  Red  Branch ;  we  were  deceived  all  together  with  his  sweet,  flowery  words.  I  left  the  delights  of  Ulster  for  the  three  heroes  that  were  bravest ;  my  life  will  not  be  long,  I  myself  am  alone  after  them. 


CONCHUBAR'S   MESSAGE         137 

"  I  am  Deirdre  without  gladness,  and  I  at  the  end  of  my  life ;  since  it  is  grief  to  be  without  them,  I  myself  will  not  be  long  after  them." 

After  that  complaint  Deirdre  loosed  out  her  hair,  and  threw  herself  on  the  body  of  Naoise  before  it  was  put  in  the  grave  and  gave  three  kisses  to  him,  and  when  her  mouth  touched  his  blood,  the  colour  of  burning  sods  came  into  her  cheeks,  and  she  rose  up  like  one  that  had  lost  her  wits,  and  she  went  on  through  the  night  till  she  came  to  where  the  waves  were  breaking  on  the  strand.  And  a  fisherman  was  there  and  his  wife,  and  they  brought  her  into  their  cabin  and  sheltered  her,  and  she  neither  smiled  nor  laughed,  nor  took  food,  drink,  or  sleep,  nor  raised  her  head  from  her  knees,  but  crying  always  after  the  sons  of  Usnach. 

But  when  she  could  not  be  found  at  Emain,  Conchubar  sent  Levarcham  to  look  for  her,  and  to  bring  her  back  to  his  palace,  that  he  might  make  her  his  wife.  And  Levarcham  found  her  in  the  fisherman's  cabin,  and  she  bade  her  come  back  to  Emain,  where  she  would  have  protection  and  riches  and  all  that  she  would  ask.  And  she  gave  her  this  message  she  brought  from  Conchubar  :  "  Come  up  to  my  house,  O  branch  with  the  dark  eye-lashes,  and  there  need  be  no  fear  on  your  fair  face,  of  hatred  or  of  jealousy  or  of  reproach."  And  Deirdre  said  :  "  I  will  not  go  up  to  his  house,  for  it  is  not  land  or  earth  or  food  I  am  wanting,  or  gold  or  silver  or  horses,  but  leave  to  go  to  the  grave  where  the  sons  of  Usnach  are  lying,  till  I  give  the  three  honey  kisses  to  their  three  white,  beautiful  bodies."  And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  Make  keening  for  the  heroes  that  were  killed  on  their  coming  to  Ireland  ;  stately  they  used  to  be,  coming  to  the  house,  the  three  great  sons  of  Usnach. 

"The  sons  of  Usnach  fell  in  the  fight  like  three  branches  that  were  growing  straight  and  nice,  and  they 


138  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  US  XACH 

destroyed  in  a  heavy  storm  that  left  neither   bud    nor  twig  of  them. 

''  Xaoise,  my  gentle,  well-learned  comrade,  make  no  delay  in  crying  him  with  me ;  cry  for  Ardan  that  killed  the  wild  boars,  cry  for  Ainnle  whose  stength  was  great 

"  It  was  Naoise  that  would  kiss  my  lips,  my  first  man  and  my  first  sweetheart ;  it  was  Ainnle  would  pour  out  my  drink,  and  it  was  Ardan  would  lay  my  pillow. 

"  Though  sweet  to  you  is  the  mead  that  is  drunk  by  the  soft-living  son  of  Ness,  the  food  of  the  sons  of  Usnach  was  sweeter  to  me  all  through  my  lifetime. 

"  Whenever  Naoise  would  go  out  to  hunt  through  the  woods  or  the  wide  plains,  all  the  meat  he  would  bring  back  was  better  to  me  than  honey. 

"  Though  sweet  to  you  are  the  sounds  of  pipes  and  of  trumpets,  it  is  truly  I  say  to  the  king,  I  have  heard  music  that  is  sweeter. 

"  Delightful  to  Conchubar,  the  king,  are  pipes  and  trumpets  ;  but  the  singing  of  the  sons  of  Usnach  was  more  delightful  to  me. 

"It  was  Naoise  had  the  deep  sound  of  the  waves  in  his  voice  ;  it  was  the  song  of  Ardan  that  was  good,  and  the  voice  of  Ainnle  towards  their  green  dwelling-place. 

"  Their  birth  was  beautiful  and  their  blossoming,  as  they  grew  to  the  strength  of  manhood ;  sad  is  the  end  to-day,  the  sons  of  Usnach  to  be  cut  down. 

"  Dear  were  their  pleasant  words,  dear  their  young,  high  strength ;  in  their  going  through  the  plains  of  Ireland  there  was  a  welcome  before  the  coming  of  their  strength. 

"  Dear  their  grey  eyes  that  were  loved  by  women,  many  looked  on  them  as  they  went ;  when  they  went  freely  searching  through  the  woods,  their  steps  were  pleasant  on  the  dark  mountain. 


DEIRDRE'S    DEATH  139 

"  I  do  not  sleep  at  any  time,  and  the  colour  is  gone  from  my  face ;  there  is  no  sound  can  give  me  delight  since  the  sons  of  Usnach  do  not  come. 

"  I  do  not  sleep  through  the  night ;  my  senses  are  scattered  away  from  me,  I  do  not  care  for  food  or  drink.  I  have  no  welcome  to-day  for  the  pleasant  drink  of  nobles,  or  ease,  or  comfort,  or  delight,  or  a  great  house,  or  the  palace  of  a  king. 

•'  Do  not  break  the  strings  of  my  heart  as  you  took  hold  of  my  young  youth,  Conchubar ;  though  my  darling  is  dead,  my  love  is  strong  to  live.  What  is  country  to  me,  or  land,  or  lordship?  What  are  swift  horses?  What  are  jewels  and  gold?  Och !  it  is  I  will  be  lying  to-night  on  the  strand  like  the  beautiful  sons  of  Usnach." 

So  Levarcham  went  back  to  Conchubar  to  tell  him  what  way  Deirdre  was,  and  that  she  would  not  come  with  her  to  Emain  Macha. 

And  when  she  was  gone,  Deirdre  went  out  on  the  strand,  and  she  found  a  carpenter  making  an  oar  for  a  boat,  and  making  a  mast  for  it,  clean  and  straight,  to  put  up  a  sail  to  the  wind.  And  when  she  saw  him  making  it,  she  said  :  "  It  is  a  sharp  knife  you  have,  to  cut  the  oar  so  clean  and  so  straight,  and  if  you  will  give  it  to  me,"  she  said,  "  I  will  give  you  a  ring  of  the  best  gold  in  Ireland  for  it,  the  ring  that  belonged  to  Naoise,  and  that  was  with  him  through  the  battle  and  through  the  fight ;  he  thought  much  of  it  in  his  lifetime ;  it  is  pure  gold,  through  and  through."  So  the  carpenter  took  the  ring  in  his  hand,  and  the  knife  in  the  other  hand,  and  he  looked  at  them  together,  and  he  gave  her  the  knife  for  the  ring,  and  for  her  asking  and  her  tears.  Then  Deirdre  went  close  to  the  waves,  and  she  said :  "  Since  the  other  is  not  with  me  now,  I  will  spend  no  more  of  my  lifetime  without  him."     And  with  that  she  drove  the  black  knife  into 


140    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSXACH 

her  side,  but  she  drew  it  out  again  and  threw  it  in  the  sea  to  her  right  hand,  the  way  no  one  would  be  blamed  for  her  death. 

Then  Conchubar  came  down  to  the  strand  and  five  hundred  men  along  with  him,  to  bring  Deirdre  away  to  Emain  Macha,  but  all  he  found  before  him  was  her  white  body  on  the  ground,  and  it  without  life.  And  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"A  thousand  deaths  on  the  time  I  brought  death  on  my  sister's  children  ;  now  I  am  myself  without  Deirdre,  and  they  themselves  are  without  life. 

"  They  were  my  sister's  children,  the  three  brothers  I  vexed  with  blows,  Naoise,  and  Ainnle,  and  Ardan ;  they  have  died  along  with  Deirdre." 

And  they  took  her  white,  beautiful  body,  and  laid  it  in  a  grave,  and  a  flagstone  was  raised  over  her  grave,  and  over  the  grave  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  their  names  were  written  in  Ogham,  and  keening  was  made  for  their  burial. 

And  as  to  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  he  came  on  the  day  after  the  children  of  Usnach  were  killed,  to  Emain  Macha.  And  when  he  found  they  had  been  killed  and  his  pledge  to  them  broken,  he  himself,  and  Cormac  Conloingeas,  Conchubar's  own  son,  and  Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  with  their  men,  made  an  attack  on  Conchubar's  house  and  men,  and  a  great  many  were  killed  by  them,  and  Emain  Macha  was  burned  and  destroyed. 

And  after  doing  that,  they  went  into  Connaught,  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve  at  Cruachan,  and  they  were  made  welcome  there,  and  they  took  service  with  them  and  fought  with  them  against  Ulster  because  of  the  treachery  that  was  done  by  Conchubar.  And  that  is  the  way  Fergus  and  the  others  came  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  men  of  Connaught  in  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


CATHEAD'S   CURSE  141 

And  Cathbad  laid  a  curse  on  Emain  Macha,  on  account  of  that  great  wrong.  And  it  is  what  he  said,  that  none  of  the  race  of  Conchubar  should  have  the  kingdom,  to  the  end  of  life  and  time. 

And  that  came  true,  for  the  most  of  Conchubar's  sons  died  in  his  own  lifetime,  and  when  he  was  near  his  death,  he  bade  the  men  of  Ulster  bring  back  Cormac  Conloingeas  out  of  Cruachan,  and  give  him  the  kingdom. 

So  they  sent  messengers  to  Cormac,  and  he  set  out  and  his  three  troops  of  men  with  him,  and  he  left  his  blessing  with  Ailell  and  with  Maeve,  and  he  promised  them  a  good  return  for  all  the  kind  treatment  they  had  given  him.  And  they  crossed  the  river  at  Athluain,  and  there  they  saw  a  red  woman  at  the  edge  of  the  ford,  and  she  washing  her  chariot  and  her  harness.  And  after  that  they  met  a  young  girl  coming  towards  them,  and  a  light  green  cloak  about  her,  and  a  brooch  of  precious  stones  at  her  breast.  And  Cormac  asked  her  was  she  coming  with  them,  and  she  said  she  was  not,  and  it  would  be  better  for  himself  to  turn  back,  for  the  ruin  of  his  life  was  come. 

And  he  stopped  for  the  night  at  the  House  of  the  Two  Smiths  on  the  hill  ofBruighean  Mor,  the  great  dwelling-  place. 

But  a  troop  of  the  men  of  Connaught  came  about  the  house  in  the  night,  for  they  were  on  the  way  home  after  destroying  and  robbing  a  district  of  Ulster,  and  they  thought  to  make  an  end  of  Cormac  before  he  would  get  to  Emain. 

And  it  chanced  there  was  a  great  harper,  Craiftine,  living  close  by,  and  his  wife,  Sceanb,  daughter  of  Scethern,  a  Druid  of  Connaught,  loved  Cormac  Con-  loingeas, and  three  times  she  had  gone  to  meet  him  at  Athluain,  and  she  planted  three  trees  there — Grief,  and  Dark,  and  Dumbness. 


142    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

And  there  was  great  hatred  and  jealousy  of  Cormac  on  Craiftine,  so  when  he  knew  the  men  of  Connaught  were  going  to  make  an  attack  on  him,  he  went  outside  the  house  with  his  harp,  and  played  a  soft  sleepy  tune  to  him,  the  way  he  had  not  the  strength  to  rouse  himself  up,  and  himself  and  the  most  of  his  people  were  killed.  And  Amergin,  that  had  gone  with  the  message  to  him,  made  his  grave  and  his  mound,  and  the  place  is  called  Cluain  Duma,  the  Lawn  of  the  Mound. 


VIII 

THE  DREAM  OF  ANGUS  OG 

A  NGUS,  son  of  the  Dagda,  was  asleep  in  his  bed  one  '^^  night,  and  he  saw  what  he  thought  was  a  young  girl  standing  near  him  at  the  top  of  the  bed,  and  she  the  most  beautiful  he  had  ever  seen  in  Ireland.  He  put  out  his  hand  to  take  her  hand,  but  she  vanished  on  the  moment,  and  in  the  morning  when  he  awoke  there  were  no  trace  or  tidings  of  her. 

He  got  no  rest  that  day  thinking  of  her,  and  that  she  had  gone  away  before  he  could  speak  to  her.  And  the  next  night  he  saw  her  again,  and  this  time  she  brought  a  little  harp  in  her  hand,  the  sweetest  he  ever  heard,  and  she  played  a  song  to  him,  so  that  he  fell  asleep  and  slept  till  morning.  And  the  same  thing  happened  every  night  for  a  year.  She  would  come  to  his  bedside  and  be  playing  on  the  harp  to  him,  but  she  would  be  gone  before  he  could  speak  with  her.  And  at  the  end  of  the  year  she  came  no  more,  and  Angus  began  to  pine  away  with  love  of  her  and  with  fretting  after  her ;  and  he  would  take  no  food,  but  lay  upon  the  bed,  and  no  one  knew  what  it  was  ailed  him.  And  all  the  physicians  of  Ireland  came  together,  but  they  could  not  put  a  name  on  his  sickness  or  find  any  cure  for  him. 

But  at  last  Fergne,  the  physician  of  Conn,  was  brought  to  him,  and  as  soon  as  he  looked  at  him  he  knew  it  was  not  on  his  body  the  sickness  was,  but  on  his  mind.    And 

U3 


144   THE  DREAM  OF  ANGUS  OG 

he  sent  every  one  away  out  of  the  room,  and  he  said  :  "  I  think  it  is  for  the  love  of  some  woman  that  you  are  wasting  away  like  this."  "  That  is  true,  indeed,"  said  Angus  ;  "  and  it  is  my  sickness  has  betrayed  me."  And  then  he  told  him  how  the  woman  with  the  most  beautiful  appearance  of  any  woman  in  Ireland,  used  to  come  and  to  be  playing  the  harp  to  him  through  the  night,  and  how  she  had  vanished  away. 

Then  Fergne  went  and  spoke  with  Boann,  Angus's  mother,  and  he  told  her  all  that  happened,  and  he  bade  her  to  send  and  search  all  through  Ireland  if  she  could  find  a  young  girl  of  the  same  appearance  as  the  one  Angus  had  seen  in  his  sleep.  And  then  he  left  him  in  his  mother's  care,  and  she  had  all  Ireland  searched  for  a  year,  but  no  young  girl  of  that  appear-  ance could  be  found. 

At  the  end  of  the  year,  Boann  sent  for  Fergne  to  come  again,  and  she  said  :  "  We  have  not  got  any  help  from  our  search  up  to  this."  And  Fergne  said  :  "  Send  for  the  Dagda,  that  he  may  come  and  speak  to  his  son."  So  they  sent  for  the  Dagda,  and  when  he  came,  he  said  :  "  What  have  I  been  called  for  ?  "  "  To  give  an  advice  to  your  son,"  said  Fergne,  "  and  to  help  him,  for  he  is  lying  sick  on  account  of  a  young  girl  that  appeared  to  him  in  his  sleep,  and  that  cannot  be  found  ;  and  it  would  be  a  pity  for  him  to  die."  "  What  use  will  it  be,  I  to  speak  to  him  ?  "  said  the  Dagda,  "  for  my  knowledge  is  no  higher  than  your  own."  "  By  my  word,"  said  Fergne,  "you  are  the  king  of  all  the  Sidhe  of  Ireland,  and  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  go  to  Bodb,  the  king  of  the  Sidhe  of  Munster,  for  he  has  a  name  for  knowledge  all  through  Ireland."  So  messengers  were  sent  to  Bodb,  at  his  house  in  Sidhe  Femain,  and  he  bade  them  welcome.  "  A  welcome  before  you,  messenger  of  the  Dagda,"  he  said,  "and  what  is  the  message  you  have  brought  ? "     "  This  is  the  message,"  they  said,  "  Angus 


CAER  145 

Og,  son  of  the  Dagda,  is  wasting  away  these  two  years  with  love  of  a  woman  he  saw  in  his  dreams,  and  we  have  not  been  able  to  find  her  in  any  place.  And  this  is  an  order  to  you,"  they  said,  "  from  the  Dagda,  to  search  out  through  Ireland  a  young  girl  of  the  same  form  and  appearance  as  the  one  he  saw."  "  The  search  will  be  made,"  said  Bodb,  "  if  it  lasts  me  a  year." 

And  at  the  end  of  a  year  he  sent  messengers  to  the  Dagda.  "  Is  it  a  good  message  you  have  brought  ? "  said  the  Dagda.  "  It  is,  indeed,"  they  said  ;  "  and  this  is  the  message  Bodb  bade  us  give  you, '  I  have  searched  all  Ireland  until  I  found  the  young  girl  with  the  same  form  and  appearance  that  you  said,  at  Loch  Beul  Draguin,  at  the  Harp  of  Cliach.'  And  now,"  they  said,  "  he  bids  Angus  to  come  with  us,  till  he  sees  if  it  is  the  same  woman  that  appeared  to  him  in  his  dream." 

So  Angus  set  out  in  his  chariot  to  Sidhe  Femain,  and  Bodb  bade  him  welcome,  and  made  a  great  feast  for  him,  that  lasted  three  days  and  three  nights.  And  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  said :  "  Come  out  now  with  me,  and  see  if  this  is  the  same  woman  that  came  to  you." 

So  they  set  out  together  till  they  came  to  the  sea,  and  there  they  saw  three  times  fifty  young  girls,  and  the  one  they  were  looking  for  among  them  ;  and  she  was  far  beyond  them  all.  And  there  was  a  silver  chain  between  every  two  of  them,  but  about  her  own  neck  there  was  a  necklace  of  shining  gold.  And  Bodb  said  :  "  Do  you  see  that  woman  you  were  looking  for  ?  "  "I  see  her,  indeed,"  said  Angus.  "  But  tell  me  who  is  she,  and  what  her  name  is."  '*  Her  name  is  Caer  Ormaith,  daughter  of  Ethal  Anbual,  from  Sidhe  Uaman,  in  the  province  of  Connaught.  But  you  cannot  bring  her  away  with  you  this  time,"  said  Bodb. 

Then  Angus  went  to  visit  his  father,  the  Dagda,  and  his  mother,  Boann,  at  Brugh  na  Boinne ;  and  Bodb 

K 


146   THE  DREAM  OF  ANGUS  OG 

went  with  him,  and  they  told  how  they  had  seen  the  girl,  and  they  had  heard  her  own  name,  and  her  father's  name.  "  What  had  we  best  do  now  ?  "  said  the  Dagda.  "  The  best  thing  for  you  to  do,"  said  Bodb,  "  is  to  go  to  Ailell  and  Maeve,  for  it  is  in  their  district  she  lives,  and  you  had  best  ask  their  help." 

So  the  Dagda  set  out  until  he  came  into  the  province  of  Connaught,  and  sixty  chariots  with  him  ;  and  Ailell  and  Maeve  made  a  great  feast  for  him.  And  after  they  had  been  feasting  and  drinking  for  the  length  of  a  week,  Ailell  asked  the  reason  of  their  journey.  And  the  Dagda  said  :  "  It  is  by  reason  of  a  young  girl  in  your  district,  for  my  son  has  sickness  upon  him  on  account  of  her,  and  I  am  come  to  ask  if  you  will  give  her  to  him."  "  Who  is  she  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  She  is  Caer  Ormaith,  daughter  of  Ethal  Anbual."  "We  have  no  power  over  her  that  we  could  give  her  to  him,"  said  Ailell  and  Maeve.  "  The  best  thing  for  you  to  do,"  said  the  Dagda,  "  would  be  to  call  her  father  here  to  you." 

So  Ailell  sent  his  steward  to  Ethal  Anbual,  and  he  said  :  "  I  am  come  to  bid  you  to  go  and  speak  with  Ailell  and  with  Maeve."  "  I  will  not  go,"  he  said ;  "  I  will  not  give  my  daughter  to  the  son  of  the  Dagda."  So  the  steward  went  back  and  told  this  to  Ailell.  "  He  will  not  come,"  he  said,  "  and  he  knows  the  reason  you  want  him  for." 

Then  there  was  anger  an  Ailell  and  on  the  Dagda,  and  they  went  out,  and  their  armed  men  with  them,  and  they  destroyed  the  whole  place  of  Ethal  Anbual,  and  he  was  brought  before  them.  And  Ailell  said  to  him :  "  Give  your  daughter  now  to  the  son  of  the  Dagda."  "That  is  what  I  cannot  do,"  he  said,  "for  there  is  a  power  over  her  that  is  greater  than  mine."  "  What  power  is  that  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  It  is  an  enchant-  ment," he  said,  "  that  is  on  her,  she  to  be  in  the  shape 


THE   TWO   SWANS  147 

of  a  bird  for  one  year,  and  in  her  own  shape  the  next  year,"  "Which  shape  is  on  her  at  this  time?"  said  Ailell.  "  I  would  not  like  to  say  that,"  said  her  father.  "  Your  head  from  you  if  you  will  not  tell  it,"  said  Ailell. 

"  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  will  tell  you  this  much  ;  she  will  be  in  the  shape  of  a  swan  next  month  at  Loch  Beul  Draguin,  and  three  fifties  of  beautiful  birds  will  be  along  with  her,  and  if  you  will  go  there,  you  will  see  her." 

So  then  Ethal  was  set  free,  and  he  made  friends  again  with  Ailell  and  Maeve;  and  the  Dagda  went  home  and  told  Angus  all  that  had  happened,  and  he  said  :  "  Go  next  summer  to  Loch  Beul  Draguin,  and  call  her  to  you  there." 

So  when  the  time  came,  Angus  Og  went  to  the  loch,  and  he  saw  the  three  times  fifty  white  birds  there,  with  their  silver  chains  about  their  necks.  And  Angus  stood  in  a  man's  shape  at  the  edge  of  the  loch,  and  he  called  to  the  girl  :  "  Come  and  speak  with  me,  O  Caer ! "  "  Who  is  calling  me  ?  "  said  Caer.  "  Angus  calls  you,"  he  said,  "  and  if  you  come,  I  swear  by  my  word,  I  will  not  hinder  you  from  going  into  the  loch  again."  "  I  will  come,"  she  said.  So  she  came  to  him,  and  he  laid  his  two  hands  on  her,  and  then,  to  hold  to  his  word,  he  took  the  shape  of  a  swan  on  himself,  and  they  went  into  the  loch  together,  and  they  went  around  it  three  times.  And  then  they  spread  their  wings  and  rose  up  from  the  loch,  and  went  in  that  shape  till  they  were  at  Brugh  na  Boinne.  And  as  they  were  going,  the  music  they  made  was  so  sweet  that  all  the  people  that  heard  it  fell  asleep  for  three  days  and  three  nights. 

And  Caer  stopped  there  with  him  ever  afterwards,  and  from  that  time  there  was  friendship  between  Angus  Og  and  Ailell  and  Maeve.  And  it  was  on  account  of  that  friendship,  Angus  gave  them  his  help  at  the  time  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


IX 

CRUACHAN 

"VTOW  as  to  Cruachan,  the  home  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  it  is  on  the  plain  of  IMagh  Ai  it  was,  in  the  province  of  Connaught. 

And  this  is  the  way  the  plain  came  by  its  name.  In  the  time  long  ago,  there  was  a  king  whose  name  was  Conn,  that  had  the  Druid  power,  so  that  when  the  Sidhe  themselves  came  against  him,  he  was  able  to  defend  himself  with  enchantments  as  good  as  their  own.  And  one  time  he  went  out  against  them,  and  broke  up  their  houses,  and  carried  away  their  cattle,  and  then,  to  hinder  them  from  following  after  him,  he  covered  the  whole  province  with  a  deep  snow. 

The  Sidhe  went  then  to  consult  with  Dalach,  the  king's  brother,  that  had  the  Druid  knowledge  even  better  than  himself;  and  it  is  what  he  told  them  to  do,  to  kill  three  hundred  white  cows  with  red  ears,  and  to  spread  out  their  livers  on  a  certain  plain.  And  when  they  had  done  this,  he  made  spells  on  them,  and  the  heat  the  livers  gave  out  melted  the  snow  over  the  whole  plain  and  the  whole  province,  and  after  that  the  plain  was  given  the  name  of  Magh  Ai,  the  Plain  of  the  Livers. 

Ailell  was  son  of  Ross  Ruadh,  king  of  Leinster,  and  Maeve  was  daughter  of  Eochaid,  king  of  Ireland,  and  her  brothers  were  the  Three  Fair  Twins  that  rose  up  against 

14S 


THE   ROYAL   HOUSE  149 

their  father,  and  fought  against  him  at  Druim  Criadh.  And  they  were  beaten  in  the  fight,  and  went  back  over  the  Sionnan,  and  they  were  overtaken  and  their  heads  were  cut  off,  and  brought  back  to  their  father,  and  he  fretted  after  them  to  the  end  of  his  Hfe. 

Seven  sons  Ailell  and  Maeve  had,  and  the  name  of  every  one  of  them  was  Maine.  There  was  Maine  Mathremail,  Hke  his  mother,  and  Maine  Athremail,  like  his  father,  and  Maine  Mo  Epert,  the  Talker,  and  Maine  Milscothach,  the  Honey-Worded,  and  Maine  Andoe  the  Quick,  and  Maine  Mingor,  the  Gently  Dutiful,  and  Maine  Morgor,  the  Very  Dutiful.  Their  own  people  they  had,  and  their  own  place  of  living. 

This  now  was  the  appearance  of  Cruachan,  the  Royal  house  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  that  some  called  Cruachan  of  the  poets  ;  there  were  seven  divisions  in  the  house,  with  couches  in  them,  from  the  hearth  to  the  wall ;  a  front  of  bronze  to  every  division,  and  of  red  yew  with  carvings  on  it ;  and  there  were  seven  strips  of  bronze  from  the  foundation  to  the  roof  of  the  house.  The  house  was  made  of  oak,  and  the  roof  was  covered  with  oak  shingles  ;  sixteen  windows  with  glass  there  were,  and  shutters  of  bronze  on  them,  and  a  bar  of  bronze  across  every  shutter.  There  was  a  raised  place  in  the  middle  of  the  house  for  Ailell  and  Maeve,  with  silver  fronts  and  strips  of  bronze  around  it,  and  four  bronze  pillars  on  it,  and  a  silver  rod  beside  it,  the  way  Ailell  and  Maeve  could  strike  the  middle  beam  and  check  their  people. 

And  outside  the  royal  house  was  the  dun,  with  the  walls  about  it  that  were  built  by  Brocc,  son  of  Blar,  and  the  great  gate  ;  and  it  is  there  the  houses  were  for  strangers  to  be  lodged. 

And  besides  this,  there  was  at  Cruachan  the  Hill  of  the  Sidhe,  or,  as  some  called  it,  the  Cave  of  Cruachan,  It  was  there  Midhir  brought  Etain  one  time,  and  it  is  there 


150  CRUACHAN 

the    people  of  the   Sidhe  lived  ;   but  it  is  seldom  any  living  person  had  the  power  to  see  them. 

It  is  out  of  that  hill  a  flock  of  white  birds  came  one  time,  and  everything  they  touched  in  all  Ireland  withered  up,  until  at  last  the  men  of  Ulster  killed  them  with  their  slings.  And  another  time  enchanted  pigs  came  out  of  the  hill,  and  in  every  place  they  trod,  neither  corn  nor  grass  nor  leaf  would  sprout  before  the  end  of  seven  years,  and  no  sort  of  weapon  would  wound  them.  But  if  they  were  counted  in  any  place,  or  if  the  people  so  much  as  tried  to  count  them,  they  would  not  stop  in  that  place,  but  they  would  go  on  to  another.  But  how-  ever often  the  people  of  the  country  tried  to  count  them,  no  two  people  could  ever  make  out  the  one  number,  and  one  man  would  call  out,  "  There  are  three  pigs  in  it,"  and  another,  "  No,  but  there  are  seven,"  and  another  that  it  was  eleven  were  in  it,  or  thirteen,  and  so  the  count  would  be  lost.  One  time  Maeve  and  Ailell  themselves  tried  to  count  them  on  the  plain,  but  while  they  were  doing  it,  one  of  the  pigs  made  a  leap  over  Maeve's  chariot,  and  she  in  it.  Every  one  called  out,  "A  pig  has  gone  over  you,  Maeve  I"  "  It  has  not,"  she  said,  and  with  that  she  caught  hold  of  the  pig  by  the  shank,  but  if  she  did,  its  skin  opened  at  the  head,  and  it  made  its  escape.  And  it  is  from  that  the  place  was  called  Magh-mucrimha,  the  Plain  of  Swine-counting. 

Another  time  Fraech,  son  of  Idath,  of  the  men  of  Connaught,  that  was  son  of  Boann's  sister,  Befind,  from  the  Sidhe,  came  to  Cruachan.  He  was  the  most  beauti-  ful of  the  men  of  Ireland  or  of  Alban,  but  his  life  was  not  long.  It  was  to  ask  Findabair  for  his  wife  he  came,  and  before  he  set  out  his  people  said  :  "  Send  a  message  to  your  mother's  people,  the  way  they  will  send  you  cloth-  ing of  the  Sidhe."  So  he  went  to  Boann,  that  was  at  Magh  Breagh,  and  he  brought  away  fifty  blue  cloaks  with  four  black  ears  on  each  cloak,  and  a  brooch  of  red  gold 


FRAECH   AT    CRUACHAN  151 

with  each,  and  pale  white  shirts  with  looped  beasts  of  gold  around  them  ;  and  fifty  silver  shields  with  edges,  and  a  candle  of  a  king's  house  in  the  hand  of  each  of  the  men,  knobs  of  carbuncle  under  them,  and  their  points  of  precious  stones.  They  used  to  light  up  the  night  as  if  they  were  sun's  rays. 

And  he  had  with  him  seven  trumpeters  with  gold  and  silver  trumpets,  with  many  coloured  clothing,  with  golden,  silken,  heads  of  hair,  with  coloured  cloaks  ;  and  three  harpers  with  the  appearance  of  a  king  on  each  of  them,  every  harper  having  the  white  skin  of  a  deer  about  him  and  a  cloak  of  white  linen,  and  a  harp-bag  of  the  skins  of  water-dogs. 

The  watchman  saw  them  from  the  dun  when  they  had  come  into  the  Plain  of  Cruachan.  "  I  see  a  great  crowd,"  he  said,  "  coming  towards  us.  Since  Ailell  was  king  and  Maeve  was  queen,  there  never  came  and  there  never  will  come  a  grander  or  more  beautiful  crowd  than  this  one.  It  is  like  as  if  I  had  my  head  in  a  vat  of  wine,  with  the  breeze  that  goes  over  them." 

Then  Fraech's  people  let  out  their  hounds,  and  the  hounds  found  seven  deer  and  seven  foxes  and  seven  hares  and  seven  wild  boars,  and  hunted  them  to  Rath  Cruachan,  and  there  they  were  killed  on  the  lawn  of  the  dun. 

Then  Ailell  and  Maeve  gave  them  a  welcome,  and  they  were  brought  into  the  house,  and  while  food  was  being  made  ready,  Maeve  sat  down  to  play  a  game  of  chess  with  Fraech.  It  was  a  beautiful  chess-board  they  had,  all  of  white  bronze,  and  the  chessmen  of  gold  and  silver,  and  a  candle  of  precious  stones  lighting  them. 

Then  Ailell  said  :  "  Let  your  harpers  play  for  us  while  the  feast  is  being  made  ready."  "  Let  them  play,  in-  deed," said  Fraech. 

So  the  harpers  began  to  play,  and  it  was  much  that  the  people  of  the  house  did  not  die  with  crying  and 


152  CRUACHAN 

with  sadness.  And  the  music  they  played  was  the  Three  Cries  of  Uaithne.  It  was  Uaithne,  the  harp  of  the  Dagda,  that  first  played  those  cries  the  time  Boann's  sons  were  born.  The  first  was  a  song  of  sorrow  for  the  hardness  of  her  pains,  and  the  second  was  a  song  of  smiling  and  joy  for  the  birth  of  her  sons,  and  the  third  was  a  sleeping  song  after  the  birth. 

And  with  the  music  of  the  harpers,  and  with  the  light  that  shone  from  the  precious  stones  in  the  house,  they  did  not  know  the  night  was  on  them,  till  at  last  Maeve  started  up,  and  she  said :  "  We  have  done  a  great  deed  to  keep  these  young  men  without  food."  "  It  is  more  you  think  of  chess-playing  than  of  providing  for  them,"  said  Ailell  ;  "  and  now,  let  them  stop  from  the  music,"  he  said,  "till  the  food  is  given  out." 

Then  the  food  was  divided.  It  was  Lothar  used  to  be  sitting  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  dividing  the  food  with  his  cleaver,  and  he  not  eating  himself,  and  from  the  time  he  began  dividing,  food  never  failed  under  his  hand. 

After  that,  Fraech  was  brought  into  the  conversation-  house,  and  they  asked  him  what  was  it  he  wanted. 

"  A  visit  to  yourselves,"  he  said,  but  he  said  nothing  of  Findabair.  So  they  told  him  he  was  welcome,  and  he  stopped  with  them  for  a  while,  and  every  day  they  went  out  hunting,  and  all  the  people  of  Connaught  used  to  come  and  to  be  looking  at  them. 

But  all  this  time  Fraech  got  no  chance  of  speaking  with  Findabair,  until  one  morning  at  daybreak,  he  went  down  to  the  river  for  washing,  and  Findabair  and  her  young  girls  had  gone  there  before  him.  And  he  took  her  hand,  and  he  said  :  "  Stay  here  and  talk  with  me,  for  it  is  for  your  sake  I  am  come,  and  would  you  go  away  with  me  secretly ? "  "I  will  not  go  secretly,"  she  said,  "  for  I  am  the  daughter  of  a  king  and  of  a  queen." 


AILELL'S   TREACHERY  153 

So  she  went  from  him  then,  but  she  left  him  a  ring  to  remember  her  by.  It  was  a  ring  her  mother  had  given  her. 

Then  Fraech  went  to  the  conversation-house  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve.  "  Will  you  give  your  daughter  to  me  ?  "  he  said.  "  We  will  give  her  if  you  will  give  the  marriage  portion  we  ask,"  said  Ailell,  "  and  that  is,  sixty  black-  grey  horses  with  golden  bits,  and  twelve  milch  cows,  and  a  white  red-eared  calf  with  each  of  them  ;  and  you  to  come  with  us  with  all  your  strength  and  all  your  musicians  at  whatever  time  we  go  to  war  in  Ulster."  "  I  swear  by  my  shield  and  my  sword,  I  would  not  give  that  for  Maeve  herself,"  he  said  ;  and  he  went  away  out  of  the  house. 

But  Ailell  had  taken  notice  of  Findabair's  ring  with  Fraech,  and  he  said  to  Maeve :  "  If  he  brings  our  daughter  away  with  him,  we  will  lose  the  help  of  many  of  the  kings  of  Ireland.  Let  us  go  after  him  and  make  an  end  of  him  before  he  has  time  to  harm  us."  "  That  would  be  a  pity,"  said  Maeve.  "  and  it  would  be  a  reproach  on  us."  "  It  will  be  no  reproach  on  us,  the  way  I  will  manage  it,"  said  he.  And  Maeve  agreed  to  it,  for  there  was  vexation  on  her  that  it  was  Findabair  that  Fraech  wanted,  and  not  herself  So  they  went  into  the  palace,  and  Ailell  said  :  "  Let  us  go  and  see  the  hounds  hunting  until  mid-day."  So  they  did  so,  and  at  mid-day  they  were  tired,  and  they  all  went  to  bathe  in  the  river.  And  Fraech  was  swimming  in  the  river,  and  Ailell  said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  come  back  till  you  bring  me  a  branch  of  the  rowan-tree  there  beyond,  with  the  beautiful  berries."  For  he  knew  there  was  a  prophecy  that  it  was  in  a  river  Fraech  would  get  his  death. 

So  he  went  and  broke  a  branch  off  the  tree  and  brought  it  back  over  the  water,  and  it  is  beautiful  he  looked   over  the  black  water,  his  body  without  fault, 


154  CRUACHAN 

and  his  face  so  nice,  and  his  eyes  very  grey,  and  the  branch  with  the  red  berries  between  the  throat  and  the  white  face.  And  then  he  threw  the  branch  to  them  out  of  the  water.  "  It  is  ripe  and  beautiful  the  berries  are,"  said  Ailell  ;  "  bring  us  more  of  them." 

So  he  went  off  again  to  the  tree,  and  the  water- worm  that  guarded  the  tree  caught  a  hold  of  him.  "  Let  me  have  a  sword,"  he  called  out,  but  there  was  not  a  man  on  the  land  would  dare  to  give  it  to  him,  through  fear  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve.  But  Findabair  made  a  leap  to  go  into  the  water  with  a  gold  knife  she  had  in  her  hand,  but  Ailell  threw  a  sharp-pointed  spear  from  above,  through  her  plaited  hair,  that  held  her ;  but  she  threw  the  knife  to  Fraech,  and  he  cut  off  the  head  of  the  monster,  and  brought  it  with  him  to  the  land,  but  he  himself  had  got  a  deep  wound.  Then  Ailell  and  Maeve  went  back  to  the  house.  "  It  is  a  great  deed  we  have  done,"  said  Maeve.  "It  is  a  pity,  indeed,  what  we  have  done  to  the  man,"  said  Ailell.  "  And  let  a  healing-bath  be  made  for  him  now,"  he  said,  "  of  the  marrow  of  pigs  and  of  a  heifer."  Fraech  was  put  in  the  bath  then,  and  pleasant  music  was  played  by  the  trumpeters,  and  a  bed  was  made  for  him. 

Then  a  sorrowful  crying  was  heard  on  Cruachan,  and  they  saw  three  times  fifty  women  with  purple  gowns,  with  green  head-dresses,  and  pins  of  silver  on  their  wrists,  and  a  messenger  went  and  asked  them  who  was  it  they  were  crying  for.  "  For  Fraech,  son  of  Idath,"  they  said,  "  boy  darling  of  the  king  of  the  Sidhe  of  Ireland." 

Then  Fraech  heard  their  crying,  and  he  said  :  "  Lift  me  out  of  this,  for  that  is  the  cry  of  my  mother,  and  of  the  women  of  Boann."  So  they  lifted  him  out,  and  the  women  came  round  him  and  brought  him  away  into  the  Hill  of  Cruachan. 

And  the  next  day   he  came  out,  and  he  whole  and 


NERA'S    ADVENTURE  155 

sound,  and  fifty  women  with  him,  and  they  with  the  appearance  of  women  of  the  Sidhe.  And  at  the  door  of  the  dun  they  left  him,  and  they  gave  out  their  cry  again,  so  that  all  the  people  that  heard  it  could  not  but  feel  sorrowful.  It  is  from  this  the  musicians  of  Ireland  learned  the  sorrowful  cry  of  the  women  of  the  Sidhe. 

And  when  he  went  into  the  house,  the  whole  house-  hold rose  up  before  him  and  bade  him  welcome,  as  if  it  was  from  another  world  he  was  come.  And  there  was  shame  and  repentance  on  Ailell  and  on  Maeve  for  trying  to  harm  him,  and  peace  was  made,  and  he  went  away  to  his  own  place. 

And  it  was  after  that  he  came  to  help  Ailell  and  Maeve,  and  that  he  got  his  death  in  a  river  as  was  foretold,  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 

And  one  time  the  Hill  was  robbed  by  the  men  of  Cruachan,  and  this  is  the  way  it  happened. 

One  night  at  Samhain,  Ailell  and  Maeve  were  in  Cruachan  with  their  whole  household,  and  the  food  was  being  made  ready. 

Two  prisoners  had  been  hanged  by  them  the  day  before,  and  Ailell  said  :  "  Whoever  will  put  a  gad  round  the  foot  of  either  of  the  two  men  on  the  gallows,  will  get  a  prize  from  me." 

It  was  a  very  dark  night,  and  bad  things  would  always  appear  on  that  night  of  Samhain,  and  every  man  that  went  out  to  try  came  back  very  quickly  into  the  house.  "  I  will  go  if  I  will  get  a  prize,"  said  Nera,  then.  "  I  will  give  you  this  gold-hilted  sword,"  said  Ailell. 

So  Nera  went  out  and  he  put  a  gad  round  the  foot  of  one  of  the  men  that  had  been  hanged.  Then  the  man  spoke  to  him.  "  It  is  good  courage  you  have,"  he  said,  "and  bring  me  with  you  where  I  can  get  a  drink,  for  I  was  very  thirsty  when  I  was  hanged."  So  Nera  brought  him  where  he  would  get  a  drink,  and  then  he 


IS6  CRUACHAN 

put    him    on    the    gallows   again,    and    went    back    to  Cruachan. 

But  what  he  saw  was  the  whole  of  the  palace  as  if  on  fire  before  him,  and  the  heads  of  the  people  of  it  lying  on  the  ground,  and  then  he  thought  he  saw  an  army  going  into  the  Hill  of  Cruachan,  and  he  followed  after  the  army.  "  There  is  a  man  on  our  track,"  the  last  man  said.  "  The  track  is  the  heavier,"  said  the  next  to  him,  and  each  said  that  word  to  the  other  from  the  last  to  the  first.  Then  they  went  into  the  Hill  of  Cruachan.  And  they  said  to  their  king :  "  What  shall  be  done  to  the  man  that  is  come  in  ?  "  ''  Let  him  come  here  till  I  speak  with  him,"  said  the  king.  So  Nera  came,  and  the  king  asked  him  who  it  was  had  brought  him  in.  "  I  came  in  with  your  army,"  said  Nera.  "  Go  to  that  house  beyond,"  said  the  king  :  "  there  is  a  woman  there  will  make  you  welcome.  Tell  her  it  is  I  myself  sent  you  to  her.  And  come  every  day,"  he  said,  "  to  this  house  with  a  load  of  firing." 

So  Nera  went  where  he  was  told,  and  the  woman  said  :  "  A  welcome  before  you,  if  it  is  the  king  sent  you."  So  he  stopped  there,  and  took  the  woman  for  his  wife.  And  every  day  for  three  days  he  brought  a  load  of  firing  to  the  king's  house,  and  on  each  day  he  saw  a  blind  man,  and  a  lame  man  on  his  back,  coming  out  of  the  house  before  him.  They  would  go  on  till  they  were  at  the  brink  of  a  well  before  the  Hill.  "  Is  it  there  ?  "  the  blind  man  would  say.  "  It  is,  indeed,"  the  lame  man  would  say.     "  Let  us  go  away,"  the  lame  man  would  say  then. 

And  at  the  end  of  three  days,  as  he  thought,  Nera  asked  the  woman  about  this.  "  Why  do  the  blind  man  and  the  lame  man  go  every  day  to  the  well  ?  "  he  said.  "  They  go  to  know  is  the  crown  safe  that  is  in  the  well.  It  is  there  the  king's  crown  is  kept."  "Why  do  these  two  go  ?  "  said  Nera.  "  It  is  easy  to  tell  that,"  she  said  ;  "  they  are  trusted  by  the  king  to  visit  the  crown,  and 


THE    HILL   OF   THE    SIDHE        157 

one  of  them  was  blinded  by  him,  and  the  other  was  lamed.  And  another  thing,"  she  said,  "go  now  and  give  a  warning  to  your  people  to  mind  themselves  next  Samhain  night,  unless  they  will  come  to  attack  the  hill,  for  it  is  only  at  Samhain,"  she  said,  "  the  army  of  the  Sidhe  can  go  out,  for  it  is  at  that  time  all  the  hills  of  the  Sidhe  of  Ireland  are  opened.  But  if  they  will  come,  I  will  promise  them  this,  the  crown  of  Briun  to  be  carried  off  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve." 

"  How  can  I  give  them  that  message,"  said  Nera,  "when  I  saw  the  whole  dun  of  Cruachan  burned  and  destroyed,  and  all  the  people  destroyed  with  it  ?  "  "  You  did  not  see  that,  indeed,"  she  said.  "  It  was  the  host  of  the  Sidhe  came  and  put  that  appearance  before  your  eyes.  And  go  back  to  them  now,"  she  said,  "  and  you  will  find  them  sitting  round  the  same  great  pot,  and  the  meat  has  not  yet  been  taken  off  the  fire." 

"  How  will  it  be  believed  that  I  have  gone  into  the  Hill  ? "  said  Nera,  "  Bring  flowers  of  summer  with  you,"  said  the  woman.  So  he  brought  wild  garlic  with  him,  and  primroses  and  golden  fern. 

So  he  went  back  to  the  palace,  and  he  found  his  people  round  the  same  great  pot,  and  he  told  them  all  that  had  happened  him,  and  the  sword  was  given  to  him,  and  he  stopped  with  his  people  to  the  end  of  a  year. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  Ailell  said  to  Nera :  "  We  are  going  now  against  the  Hill  of  the  Sidhe,  and  let  you  go  back,"  he  said,  "  if  you  have  anything  to  bring  out  of  it."  So  he  went  back  to  see  the  woman,  and  she  bade  him  welcome.  "  Go  now,"  she  said,  "  and  bring  in  a  load  of  firing  to  the  king,  for  I  went  in  myself  every  day  for  the  last  year  with  the  load  on  my  back,  and  I  said  there  was  sickness  on  you."     So  he  did  that. 

Then  the  men  of  Connaught  and  the  black  host  of  the  exiles  of  Ulster  went  into  the  Hill  and  robbed  it  and  brought  away  the  crown  of  Briun,  son  of  Smetra,  that 


158  CRUACHAN 

was  made  by  the  smith  of  Angus,  son  of  Umor,  and  that  was  kept  in  the  well  at  Cruachan,  to  save  it  from  the  Morrigu.  And  Nera  was  left  with  his  people  in  the  hill,  and  he  has  not  come  out  till  now,  and  he  will  not  come  out  till  the  end  of  life  and  time. 

Now  one  time  the  Morrigu  brought  away  a  cow  from  the  Hill  of  Cruachan  to  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  after  she  brought  it  back  again  its  calf  v/as  born.  And  one  day  it  went  out  of  the  Hill,  and  it  bellowed  three  times.  At  that  time  Ailell  and  Fergus  were  playing  draughts,  for  it  was  after  Fergus  had  come  as  an  exile  from  Ulster,  because  of  the  death  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  they  heard  the  bellowing  of  the  bull-calf  in  the  plain.  Then  Fergus  said  :  "  I  do  not  like  the  sound  of  the  calf  bellowing.  There  will  be  calves  without  cows,"  he  said,  "  when  the  king  goes  on  his  march." 

But  now  Ailell's  bull,  Finbanach,  the  White- Horned,  met  the  calf  in  the  plain  of  Cruachan,  and  they  fought  together,  and  the  calf  was  beaten  and  it  bellowed.  *'  What  did  the  calf  bellow  ?  "  Maeve  asked  her  cow-herd  Buaigle.  "  I  know  that,  my  master,  Fergus,"  said  Bricriu.  "  It  is  the  song  that  you  were  singing  a  while  ago."  On  that  Fergus  turned  and  struck  with  his  fist  at  his  head,  so  that  the  five  men  of  the  chessmen  that  were  in  his  hand  went  into  Bricriu's  head,  and  it  was  a  lasting  hurt  to  him.  "  Tell  me  now,  Buaigle,  what  did  the  calf  bellow?"  said  Maeve.  "It  said  indeed,"  said  Buaigle,  "  that  if  its  father  the  Brown  of  Cuailgne  would  come  to  fight  with  the  White-Horned,  he  would  not  be  seen  any  more  in  Ai,  he  would  be  beaten  through  the  whole  plain  of  Ai  on  every  side."  And  it  is  what  Maeve  said :  "  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,  I  will  not  lie  down  on  feathers,  or  drink  red  or  white  ale,  till  I  see  those  two  bulls  fighting  before  my  face." 


X 

THE  WEDDING  OF  MAINE  MORGOR 

■\  1  rHEN  Maine  Morgor,  the  Very  Dutiful,  the  son  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  set  out  for  his  wedding  with  Ferb,  daughter  of  Gerg  of  Rath  Ini,  in  Ulster,  he  brought  three  troops  of  young  men  with  him,  and  fifty  men  in  each  troop,  and  this  is  the  appearance  that  was  on  the  first  two  troops.  Shining  white  shirts  they  had,  striped  with  purple  down  the  sides  ;  gold  shields  on  their  backs  with  borders  of  white  silver,  with  figures  engraved  on  them,  and  with  edges  of  white  bronze  as  sharp  as  knives.  Great  two-edged  swords  with  silver  hilts  at  their  belts  ;  chains  of  white  silver  round  their  necks.  And  there  were  neither  helmets  on  their  heads,  or  shoes  on  their  feet. 

And  as  to  the  third  troop,  the  one  Maine  himself  was  in,  there  were  fifty  reddish-brown  horses  in  it,  and  fifty  white  horses  with  red  ears,  with  long  manes  and  tails  coloured  purple,  and  bridles  on  them,  with  a  ball  of  red  gold  on  the  one  side,  and  a  ball  of  white  silver  on  the  other  side,  and  a  gold  or  a  silver  bit  to  every  one  of  them.  A  collar  of  gold  with  bells  from  it  on  the  neck  of  every  horse,  and  when  the  horses  would  be  moving,  the  sound  of  these  bells  would  be  as  sweet  as  the  strings  of  a  harp  when  the  player  strikes  it  with  his  hand.  There  was  a  chariot  of  white  bronze  ribbed  with    gold    and    silver    to    every    two    of  the    horses  ; 


i6o     WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

purple  cushions  sewed  with  gold  bound  to  every  chariot ;  fifty  fair  slender  young  men  in  these  fifty  chariots,  and  not  one  among  them  but  was  the  son  of  a  king  and  a  queen,  and  was  a  hero  and  a  brave  man  of  Connaught,  and  they  wearing  purple  cloaks  about  them,  that  had  borders  ornamented  with  gold  and  silver,  and  a  clasp  of  pure  red  gold  to  every  cloak  ;  fine  silk  coats  fastened  with  hooks  of  gold  close  to  their  white  bodies ;  fifty  silver  shields  on  their  backs  with  gold  rims  studded  with  carbuncles  and  other  precious  stones  of  ever}-  colour ;  two  candles  of  valour  were  the  two  shining  spears  on  the  hand  of  every  man  of  them  ;  fifty  rivets  of  bronze  and  of  gold  in  every  spear,  and  if  any  man  of  them  had  a  debt  of  a  bushel  of  silver  or  gold,  one  rivet  from  his  spear  would  pay  it.  And  there  were  precious  stones  on  their  spears  that  would  flame  in  the  night  like  the  rays  of  the  sun.  At  their  belts  they  had  long,  gold-hilted  swords  with  silver  sheaths  ;  goads  in  their  hands  of  white  bronze  with  silver  crooks.  And  as  to  the  young  men  themselves,  they  were  very  hand-  some and  stately,  and  large  and  shining  ;  curled  yellow  hair  on  them,  hanging  down  on  their  shoulders  ;  proud,  clear,  blue  eyes  ;  their  cheeks  like  the  flowers  of  the  woods  in  May,  or  like  the  foxglove  of  the  mountains.  There  were  seven  greyhounds  following  Maine's  chariot  in  chains  of  silver,  and  apples  of  gold  on  every  chain.  There  were  seven  trumpeters  with  gold  and  silver  trumpets,  wearing  clothes  of  many  colours,  and  having  all  of  them  light  yellow  hair.  And  three  Druids  went  in  front  of  them,  and  they  having  bands  of  silver  on  their  heads,  and  speckled  cloaks  on  them,  and  carrying  shields  of  bronze  with  ornaments  of  red  copper.  And  there  were  three  harpers  with  them,  that  had  the  appear-  ance of  kings. 

It   is  like  that  they  gathered   at  the  royal  house   of  Cruachan,  and  they  went  three  times   round   the  lawn 


THE   ARRIVAL   AT   RATH    INI      i6i 

before  the  house.  And  they  said  farewell  to  Maeve  and  to  Ailell,  and  then  they  set  out  for  Rath  Ini. 

"  It  is  a  fine  setting  out  you  are  having,"  said  Bricriu  ;  "  but  maybe  the  coming  back  will  not  be  so  fine."  "  It  is  a  journey  that  will  be  heard  of  in  every  place,"  said  Maine.  "  I  suppose,"  said  Bricriu,  "  it  is  but  a  day  visit  you  will  make  there,  for  you  will  hardly  stop  to  feast  through  the  night  in  a  district  that  is  under  Conchubar."  "  I  give  my  word,"  said  Maine,  "  we  will  not  turn  back  to  Cruachan  till  we  have  feasted  three  days  and  three  nights  in  Gerg's  house."  He  did  not  waste  any  more  time  talking,  but  set  out  on  the  journey. 

When  the  messengers  they  sent  before  them  came  to  Gerg's  house  at  Rath  Ini,  the  people  there  began  to  make  all  ready  before  them,  and  they  laid  down  green-  leaved  birch  branches  and  fresh  green  rushes  in  the  house.  Then  Ferb  sent  her  foster-sister,  Findchoem,  daughter  of  Erg,  and  bade  her  go  a  part  of  the  way  with  the  messengers,  and  bring  her  back  word  what  appearance  was  on  Maine  and  on  his  companions.  She  was  not  long  away,  and  as  soon  as  she  came  back  she  went  with  her  report  to  the  sunny  parlour  where  Ferb  was,  and  it  is  what  she  said :  "  I  never  saw  since  Con-  chubar was  in  Emain,  and  I  never  will  see  till  the  end  of  life  and  time,  a  finer,  or  grander,  or  a  more  beautiful  troop,  than  the  troop  that  is  coming  now  over  the  plain.  It  was  the  same  as  if  I  was  in  a  sweet  apple-  garden,  from  the  sweetness  that  came  to  me  when  the  light  wind  passed  over  them  and  stirred  their  clothes." 

With  that,  the  men  of  Connaught  came  to  the  dun,  and  the  people  within  pressed  upon  one  another  to  look  at  them.  And  the  gates  were  set  open,  and  their  chariots  unyoked,  and  baths  of  pure  water  were  made  ready  for  them.  And  then  they  were  brought  into  the  hall  of  heroes  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  and  they  were 

L 


i62     WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORG  OR 

given  every  sort  of  food    and  of  drink    that    is   to   be  found  on  the  whole  ridge  of  the  world. 

But  as  they  were  using  the  feast  and  making  merry,  there  came  a  sudden  blast  of  wind  that  shook  the  whole  place,  so  that  the  hall  they  were  in  trembled,  and  the  shields  fell  from  their  hooks,  and  the  spears  from  their  places,  and  the  tables  fell  like  leaves  in  an  oak  wood.  All  the  young  men  were  astonished,  and  Gerg  asked  Maine's  Druids  what  meaning  they  could  put  on  that  blast.  And  Ollgaeth,  Maine's  chief  Druid,  said  :  "  I  think  it  is  no  good  sign  for  those  who  are  come  to-night  to  this  wedding.  A  blast  of  wind,"  he  said  ;  "  a  sorrowful  sound  ;  it  is  the  man  that  will  conquer. 

"  A  shield  struck  out  of  a  white  hand  ;  the  bodies  of  dead  men  laid  under  stones ;  a  high  stone  over  stiff  bodies  ;  the  story  is  sorrowful ! 

"  And  if  you  will  take  my  advice,"  he  said,  "  you  will  quit  this  feast  this  very  night." 

But  he  got  a  sharp  rebuke  from  Maine  for  saying  that,  and  Gerg  said  :  "  There  is  no  cause  for  any  un-  easiness, for  the  men  of  Ulster  are  not  gathered  at  Emain  at  this  time.  And  if  they  were  itself,"  he  said,  "  I  and  my  two  sons  would  be  ready  to  go  out  and  fight  against  Conchubar  along  with  you." 

They  hung  up  their  arms  then  again,  and  gave  no  more  heed  to  what  the  Druid  had  said. 

Now  on  the  mornihg  of  this  very  day,  when  Conchubar  was  lying  in  his  sleep  at  Emain,  he  saw  in  a  dream  a  beautiful  woman  coming  to  his  bedside,  and  she  having  the  appearance  of  a  queen.  Yellow  plaited  hair  she  had,  and  folds  of  silk  over  her  white  skin,  and  a  cloak  of  green  silk  from  her  shoulders,  and  two  sandals  of  white  bronze  between  her  soft  feet  and  the  ground.  "  All  good  be  with  you,  Conchubar,"  she  said.  "  What  is  the  reason  of  your  coming  ? "  said  Conchubar.     "  It  is  not  long  from  this  time,"  she  said, 


CONCHUBAR'S   VISION  163 

"  that  Ulster  will  be  attacked  and  will  be  robbed,  and  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne  will  be  driven  away.  And  the  son  of  the  man  that  will  do  this  thing,"  she  said,  "  Maine  Morgor,  son  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  is  coming  this  very  night  to  his  wedding  with  Ferb,  daughter  of  Gerg  of  Rath  Ini,  and  three  times  fifty  young  men  with  him.  Rise  up  now,"  she  said,  "  there  are  but  three  times  fifty  men  against  you,  and  the  victory  will  be  with  you." 

Then  Conchubar  sprang  up,  and  sent  for  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  and  told  him  his  vision.  "  It  is  likely  enough,"  he  said,  "  that  it  is  meant  to  warn  us  against  the  men  of  Connaught.  And  you  may  be  sure,"  he  said,  "  that  if  we  stop  here  quietly,  they  will  be  doing  their  robbery.  And  let  me  have  the  truth  from  you  now,  and  tell  me  what  is  best  to  do,  for  there  is  not  the  like  of  you  among  the  Druids." 

And  Cathbad  said  :  "  It  is  what  your  vision  means,  that  many  men  will  get  their  death,  and  Maine  of  Connaught,  he  that  is  above  all  disgrace,  along  with  them ;  and  he  and  his  companions  will  never  go  back  again  to  beautiful  Cruachan.  But  you  yourself  will  come  back  safe,"  he  said,  ''  with  fame  and  victory." 

Then  Conchubar  set  out,  and  there  went  with  him  Cathrach  Catuchenn,  a  queen  with  a  great  name,  that  had  come  to  Emain  from  the  country  of  Spain  for  love  of  Cuchulain ;  and  she  went  out  now  with  Conchubar's  army.  And  there  went  with  him  as  well,  the  three  outlaws  of  the  race  of  the  Fomor,  Siabarcha,  son  of  Suilremar,  and  Berngal  Brec,  and  Buri  of  the  Rough  Word.  And  Facen,  son  of  Dublongsech  of  the  old  stock  of  Ulster  came,  and  Fabric  Fiacail  from  Great  Asia,  and  Forais  Fingalach  from  the  Isle  of  Man.  So  Conchubar  set  out,  and  three  times  fifty  men  with  him,  but  he  brought  none  of  the  men  of  Ulster  with  him,   but    himself    and    his    chariot-driver    Brod,   and 


i64     WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

Imrinn  the  Druid,  Cathbad's  son.  And  none  of  them  brought  a  servant  with  him,  except  only  Conchubar,  but  their  shields  on  their  backs,  and  their  bright  green  spears  in  their  hands,  and  their  heavy  swords  in  their  belts.  And  if  they  were  not  many  in  number,  the  pride  of  their  minds  was  great. 

When  they  were  come  within  sight  of  Rath  Ini,  they  saw  a  great  heavy  cloud  over  it,  the  one  end  of  it  black  and  the  middle  red,  and  the  other  end  green.  And  Conchubar  asked  Imrinn  the  Druid,  "  What  is  this  cloud  over  the  house  a  token  of? "  "  I  know  well,"  said  Imrinn,  "  it  is  a  sign  there  will  be  fighting  to-night,  and  the  sorrow  of  death  will  be  on  the  house  like  a  cloud,  and  it  is  for  a  young  man  the  death  darkness  is  made  ready." 

Then  Conchubar  went  on  towards  the  dun,  and  just  at  that  time  the  great  vat  that  belonged  to  the  house,  and  that  got  afterwards  the  name  of  the  Ol  Guala,  was  brought  into  the  feasting  hall,  and  it  full  of  wine.  But  whoever  went  to  draw  it  let  the  silver  vessel  fall  into  the  vat,  so  that  the  wine  flowed  over  the  edges  in  three  waves.  "  My  grief!  "  said  OUgaeth  the  Druid,  "  it  is  not  long  before  these  vessels  will  be  with  strangers.  He  is  not  a  happy  son  born  of  a  mother  that  is  in  this  house  to-night." 

Then  Conchubar  came  to  the  door,  and  the  strangers  that  were  with  him  gave  their  shout  of  attack  around  the  dun,  as  their  custom  was.  At  that  Gerg  rose  up,  and  his  two  sons  with  him.  Conn  Coscorach  and  Cobthach  Cnesgel,  and  they  took  hold  of  their  arms.  And  Gerg  said  to  Maine  :  "  Let  this  be  fought  out  now  between  us  men  of  Ulster  till  you  see  which  of  us  are  the  bravest.  And  we  are  all  answerable  for  you,  and  it  is  best  for  you  that  we  should  fight  together.  But  if  we  fall,  then  let  you  hold  the  place  if  you  can." 

And  then  Gerg  went  out  and  his  two  sons  along  with  him  and   their  people.     And  they  held  the  place,  and 


DEATHOFGERG  165 

fought  Conchubar  outside ;  and  for  a  long  time  they  did  not  let  any  one  go  past  them.  And  Gerg  stood  outside  the  door,  and  a  hewing  and  cutting  was  aimed  at  him  on  every  side,  and  five  men  of  the  Fomor  fell  by  him,  and  Imrinn  the  Druid,  along  with  them,  and  he  cut  his  head  off  and  brought  it  to  the  door  with  him. 

Then  Cathrach  Catuchenn  came  between  him  and  the  door,  and  she  made  a  sharp  attack  on  him,  and  Gerg  struck  her  head  off,  and  brought  it  back  with  him  into  the  house,  for  he  had  got  a  hard  wound.  And  he  threw  the  heads  down  before  Maine,  and  he  sat  down  on  a  bed,  and  gave  a  heavy  sigh  and  asked  for  a  drink.  And  then  Conchubar  and  his  people  came  up  to  the  wall,  and  they  were  holding  their  shields  over  their  heads  with  their  left  hands,  and  tearing  down  the  wall  with  their  right  hands,  till  they  were  able  to  make  their  way  through  it. 

Then  Brod,  Conchubar's  chariot-driver,  threw  one  of  the  spears  he  had  in  his  hand  into  the  house,  and  it  went  through  Gerg's  body,  and  through  the  body  of  Airisdech  his  servant  that  was  behind  him,  so  that  the  two  of  them  fell  together.  And  Conchubar  attacked  Gerg's  people  in  the  house,  so  that  thirty  of  them  fell,  and  he  killed  Conn,  Gerg's  son,  by  his  own  hand,  and  many  of  his  own  people  got  their  death  as  well. 

Then  Nuagal,  Gerg's  wife,  rose  up,  and  she  gave  three  great  angry  cries  of  grief,  and  she  took  the  head  of  her  husband  into  her  bosom.  "  By  my  word,"  she  said,  "  it  is  a  fine  servant's  deed,  Brod  to  have  killed  Gerg  in  his  own  house.  But  there  are  many,"  she  said,  "  that  will  keen  you,  and  as  you  have  fallen  on  account  of  your  daughter,  many  women  shall  have  sorrow  on  account  of  you."     And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  It  is  a  good  fight  Gerg  made,  that  is  lying  here  now,  the  fair-haired  champion  with  the  red  sword  ;  he  that  was  proud,  open-handed,  brave,  wise,  beautiful. 


i66    WEDDIXG   OF    MAIXE    MORGOR 

'•  Where  is  there  a  better  hero  than  Gerg  ?  Where  is  the  man  that  has  not  anger  on  him.  Where  is  the  army  that  does  not  keen  for  your  death  ? 

"  It  is  grief  to  me  to  see  you  on  your  bed  of  death,  O  beautiful  fair-haired  Gerg !  It  is  a  pit)'  for  me,  you  to  be  dead. 

"  Before  you  here  in  Rath  Ini,  and  at  Loch  Ane  and  at  Irard,  and  in  the  valleys  of  the  south,  there  were  many  women  that  gave  you  their  love. 

"  You  were  the  friend  of  even-  armv  ;  even-  one  crave  you  full  obedience  ;  your  friendl)'  word  was  dear  to  ever)'  one ;  surely  it  is  you  v^-ere  the  good  adviser. 

"It  is  great  indeed  your  deeds  were,  it  is  stately  your  assemblies  were  ;  you  were  a  king  among  great  lords. 

"Your  house  was  great,  it  was  well-known,  the  house  within  which  harm  came  to  you  ;  it  was  there  Brod  killed  you  in  the  hall  of  kings. 

"It  was  a  great  harm  and  a  great  curse  Brod  put  on  us,  he  to  kill  a  king  of  Ireland  before  his  time ;  he  has  killed  him  ;  he  has  killed  all  of  us  along  with  him." 

Then  Gerg's  two  sons  said  they  would  hold  the  place,  and  they  were  not  without  killing  many  in  the  fight  Then  Maine  could  not  hold  in  his  strength  any  longer,  and  he  went  out  to  avenge  his  father-in-law.  And  his  three  times  fifty  companions  rose  up  along  with  him,  and  it  was  not  easy  to  stand  against  them.  There  was  great  pride  in  the  mind,  and  great  courage  in  the  heart  of  ever>-  one  of  them,  and  there  was  great  desire  and  longing  on  them  to  do  high  deeds. 

And  as  to  Maine,  the  king's  son,  he  was  stately,  kind,  mannerly,  and  although  he  was  hardly  out  of  his  bo}'hood,  he  was  braver  in  the  fight  than  any  other.  He  w^as  gentle  in  the  drinking-house,  and  he  was  hard  in  battle,  and  he  was  mindful  of  his  enemies,  and  he  was  pitiful  in  wounding,  and  a  sp)ender  of  treasure,  and  a  stone  of  anger,  and  a  wave  of  justice ;  and  he  was  the 


THE    FIGHT   AT    RATH    INI         167 

head  in  the  gatherings  of  the  three  Connaughts,   and  their  hand  in  spending,  and  their  fitting  king. 

He  thought  it  would  be  dishonour  on  him,  ever  to  be  overcome  in  equal  fight  by  any  men  in  the  world,  or  the  place  to  be  taken  that  he  was  defending.  And  he  went  out  and  drove  the  Fomor  away  from  the  house,  and  it  is  not  a  hand  of  healing  Maine  had  that  time ;  and  nine  of  the  Fomor  fell  by  his  first  attack.  Then  the  outlaw  of  Great  Asia,  Fabric  Fiacail,  came  up  to  the  threshold,  and  began  destroying  the  men  before  him,  and  no  one  stood  against  him  till  he  came  to  the  place  where  Maine  was.  And  then  they  two  set  their  shields  one  against  the  other,  and  they  were  fighting  together  till  after  midnight ;  and  Fabric  gave  Maine  three  deep  wounds,  and  when  they  were  tired  out  with  the  fight,  Maine  struck  off  his  head.  Then  Conchubar  came,  and  thirty  of  Gerg's  men  were  killed  by  him,  and  the  two  armies  fell  upon  one  another,  and  it  is  much  that  even  the  toes  of  their  feet  did  not  make  an  attack  of  their  own.  And  the  blood  that  was  in  the  dun  was  as  high  as  a  man's  knees,  and  in  all  the  district  round  nothing  could  be  heard  but  the  striking  of  blows  on  shields,  and  the  clinking  of  spears,  and  the  clash  of  swords  against  one  another,  and  the  roar  of  beaten  men. 

And  Maine,  when  he  had  overcome  the  Fomor,  came  where  Facen,  son  of  Dublongsech  was,  and  they  fought  together  a  good  while,  and  then  Facen  was  killed.  Then  Maine  and  Cobthach  were  driven  up  into  the  house  after  their  people  were  put  down,  and  they  held  it  bravely  till  morning,  and  no  one  was  able  to  make  a  way  in. 

In  this  same  night,  the  same  woman  that  had  brought  news  to  Conchubar,  went  to  where  Maeve  was  lying  in  her  sleep  at  Cruachan,  and  said  to  her :  "  If  you  had  the  Druid  sight,  Maeve,"  she  said,  "  you  would  not  be 


i68    WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

in  your  sleep  now."  "  What  has  happened  ? "  said  Maeve.  "  Conchubar  is  at  this  very  moment,"  said  the  strange  woman,  "getting  the  upper  hand  of  Maine,  and  he  is  on  the  point  of  putting  him  to  death.  Rise  up  now,  and  gather  your  men  together,"  she  said,  "and  go  out  and  avenge  him." 

With  that  Maeve  wakened  out  of  her  sleep,  and  she  called  to  Ailell  and  told  him  the  vision,  and  told  it  to  her  people  as  well.  "There  is  no  truth  in  it,"  said  Bricriu. 

But  when  Fiannamail,  the  innkeeper's  son  at  Cruachan,  heard  it,  he  waited  for  no  one  and  made  no  delay,  but  set  out  for  the  place  where  Maine  was,  for  Maine  was  his  foster-brother.  And  Maeve  chose  out  seven  hundred  armed  men,  the  best  that  were  to  be  found  in  Cruachan  at  that  time.  And  then  Donall  Dearg  came,  that  was  the  best  fighter  in  the  province,  and  that  was  another  of  Maine's  foster-brothers.  And  he  set  out  in  the  same  way,  before  the  others,  and  thirty  fighting  men  with  him,  and  the  name  of  every  one  of  them  was  Donall.  And  then  Maeve  set  out  after  them  on  her  journey. 

But  as  to  Maine,  he  held  the  house  till  the  bright  rising  of  the  sun  on  the  morrow,  and  it  was  not  pleasant  rest  this  night  brought  to  either  side.  When  they  could  see  each  other  by  the  light  of  day,  each  remembered  the  other  to  his  hurt,  and  Conchubar  began  to  rouse  up  his  people.  "  If  it  was  the  men  of  Ulster  I  had  with  me  now,"  he  said,  "  they  would  not  be  dragging  on  with  this  battle,  the  way  the  Fomor  are  doing."  When  the  Fomor  heard  that  sharp  reproach,  their  courage  rose  up  in  them,  and  they  pressed  on  hard  in  the  fight,  and  never  left  off  till  they  were  through  the  door  of  the  house.  The  house  they  came  into  had  a  great  name  for  grandeur,  but  it  was  bad  work  that  was  done  in  it  now.  There  were  a  hundred  tables  of  white  silver  in  it,  and  three  hundred  of  brass,  and  three  hundred  of  white 


DEATHOFMAINE  169 

bronze.  And  there  were  thirty  vessels  with  pure  silver  from  Spain  on  their  rims,  and  two  hundred  cowhorns  ornamented  with  gold  or  silver,  and  thirty  silver  cups,  and  thirty  brass  cups,  and  on  the  walls  there  were  hangings  of  white  linen  with  wonderful  figures  worked  on  them. 

Then  the  two  armies  met  one  another  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  and  a  great  many  were  killed  there.  And  Cobthach,  Gerg's  son,  after  he  had  killed  many  of  the  Fomor,  came  to  where  Berngal  Brec  was  hewing  the  heads  off  the  men  of  Connaught,  and  they  fought  to-  gether, and  Berngal  was  worsted  in  the  end. 

And  as  to  Maine,  he  killed  Buri  of  the  Rough  Word,  and  after  that  he  went  mad  and  raging  through  the  house,  and  thirty  other  men  fell  by  him.  But  when  Conchubar  saw  the  madness  that  was  on  Maine,  he  turned  to  him,  and  Maine  waited  for  him,  and  they  fought  a  long  while,  and  Maine  threw  his  casting  spear  so  strong  and  straight,  that  it  went  through  Conchubar's  body ;  and  while  Conchubar  was  striving  to  draW  out  that  spear,  Maine  wounded  him  with  the  long  spear  that  was  in  his  hand.  Then  Brod  came  to  help  Conchubar,  and  Maine  gave  him  three  heavy  wounds,  so  that  he  was  able  to  fight  no  more.  But  then  Conchubar  attacked  him  with  blows  on  every  side,  until  he  laid  him  dead  before  him. 

And  after  he  had  killed  Maine,  he  began  to  attack  the  crowd  about  him,  so  that  they  fell,  foot  to  foot,  and  neck  to  neck,  all  through  the  house.  And  at  the  end,  there  was  not  one  of  Maine's  people  left  living ;  and  of  the  three  times  fifty  men  that  came  with  Conchubar,  there  was  not  one  left  living  but  himself  and  Brod,  and  if  they  were  itself,  they  did  not  come  whole  out  of  it. 

Then  Conchubar  drove  Cobthach,  Gerg's  son,  out  of  the  house ;  and  while  he  was  following  him  over  the  plain,  Ferb  came  with  her  foster-sister  to  the  place  where  Maine 


I70    WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

was  lying,  and  she  cried  and  lamented  over  him,  and  she  said  :  "  My  grief!  you  are  alone  now,  you  that  spent  so  many  nights  in  company."  And  she  made  this  complaint : — 

"  O  young  man,  it  is  red  your  bed  is  !  It  is  bad  the  signs  were,  and  you  coming  into  the  house,  a  foretelling  of  tears  to  all  your  people. 

"  O  son  of  Maeve !  O  branch  of  high  honour !  O  son  of  Ailell  who  is  not  weak  !  It  is  a  pity  it  is  for  my  heart  and  my  body,  you  to  be  lying  there  for  ever  ! 

"  O  young  man,  the  best  I  ever  saw ;  a  rod  of  gold  and  you  lying  on  the  pillow ;  whenever  you  and  an  enemy  met  together,  that  was  the  last  meeting  there  was  between  you. 

"  There  is  grief  on  me,  you  to  be  lying  there,  young  man,  son  of  Maeve ;  your  face  was  ruddy,  your  hand  was  rough  in  battle ;  it  is  grief  has  been  put  into  my  heart  that  was  waiting  for  you. 

"  It  is  seldom  you  were  without  arms  up  to  this,  until  you  were  struck  down,  lying  dead.  The  shining  spear  pierced  you,  the  hard  sword  wounded  you,  till  blood  was  dropping  down  on  your  cheeks. 

"  Och !  What  were  you  to  me,  and  I  not  to  have  seen  your  death  ;  my  darling,  my  choice  among  men,  he  that  was  worth  good  treasure. 

"  He  is  my  husband  for  all  my  days,  great  Maine,  Ailell's  son  ;  I  will  die  for  the  want  of  him,  and  he  not  able  to  come  and  care  me. 

"  His  purple  cloak  is  grief  to  me,  and  himself  lying  there  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  and  his  hand  that  was  struck  off  after  he  fell,  and  his  head  in  the  hand  of  Conchubar ; 

"  And  his  sword  that  was  strong,  heavy  in  striking,  Conchubar  has  carried  it  far  away ;  and  his  shield  there  where  he  fell,  and  he  defending  his  people 

"  He  himself  a  hero,  and  no  lie  in  it ;  it  is  he  divided 


THE    INNKEEPER'S    SON  171 

much  riches  ;  it  is  not  a  Httle  thing  he  did  to  die  Hke  that,  and  he  defending  his  people. 

"  The  fair  young  man  of  Connaught  to  be  lying  there  cold,  and  the  best  of  his  troop  along  with  him  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  his  people  that  died  defending  him  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  me,  his  unmarried  wife. 

"  There  is  nothing  I  can  do  for  you,  Maine  ;  it  is  on  myself  the  hurt  is  come ;  my  heart  is  broken  with  it,  and  I  looking  at  you,  Maine." 

Then  Fiannamail,  the  innkeeper's  son  from  Cruachan,  came  to  the  house,  and  Ferb  saw  him,  and  she  said :  "  Here  is  Fiannamail  come  to  visit  us,  but  whatever  companions  he  has  left  at  home,  he  will  find  none  before  him  here."  "  That  is  rough  news  you  are  giving  me,  Ferb,"  said  Fiannamail ;  "  and  indeed  I  am  parted  from  my  companions  if  it  is  they  that  are  lying  here,"  he  said.  "  They  are  your  companions  indeed,"  said  Ferb  ;  "  they  overcame  others,  and  now  they  are  overcome  them-  selves." 

And  Fiannamail  said  :  "  And  Maine,  is  he  living  ?  my  comrade,  my  dear  friend,  my  prince  at  home ! "  And  Ferb  said  :  "  It  is  bitter  to  me,  you  to  ask  this,  for  I  know  you  did  not  think  it  was  Maine's  last  bed  you  would  find  here." 

And  then  she  told  Fiannamail  all  that  had  happened.  And  Fiannamail  said  ;  "  When  this  news  of  the  thing  the  people  of  Ulster  have  done  goes  out,  they  will  be  attacked  in  the  west  and  in  the  east  as  long  as  there  is  a  man  living  in  Connaught."  But  Ferb  said  :  "  There  are  not  left  of  the  army  of  Ulster  but  Conchubar  himself  and  Brod  his  chariot-driver,  and  the  both  of  them  were  wounded  by  Mainebefore  Conchubar  killed  him  at  the  last." 

Then  Fiannamail  went  out  to  follow  after  Conchubar,  to  get  satisfaction  for  Maine's  death.  And  he  met  with  Niall  of  the  Fair  Head,  Conchubar's  son,  and  a  hundred  men  with  him,  and  they  looking   for  Conchubar ;   and 


172    WEDDING  OF   MAINE    M  ORG  OR 

for  all  they  were  so  many,  he  fought  a  hot  battle  with  them,  till  he  fell  dead. 

And  after  he  left  Ferb,  she  was  looking  at  the  young  men  of  Connaught,  and  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  A  pity  it  is,  young  men  of  Connaught,  that  there  is  not  soft  down  in  your  pillows  under  you ;  you  that  took  the  defence  and  would  not  give  it  up.  What  troop  was  there  better  than  yourselves,  and  now  you  are  lying  like  a  loosened  thread. 

"  It  is  a  heavy  hand  was  laid  on  your  eyes  ;  you  were  given  the  sour  drink  of  beaten  men ;  your  story  is  hard,  it  will  be  a  cause  of  battles ;  it  will  be  a  foretelling  of  many  tears. 

"  It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  help  for  me  to  bring  you,  but  only  to  be  keening  and  crying  over  you ;  it  would  be  better  for  me  to  go  with  you,  and  my  ashes  to  be  scattered   abroad. 

"  You  were  the  best  of  the  armies  of  Ireland,  young  men  of  Connaught,  and  I  keening  you  ;  many  women  will  cry  Och  !  Och  !  after  your  proud  ways. 

"  It  is  proud  you  were  coming  into  the  house  ;  it  is  not  common  men  you  had  for  your  fathers.  O  beautiful  young  men  of  Connaught,  it  is  a  pity  it  is  the  way  you  are  now  !  " 

Then  Donall  Dearg  came  to  the  lawn  before  the  dun-  And  Ferb's  foster-sister  saw  him,  and  she  said  :  "  It  is  a  pity  he  was  not  here  and  Maine  living,  for  he  would  have  given  him  good  help."  And  when  Ferb  heard  he  was  there,  she  went  out  to  him  and  she  said  :  "  Well,  Donall,  hawk  of  valour,  here  is  a  thing  for  you  to  do,  to  avenge  your  foster-brother  that  has  got  his  death."  And  it  is  what  Donall  said  :  "  If  Maine  has  fallen,  the  man  has  fallen  that  was  above  all  his  companions,  in  courage,  in  wisdom,  and  in  gentleness."  And  Ferb  said :  "  It  is  not  the  work  of  a  hero,  you  to  be  sighing  and  keening  and  crying  Ochone !  But  since  Maine  will  not  come  back  for 


FERB'S   LAMENTS  i73 

that,  it  is  better  for  you  to  go  out  against  his  enemies."  And  Donall  said  :  "  I  will  go ;  I  will  destroy  Conchubar,  I  will  destroy  his  two  sons  in  revenge  for  Maine."  And  Ferb  said  :  "  If  it  had  been  yourself,  Donall  Dearg,  that  had  got  your  death  from  the  men  of  Ulster  on  account  of  me,  the  story  of  the  great  vengeance  Maine  did  for  it  would  be  told  in  every  place."  Then  Donall  said :  "  And  as  it  is  Maine  Morgor  himself  has  got  his  death,  I  will  never  go  home  westward  so  long  as  there  is  a  man  left  living  in  Ulster. 

So  Donall  went  out,  and  he  had  not  long  to  wait  till  he  saw  a  great  troop  coming  towards  him,  and  Feradach  of  the  Long  Hand,  Conchubar's  son,  with  them.  And  Donall  and  his  men  attacked  them,  but  they  were  out-  numbered, and  all  his  men  fell.  And  he  himself  wounded  Feradach  twice,  but  then  his  men  came  at  him,  and  Feradach  struck  his  head  off,  and  let  out  his  shout  of  victory,  and  his  people  shouted  along  with  him. 

And  Ferb  was  gone  into  the  house  again,  and  she  was  looking  at  Maine.  "  There  is  no  good  appearance  on  you  now,  the  way  you  are,  Maine,"  she  said  ;  "  and  my  father  got  his  death  through  you,  and  my  father's  son  ;  but  even  so,  I  will  die  with  the  fret  of  losing  you."  And  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  There  are  many  women  and  many  young  girls  will  be  lonely  after  you,  you  to  be  the  only  one  to  fail  them. 

"  It  is  beautiful  you  were  up  to  this,  proud  and  tall,  going  out  with  your  young  hounds  to  the  hunting ;  it  is  spoiled  your  body  is  now,  it  is  pale  your  hands  are. 

"  It  is  bad  the  news  is  that  will  travel  westward  to  Findabair  of  the  Fair  Eyebrows ;  the  story  of  her  brother  that  failed  Ferb ;  it  is  not  I  that  have  not  my  fill  of  sorrow." 

Then  Maeve  and  her  men  came  up  to  where  Conchubar  was,  and  his  two  sons  that  had  joined  him,  and  they  faced  one  another,  and  the  fight  began  ;  and 


174    WEDDING   OF   MAINE    M  ORG  OR 

Maeve  broke  through  the  army  of  Ulster  to  get  satisfac-  tion for  her  son  and  for  her  people,  and  she  killed  Conchubar's  two  sons.  But  Conchubar  stood  out  and  faced  her  in  spite  of  his  wounds,  and  in  spite  of  being  tired  out ;  for  his  hurts  were  healed  by  the  greatness  of  his  anger  after  his  two  sons  being  kiiled. 

Then  Maeve  was  driven  back  and  lost  the  battle  ;  and  the  Druids  brought  her  away  as  was  their  custom  ;  and  Conchubar  followed  after  them  till  they  had  passed  Magh  Ini.  And  then  he  turned  back  to  spoil  Gerg's  dun,  and  he  carried  away  with  him  all  he  could  find  of  treasures ;  and  he  took  away  the  great  brass  vat  that  was  in  the  house,  and  brought  it  to  Emain.  And  when  it  was  filled  with  beer,  all  the  province  of  Ulster  used  to  drink  from  it ;  and  it  got  the  name  of  the  Champion's  Drinking  Vat. 

And  Ferb  died  with  grief  for  Maine,  and  Nuagal  died  with  grief  for  her  husband  and  for  her  two  sons.  And  a  grave  was  made  for  them,  and  a  stone  put  over  it,  and  their  names  were  written  in  Ogham  ;  and  Rath  Ini  got  the  name  of  Duma  Ferb,  Ferb's  Mound,  after  that. 

And  this  was  the  first  blood  shed  in  Ulster  on  the  account  of  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


XI 

THE  WAR  FOR  THE  BULL  OF  CUAILGNE 

TT  happened  one  time  when  Maeve  and  Ailell  rose  up  ^  from  their  royal  bed  in  Cruachan,  they  began  to  talk  with  one  another.  "It  is  what  I  am  thinking,"  said  "^Ailell,  "  it  is  a  true  saying,  '  Good  is  the  wife  of  a  good  man.' "  "  A  true  saying,  indeed,"  said  Maeve,  "  but  why  do  you  bring  it  to  mind  at  this  time  ?  "  "I  bring  it  to  mind  now  because  you  are  better  to-day  than  the  day  I  married  you."  "  I  was  good  before  I  ever  had  to  do  with  you,"  said  Maeve.  "  How  well  we  never  heard  of  that  and  never  knew  it  until  now,"  said  Ailell,  "  but  only  that  you  stopped  at  home  like  any  other  woman,  while  the  enemies  at  your  boundaries  were  slaughtering  and  destroying  and  driving  all  before  them,  and  you  not  able  to  hinder  them."  "  That  is  not  the  way  it  was  at  all,"  said  Maeve,  "  but  of  the  six  daughters  of  my  father  Eochaid,  King  of  Ireland,  I  was  the  best  and  the  one  that  was  thought  most  of.  As  to  dividing  gifts  and  giving  wages,  I  was  the  best  of  them,  and  as  to  battle  feats  and  arms  and  fighting,  I  was  the  best  of  them.  It  was  I  had  fifteen  hundred  paid  soldiers,  and  fifteen  hundred  more  that  were  the  sons  of  chief  men.  And  I  had  these,"  she  said,  "  for  my  own 