THOMAS   P.    O'NEILL,  JR 

LIBRARY 

BOSTON   COLLEGE 


Ex    Libris 


Heinz  Bluhm 
1907-1993 


CUCHULAIN    OF    MUIRTHEMNE 


First  Edition        .        .        .    April  1902 
Second  Edition     .        .        .    August  1903 


CUCHULAIN  OF  MUIRTHEMNE : 
THE  STORY  OF  THE  MEN  OF 
THE  RED  BRANCH  OF  ULSTER 
ARRANGED  AND  PUT  INTO 
ENGLISH  BY  LADY  GREGORY 
WITH  A  PREFACE  BY  W.  B.  YEATS 


NEW    YORK 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

153-157    FIFTH    AVENUE 

1903 


"t)ei|\im  -An  rh6iT)  too  beip  mo  rhuitinci|i,"  a^  CO- 
CtJl-Ain,  ''50  mbeit)  cp^Cc  ^suf  iom|A^*6  pOf  ^fi  mo 
jniomxjkftxMb-fe  x^me^fs  n^  n-^l^-o-jniorh  -oo  tiinne  n^ 
5Air5i"6i5  If  ct^eine." 

*'l  SWEAR  BY  THE  OATH  OF  MY  PEOPLE,"  SAID  CUCHULPIN,  *' I 
WILL  MAKE  MY  DOINGS  BE  SPOKEN  OF  AMONG  THE  GREAT  DOINGS 
OF   HEROES    IN   THEIR   STRENGTH." 


.r>* 


Printed  in  Great  Britain, 


DEDICATION   OF   THE   IRISH   EDITION 
TO   THE   PEOPLE   OF   KILTARTAN 

My  Dear  Friends, 

When  I  began  to  gather  these  stories 
together,  it  is  of  you  I  was  thinking,  that  you  would 
like  to  have  them  and  to  be  reading  them.  For 
although  you  have  not  to  go  far  to  get  stories  of 
Finn  and  Goll  and  Oisin  from  any  old  person  in  the 
place,  there  is  very  little  of  the  history  of  Cuchulain 
and  his  friends  left  in  the  memory  of  the  people,  but 
only  that  they  were  brave  men  and  good  fighters, 
and  that  Deirdre  was  beautiful. 

When  I  went  looking  for  the  stories  in  the  old 
writings,  I  found  that  the  Irish  in  them  is  too  hard 
for  any  person  to  read  that  has  not  made  a  long  study 
of  it.  Some  scholars  have  worked  well  at  them.  Irish- 
men and  Germans  and  Frenchmen,  but  they  have 
printed  them  in  the  old  cramped  Irish,  with  translations 
into  German  or  French  or  English,  and  these  are  not 
easy  for  you  to  get,  or  to  understand,  and  the  stories 
themselves  are  confused,  every  one  giving  a  different 
account  from  the  others  in  some  small  thing,  the  way 
there  is  not  much  pleasure  in  reading  them.     It  is  what 


vi  DEDICATION 

I  have  tried  to  do,  to  take  the  best  of  the  stories,  or  what- 
ever parts  of  each  will  fit  best  to  one  another,  and  in  that 
way  to  give  a  fair  account  of  Cuchulain's  life  and  death. 
I  left  out  a  good  deal  I  thought  you  would  not  care 
about  for  one  reason  or  another,  but  I  put  in  nothing 
of  my  own  that  could  be  helped,  only  a  sentence  or 
so  now  and  again  to  link  the  different  parts  together. 
I  have  told  the  whole  story  in  plain  and  simple 
words,  in  the  same  way  my  old  nurse  Mary  Sheridan 
used  to  be  telling  stories  from  the  Irish  long  ago,  and 
I  a  child  at  Roxborough. 

And  indeed  if  there  was  more  respect  for  Irish  things 
among  the  learned  men  that  live  in  the  college  at 
Dublin,  where  so  many  of  these  old  writings  are  stored, 
this  work  would  not  have  been  left  to  a  woman  of 
the  house,  that  has  to  be  minding  the  place,  and 
listening  to  complaints,  and  dividing  her  share  of  food. 

My  friend  and  your  friend  the  Craoibhin  Aoibhin 
has  put  Irish  of  to-day  on  some  of  these  stories  that 
I  have  set  in  order,  for  I  am  sure  you  will  like  to  have 
the  history  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland  told  in  the  language 
of  Ireland.  And  I  am  very  glad  to  have  something 
that  is  worth  offering  you,  for  you  have  been  very 
kind  to  me  ever  since  I  came  over  to  you  from 
Kilchriest,  two-and-twenty  years  ago. 

AUGUSTA   GREGORY. 

March  1902. 


PREFACE 

I 

T  THINK  this  book  is  the  best  that  has  come  out  of 
Ireland  in  my  time.  Perhaps  I  should  say  that  it 
is  the  best  book  that  has  ever  come  out  of  Ireland  ; 
for  the  stories  which  it  tells  are  a  chief  part  of  Ireland's 
gift  to  the  imagination  of  the  world — and  it  tells  them 
perfectly  for  the  first  time.  Translators  from  the  Irish 
have  hitherto  retold  one  story  or  the  other  from  some 
one  version,  and  not  often  with  any  fine  understanding 
of  English,  of  those  changes  of  rhythm  for  instance 
that  are  changes  of  the  sense.  They  have  translated 
the  best  and  fullest  manuscripts  they  knew,  as  accurately 
as  they  could,  and  that  is  all  we  have  the  right  to 
expect  from  the  first  translators  of  a  difficult  and 
old  literature.  But  few  of  the  stories  really  begin 
to  exist  as  great  works  of  imagination  until  somebody 
has  taken  the  best  bits  out  of  many  manuscripts. 
Sometimes,  as  in  Lady  Gregory's  version  of  Deirdre, 
a  dozen  manuscripts  have  to  give  their  best  before 
the  beads  are  ready  for  the  necklace.  It  has  been 
as  necessary  also  to  leave  out  as  to  add,  for 
generations  of  copyists,  who  had  often  but  little 
sympathy  with  the  stones  they  copied,  have  mixed 
versions  together  in  a  clumsy  fashion,  often  repeating 


viii  PREFACE 

one  incident  several  times,  and  every  century  has 
ornamented  what  was  once  a  simple  story  with  its  own 
often  extravagant  ornament.  One  does  not  perhaps 
exaggerate  when  one  says  that  no  story  has  come  down 
to  us  in  the  form  it  had  when  the  story-teller  told  it  in 
the  winter  evenings.  Lady  Gregory  has  done  her  work 
of  compression  and  selection  at  once  so  firmly  and  so 
reverently  that  I  cannot  believe  that  anybody,  except 
now  and  then  for  a  scientific  purpose,  will  need  another 
text  than  this,  or  than  the  version  of  it  the  Gaelic 
League  is  about  to  publish  in  Modern  Irish.  When 
she  has  added  her  translations  from  other  cycles,  she 
will  have  given  Ireland  its  Mabinogion,  its  Morte 
D'Arthur,  its  Nibelungenlied.  She  has  already  put  a 
great  mass  of  stories,  in  which  the  ancient  heart  of 
Ireland  still  lives,  into  a  shape  at  once  harmonious 
and  characteristic ;  and  without  writing  more  than  a 
very  few  sentences  of  her  own  to  link  together  incidents 
or  thoughts  taken  from  different  manuscripts,  without 
adding  more  indeed  than  the  story-teller  must  often 
have  added  to  amend  the  hesitation  of  a  moment. 
Perhaps  more  than  all  she  had  discovered  a  fitting 
dialect  to  tell  them  in.  Some  years  ago  I  wrote  some 
stories  of  mediaeval  Irish  life,  and  as  I  wrote  I  was 
sometimes  made  wretched  by  the  thought  that  I  knew 
of  no  kind  of  English  that  fitted  them  as  the  language 
of  Morris'  prose  stories — the  most  beautiful  language 
I  had  ever  read — fitted  his  journeys  to  woods  and 
wells  beyond  the  world.  I  knew  of  no  language  to 
write  about  Ireland  in  but  raw  modern  English  ;  but  now 
Lady  Gregory  has  discovered  a  speech  as  beautiful  as 
that  of  Morris,  and  a  living  speech  into  the  bargain. 


PREFACE  ix 

As  she  moved  about  among  her  people  she  learned  to 
love  the  beautiful  speech  of  those  who  think  in  Irish,  and 
to  understand  that  it  is  as  true  a  dialect  of  English  as  the 
dialect  that  Burns  wrote  in.  It  is  some  hundreds  of  years 
old,  and  age  gives  a  language  authority.  One  finds  in  it 
the  vocabulary  of  the  translators  of  the  Bible,  joined  to 
an  idiom  which  makes  it  tender,  compassionate,  and 
complaisant,  like  the  Irish  language  itself.  It  is  certainly 
well  suited  to  clothe  a  literature  which  never  ceased  to 
be  folk-lore  even  when  it  was  recited  in  the  Courts  of 
Kings. 


II 


Lady  Gregory  could  with  less  trouble  have  made  a 
book  that  would  have  better  pleased  the  hasty  reader. 
She  could  have  plucked  away  details,  smoothed  out 
characteristics  till  she  had  left  nothing  but  the  bare 
stories  ;  but  a  book  of  that  kind  would  never  have 
called  up  the  past,  or  stirred  the  imagination  of  a  painter 
or  a  poet,  and  would  be  as  little  thought  of  in  a  few 
years  as  if  it  had  been  a  popular  novel. 

The  abundance  of  what  may  seem  at  first  irrelevant 
invention  in  a  story  like  the  death  of  Conaire,  is 
essential  if  we  are  to  recall  a  time  when  people  were  in 
love  with  a  story,  and  gave  themselves  up  to  imagination 
as  if  to  a  lover.  One  may  think  there  are  too  many 
lyrical  outbursts,  or  too  many  enigmatical  symbols 
here  and  there  in  some  other  story,  but  delight  will 
always  overtake  one  in  the  end.  One  comes  to  accept 
without  reserve   an  art  that  is  half  epical,  half  lyrical, 


X  PREFACE 

like  that  of  the  historical  parts  of  the  Bible,  the  art  of  a 
time  when  perhaps  men  passed  more  readily  than  they 
do  now  from  one  mood  to  another,  and  found  it  harder 
than  we  do  to  keep  to  the  mood  in  which  one  tots  up 
figures  or  banters  a  friend. 


Ill 


The  Church  when  it  was  most  powerful  created  an 
imaginative  unity,  for  it  taught  learned  and  unlearned 
to  climb,  as  it  were,  to  the  great  moral  realities  through 
hierarchies  of  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  through  clouds 
of  Saints  and  Angels  who  had  all  their  precise  duties 
and  privileges.  The  story-tellers  of  Ireland,  perhaps  of 
every  primitive  country,  created  a  like  unity,  only  it  was 
to  the  great  aesthetic  realities  that  they  taught  people  to 
climb.  They  created  for  learned  and  unlearned  alike, 
a  communion  of  heroes,  a  cloud  of  stalwart  witnesses  ; 
but  because  they  were  as  much  excited  as  a  monk  over 
his  prayers,  they  did  not  think  sufficiently  about  the 
shape  of  the  poem  and  the  story.  One  has  to  get  a 
little  weary  or  a  little  distrustful  of  one's  subject, 
perhaps,  before  one  can  lie  awake  thinking  how  one 
will  make  the  most  of  it.  They  were  more  anxious 
to  describe  energetic  characters,  and  to  invent  beautiful 
stories,  than  to  express  themselves  with  perfect  dramatic 
logic  or  in  perfectly-ordered  words.  They  shared 
their  characters  and  their  stories,  their  very  images, 
with  one  another,  and  handed  them  down  from  genera- 
tion   to   generation ;    for    nobody,   even   when   he   had 


PREFACE  xi 

added  some  new  trait,  or  some  new  incident,  thought  of 
claiming  for  himself  what  so  obviously  lived  its  own 
merry  or  mournful  life.  The  wood-carver  who  first  put 
a  sword  into  St  Michael's  hand  would  have  as  soon 
claimed  as  his  own  a  thought  which  was  perhaps  put 
into  his  mind  by  St  Michael  himself.  The  Irish  poets 
had  also,  it  may  be,  what  seemed  a  supernatural  sanction, 
for  a  chief  poet  had  to  understand  not  only  innumerable 
kinds  of  poetry,  but  how  to  keep  himself  for  nine  days 
in  a  trance.  They  certainly  believed  in  the  historical 
reality  of  even  their  wildest  imaginations.  And  so  soon 
as  Christianity  made  their  hearers  desire  a  chronology 
that  would  run  side  by  side  with  that  of  the  Bible,  they 
delighted  in  arranging  their  Kings  and  Queens,  the 
shadows  of  forgotten  mythologies,  in  long  lines  that 
ascended  to  Adam  and  his  Garden.  Those  who 
listened  to  them  must  have  felt  as  if  the  living  were 
like  rabbits  digging  their  burrows  under  walls  that  had 
been  built  by  Gods  and  Giants,  or  like  swallows  building 
their  nests  in  the  stone  mouths  of  immense  images, 
carved  by  nobody  knows  who.  It  is  no  wonder  that 
one  sometimes  hears  about  men  who  saw  in  a  vision  ivy- 
leaves  that  were  greater  than  shields,  and  blackbirds 
whose  thighs  were  like  the  thighs  of  oxen.  The  fruit  of 
all  those  stories,  unless  indeed  the  finest  activities  of  the 
mind  are  but  a  pastime,  is  the  quick  intelligence,  the 
abundant  imagination,  the  courtly  manners  of  the  Irish 
country  people. 


xii  PREFACE 


IV 


William  Morris  came  to  Dublin  when  I  was  a  boy, 
and  I  had  some  talk  with  him  about  these  old  stories. 
He  had  intended  to  lecture  upon  them,  but  "  the  ladies 
and  gentlemen  " — he  put  a  communistic  fervour  of  hatred 
into  the  phrase — knew  nothing  about  them.  He  spoke 
of  the  Irish  account  of  the  battle  of  Clontarf,  and  of 
the  Norse  account,  and  said,  that  one  saw  the  Norse 
and  Irish  tempers  in  the  two  accounts.  The  Norseman 
was  interested  in  the  way  things  are  done,  but  the 
Irishman  turned  aside,  evidently  well  pleased  to  be  out 
of  so  dull  a  business,  to  describe  beautiful  supernatural 
events.  He  was  thinking,  I  suppose,  of  the  young  man 
who  came  from  Aoibhell  of  the  Grey  Rock,  giving  up 
immortal  love  and  youth,  that  he  might  fight  and  die  by 
Murrugh's  side.  He  said  that  the  Norseman  had  the 
dramatic  temper,  and  the  Irishman  had  the  lyrical.  I 
think  I  should  have  said  epical  and  romantic  rather 
than  dramatic  and  lyrical,  but  his  words,  which  have  so 
much  greater  authority  than  mine,  mark  the  distinction 
very  well,  and  not  only  between  Irish  and  Norse,  but 
between  Irish  and  other  un-Celtic  literatures.  The  Irish 
story-teller  could  not  interest  himself  with  an  unbroken 
interest  in  the  way  men  like  himself  burned  a  house, 
or  won  wives  no  more  wonderful  than  themselves.  His 
mind  constantly  escaped  out  of  daily  circumstance,  as 
a  bough  that  has  been  held  down  by  a  weak  hand 
suddenly  straightens  itself  out.  His  imagination  was 
always   running   oflf  to   Tir-nan-oge,   to   the    Land    of 


PREFACE  xiil 

Promise,  which  is  as  near  to  the  country-people  of 
to-day,  as  it  was  to  Cuchulain  and  his  companions. 
His  behef  in  its  nearness,  cherished  in  its  turn  the 
lyrical  temper,  which  is  always  athirst  for  an  emotion, 
a  beauty  which  cannot  be  found  in  its  perfection  upon 
earth,  or  only  for  a  moment.  His  imagination,  which 
had  not  been  able  to  believe  in  Cuchulain's  greatness, 
until  it  had  brought  the  Great  Queen,  the  red  eye-browed 
goddess  to  woo  him  upon  the  battlefield,  could  not  be 
satisfied  with  a  friendship  less  romantic  and  lyrical  than 
that  of  Cuchulain  and  Ferdiad,  who  kissed  one  another 
after  the  day's  fighting,  or  with  a  love  less  romantic 
and  lyrical  than  that  of  Baile  and  Aillinn,  who  died  at 
the  report  of  one  another's  deaths,  and  married  in 
Tir-nan-oge.  His  art,  too,  is  often  at  its  greatest  when 
it  is  most  extravagant,  for  he  only  feels  himself  among 
solid  things,  among  things  with  fixed  laws  and  satis- 
fying purposes,  when  he  has  reshaped  the  world 
according  to  his  heart's  desire.  He  understands  as  well 
as  Blake  that  the  ruins  of  time  build  mansions  in 
eternity,  and  he  never  allows  anything,  that  we  can 
see  and  handle,  to  remain  long  unchanged.  The 
characters  must  remain  the  same,  but  the  strength  of 
Fergus  may  change  so  greatly,  that  he,  who  a  moment 
before  was  merely  a  strong  man  among  many,  becomes 
the  master  of  Three  Blows  that  would  destroy  an  army, 
did  they  not  cut  off  the  heads  of  three  little  hills 
instead,  and  his  sword,  which  a  fool  had  been  able  to 
steal  out  of  its  sheath,  has  of  a  sudden  the  likeness  of 
a  rainbow.  A  wandering  lyric  moon  must  knead  and 
kindle  perpetually  that  moving  world  of  cloaks  made 
put  of  the  fleeces  of  Manannan ;    of  armed  men  who 


xiv  PREFACE 

change  themselves  into  sea-birds ;  of  goddesses  who 
become  crows  ;  of  trees  that  bare  fruit  and  flower  at 
the  same  time.  The  great  emotions  of  love,  terror,  and 
friendship  must  alone  remain  untroubled  by  the  moon 
in  that  world,  which  is  still  the  world  of  the  Irish 
country-people,  who  do  not  open  their  eyes  very  wide 
at  the  most  miraculous  change,  at  the  most  sudden 
enchantment.  Its  events,  and  things,  and  people  are 
wild,  and  are  like  unbroken  horses,  that  are  so  much 
more  beautiful  than  horses  that  have  learned  to  run 
between  shafts.  One  thinks  of  actual  life,  when  one 
reads  those  Norse  stories,  which  were  already  in 
decadence,  so  necessary  were  the  proportions  of  actual 
life  to  their  efforts,  when  a  dying  man  remembered  his 
heroism  enough  to  look  down  at  his  wound  and  say, 
"  Those  broad  spears  are  coming  into  fashion " ;  but 
the  Irish  stories  make  one  understand  why  the  Greeks 
call  myths  the  activities  of  the  daemons.  The  great 
virtues,  the  great  joys,  the  great  privations  come  in  the 
myths,  and,  as  it  were,  take  mankind  between  their 
naked  arms,  and  without  putting  off  their  divinity. 
Poets  have  taken  their  themes  more  often  from  stories 
that  are  all,  or  half,  mythological,  than  from  history  or 
stories  that  give  one  the  sensation  of  history,  under- 
standing, as  I  think,  that  the  imagination  which 
remembers  the  proportions  of  life  is  but  a  long 
wooing,  and  that  it  has  to  forget  them  before  it 
becomes  the  torch  and  the  marriage-bed. 


PREFACE  XV 


One  finds,  as  one  expects,  in  the  work  of  men  who 
were  not  troubled  about  any  probabilities  or  necessities 
but  those  of  emotion  itself,  an  immense  variety  of 
incident  and  character  and  of  ways  of  expressing 
emotion.  Cuchulain  fights  man  after  man  during  the 
quest  of  the  Brown  Bull,  and  not  one  of  those  fights  is  like 
another,  and  not  one  is  lacking  in  emotion  or  strangeness  ; 
and  when  one  thinks  imagination  can  do  no  more,  the 
storyof  the  Two  Bulls,emblematic  of  all  contests,suddenly 
lifts  romance  into  prophecy.  The  characters  too  have  a 
distinctness  one  does  not  find  among  the  people  of  the 
Mabinogion,  perhaps  not  even  among  the  people  of  the 
Morte  D' Arthur.  One  knows  one  will  be  long  forgetting 
Cuchulain,  whose  life  is  vehement  and  full  of  pleasure,  as 
though  he  always  remembered  that  it  was  to  be  soon 
over  ;  or  the  dreamy  Fergus  who  betrays  the  sons  of 
Usnach  for  a  feast,  without  ceasing  to  be  noble  ;  or  Conall 
who  is  fierce  and  friendly  and  trustworthy,  but  has  not 
the  sap  of  divinity  that  makes  Cuchulain  mysterious  to 
men,  and  beloved  of  women.  Women  indeed,  with  their 
lamentations  for  lovers  and  husbands  and  sons,  and  for 
fallen  rooftrees  and  lost  wealth,  give  the  stories  their 
most  beautiful  sentences  ;  and,  after  Cuchulain,  one  thinks 
most  of  certain  great  queens — of  angry,  amorous  Maeve, 
with  her  long  pale  face  ;  of  Findabair,  her  daughter,  who 
dies  of  shame  and  of  pity  ;  of  Deirdre  who  might  be  some 
mild  modern  housewife  but  for  her  prophetic  wisdom. 
If  one  does  not  set  Deirdre's  lamentations  among  the 


xvi  PREFACE 

greatest  lyric  poems  of  the  world,  I  think  one  may  be 
certain  that  the  wine-press  of  the  poets  has  been  trodden 
for  one  in  vain ;  and  yet  I  think  it  may  be  proud  Emer, 
Cuchulain's  fitting  wife,  who  will  linger  longest  in  the 
memory.  What  a  pure  flame  burns  in  her  always, 
whether  she  is  the  newly-married  wife  fighting  for  pre- 
cedence, fierce  as  some  beautiful  bird,  or  the  confident 
housewife,  who  would  awaken  her  husband  from  his 
magic  sleep  with  mocking  words  ;  or  the  great  queen 
who  would  get  him  out  of  the  tightening  net  of  his 
doom,  by  sending  him  into  the  Valley  of  the  Deaf,  with 
Niamh,  his  mistress,  because  he  will  be  more  obedient  to 
her  ;  or  the  woman  whom  sorrow  has  sent  with  Helen  and 
seult  and  Brunnhilda,  and  Deirdre,  to  share  their 
immortality  in  the  rosary  of  the  poets. 

" '  And  oh !  my  love ! '  she  said,  '  we  were  often  in 
one  another's  company,  and  it  was  happy  for  us  ;  for  if 
the  world  had  been  searched  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to 
sunset,  the  like  would  never  have  been  found  in  one 
place,  of  the  Black  Sainglain  and  the  Grey  of  Macha, 
and  Laeg  the  chariot-driver,  and  myself  and  Cuchulain.' 

"  And  after  that  Emer  bade  Conall  to  make  a  wide, 
very  deep  grave  for  Cuchulain  ;  and  she  laid  herself 
down  beside  her  gentle  comrade,  and  she  put  her  mouth 
to  his  mouth,  and  she  said  :  '  Love  of  my  life,  my  friend, 
my  sweetheart,  my  one  choice  of  the  men  of  the  earth, 
many  is  the  women,  wed  or  unwed,  envied  me  until 
to-day ;  and  now  I  will  not  stay  living  after  you.' " 


PREFACE  xvii 


VI 


We  Irish  should  keep  these  personages  much  in 
our  hearts,  for  they  lived  in  the  places  where  we 
ride  and  go  marketing,  and  sometimes  they  have  met 
one  another  on  the  hills  that  cast  their  shadows  upon 
our  doors  at  evening.  If  we  will  but  tell  these  stories 
to  our  children  the  Land  will  begin  again  to  be  a  Holy 
Land,  as  it  was  before  men  gave  their  hearts  to  Greece 
and  Rome  and  Judea.  When  I  was  a  child  I  had  only 
to  climb  the  hill  behind  the  house  to  see  long,  blue, 
ragged  hills  flowing  along  the  southern  horizon.  What 
beauty  was  lost  to  me,  what  depth  of  emotion  is  still 
perhaps  lacking  in  me,  because  nobody  told  me,  not 
even  the  merchant  captains  who  knew  everything,  that 
Cruachan  of  the  Enchantments  lay  behind  those  long, 
blue,  ragged  hills ! 

W.  B.  YEATS. 

March  1902. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

BIRTH   OF  CUCHULAIN I 

BOY   DEEDS  OF  CUCHULAIN 7 

THE  COURTING  OF  EMER 21 

BRICRIU'S    FEAST,    AND     THE    WAR      OF     WORDS     OF     THE 

WOMEN   OF  ULSTER .48 

THE  CHAMPIONSHIP  OF  ULSTER 62 

THE  HIGH   KING  OF   IRELAND 82 

FATE  OF   THE  CHILDREN   OF  USNACH I04 

THE  DREAM   OF  ANGUS I43 

CRUACHAN 148 

THE  WEDDING   OF  MAINE  MORGOR 159 

THE  WAR  FOR  THE   BULL  OF  CUAILGNE       .  .  .  .175 

THE  AWAKENING  OF  ULSTER 245 

THE  TWO  BULLS 268 

THE  ONLY  JEALOUSY  OF   EMER 276 

ADVICE  TO  A   PRINCE 294 

THE  SONS  OF  DOEL  DERMAIT 297 

BATTLE  OF  ROSNAREE 302 

THE  ONLY  SON  OF  AOIFE 313 

THE  GREAT   GATHERING  OF   MUIRTHEMNE .           .          .           .  320 

DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 334 


CUCHULAIN  OF  MUIRTHEMNE 


BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

TN  the  time  long  ago,  Conchubar,  son  of  Ness,  was 
King  of  Ulster,  and  he  held  his  court  in  the  palace 
of  Emain  Macha.  And  this  is  the  way  he  came  to  be 
king.  He  was  but  a  young  lad,  and  his  father  was  not 
living,  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  who  was  at  that  time 
King  of  Ulster,  asked  his  mother  Ness  in  marriage. 

Now  Ness,  that  was  at  one  time  the  quietest  and 
kindest  of  the  women  of  Ireland,  had  got  to  be  un- 
kind and  treacherous  because  of  an  unkindness  that  had 
been  done  to  her,  and  she  planned  to  get  the  kingdom 
away  from  Fergus  for  her  own  son.  So  she  said  to 
Fergus :  "  Let  Conchubar  hold  the  kingdom  for  a  year, 
so  that  his  children  after  him  may  be  called  the  children 
of  a  king ;  and  that  is  the  marriage  portion  I  will  ask 
of  you." 

"  You  may  do  that,"  the  men  of  Ulster  said  to  him  ; 
"  for  even  though  Conchubar  gets  the  name  of  being 
king,  it  is  yourself  that  will  be  our  king  all  the  time." 
So  Fergus  agreed  to  it,  and  he  took  Ness  as  his 
wife,  and  her  son  Conchubar  was  made  king  in  his 
place, 

A 


2  BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

But  all  through  the  year,  Ness  was  working  to  keep 
the  kingdom  for  him,  and  she  gave  great  presents  to  the 
chief  men  of  Ulster  to  get  them  on  her  side.  And 
though  Conchubar  was  but  a  young  lad  at  that  time, 
he  was  wise  in  his  judgments,  and  brave  in  battle,  and 
good  in  shape  and  in  form,  and  they  liked  him  well. 
And  at  the  end  of  the  year,  when  Fergus  asked  to 
have  the  kingship  back  again,  they  consulted  together ; 
and  it  is  what  they  agreed,  that  Conchubar  was  to  keep 
it.  And  they  said  :  "  It  is  little  Fergus  thinks  about  us, 
when  he  was  so  ready  to  give  up  his  rule  over  us  for  a 
year ;  and  let  Conchubar  keep  the  kingship,"  they  said, 
"  and  let  Fergus  keep  the  wife  he  has  got." 

Now  it  happened  one  day  that  Conchubar  was 
making  a  feast  at  Emain  Macha  for  the  marriage  of 
his  sister  Dechtire  with  Sualtim  son  of  Roig.  And 
at  the  feast  Dechtire  was  thirsty,  and  they  gave  her  a 
cup  of  wine,  and  as  she  was  drinking  it,  a  mayfly  flew 
into  the  cup,  and  she  drank  it  down  with  the  wine.  And 
presently  she  went  into  her  sunny  parlour,  and  her  fifty 
maidens  along  with  her,  and  she  fell  into  a  deep  sleep. 
And  in  her  sleep,  Lugh  of  the  Long  Hand  appeared  to 
her,  and  he  said  :  "  It  is  I  myself  was  the  mayfly  that 
came  to  you  in  the  cup,  and  it  is  with  me  you  must  come 
away  now,  and  your  fifty  maidens  along  with  you."  And 
he  put  on  them  the  appearance  of  a  flock  of  birds,  and 
they  went  with  him  southward  till  they  came  to  Brugh 
na  Boinne,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Sidhe.  And  no 
one  at  Emain  Macha  could  get  tale  or  tidings  of  them,  or 
know  where  they  had  gone,  or  what  had  happened  them. 

It  was  about  a  year  after  that  time,  there  was  another 
feast  in  Emain,  and  Conchubar  and  his  chief  men  were 
sitting  at  the  feast.  And  suddenly  they  saw  from  the 
window  a  great  flock  of  birds,  that  lit  on  the  ground 
and  began  to  eat  up  everything  before  them,  so  that  not 
so  much  as  a  blade  of  grass  was  left. 


THE   FLIGHT   OF  THE   BIRDS        3 

The  men  of  Ulster  were  vexed  when  they  saw  the 
birds  destroying  all  before  them,  and  they  yoked  nine  of 
their  chariots  to  follow  after  them.  Conchubar  was  in 
his  own  chariot,  and  there  were  following  with  him 
Fergus  son  of  Rogh,  and  Laegaire  Buadach,  the  Battle- 
Winner,  and  Celthair  son  of  Uithecar,  and  many  others, 
and  Bricriu  of  the  bitter  tongue  was  along  with  them. 

They  followed  after  the  birds  across  the  whole  country 
southward,  across  Slieve  Fuad,  by  Ath  Lethan,  by  Ath 
Garach  and  Magh  Gossa,  between  Fir  Rois  and  Fir 
Ardae ;  and  the  birds  before  them  always.  They  were 
the  most  beautiful  that  had  ever  been  seen  ;  nine  flocks 
of  them  there  were,  linked  together  two  and  two  with  a 
chain  of  silver,  and  at  the  head  of  every  flock  there  were 
two  birds  of  different  colours,  linked  together  with  a 
chain  of  gold ;  and  there  were  three  birds  that  flew  by 
themselves,  and  they  all  went  before  the  chariots,  to  the 
far  end  of  the  country,  until  the  fall  of  night,  and  then 
there  was  no  more  seen  of  them. 

And  when  the  dark  night  was  coming  on,  Conchubar 
said  to  his  people :  "  It  is  best  for  us  to  unyoke  the 
chariots  now,  and  to  look  for  some  place  where  we  can 
spend  the  night." 

Then  Fergus  went  forward  to  look  for  some  place, 
and  what  he  came  to  was  a  very  small  poor-looking 
house.  A  man  and  a  woman  were  in  it,  and  when  they 
saw  him  they  said  :  "  Bring  your  companions  here  along 
with  you,  and  they  will  be  welcome."  Fergus  went 
back  to  his  companions  and  told  them  what  he  had  seen. 
But  Bricriu  said  :  "  Where  is  the  use  of  going  into  a 
house  like  that,  with  neither  room  nor  provisions  nor 
coverings  in  it ;  it  is  not  worth  our  while  to  be  going 
there." 

Then  Bricriu  went  on  himself  to  the  place  where 
the  house  was.  But  when  he  came  to  it,  what 
he  saw  was  a  grand,  new,  well-lighted  house ;  and  at 


4  BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

the  door  there  was  a  young  man  wearing  armour, 
very  tall  and  handsome  and  shining.  And  he  said  : 
"  Come  into  the  house,  Bricriu  ;  why  are  you  looking 
about  you  ? "  And  there  was  a  young  woman  beside 
him,  fine  and  noble,  and  with  curled  hair,  and  she  said  : 
"  Surely  there  is  a  welcome  before  you  from  me."  "  Why 
does  she  welcome  me  ?  "  said  Bricriu.  "  It  is  on  account 
of  her  that  I  myself  welcome  you,"  said  the  young  man. 
"  And  is  there  no  one  missing  from  you  at  Emain  ?  "  he 
said.  "  There  is  surely,"  said  Bricriu.  "  We  are  missing 
fifty  young  girls  for  the  length  of  a  year."  "  Would  you 
know  them  again  if  you  saw  them  ? "  said  the  young 
man.  "  If  I  would  not  know  them,"  said  Bricriu,  "  it  is 
because  a  year  might  make  a  change  in  them,  so  that  I 
would  not  be  sure."  "  Try  and  know  them  again,"  said 
the  man,  "  for  the  fifty  young  girls  are  in  this  house,  and 
this  woman  beside  me  is  their  mistress,  Dechtire.  It  was 
they  themselves,  changed  into  birds,  that  went  to  Emain 
Macha  to  bring  you  here."  Then  Dechtire  gave  Bricriu 
a  purple  cloak  with  gold  fringes ;  and  he  went  back  to 
find  his  companions.  But  while  he  was  going  he  thought 
to  himself:  "  Conchubar  would  give  great  treasure  to  find 
these  fifty  young  girls  again,  and  his  sister  along  with 
them.  I  will  not  tell  him  I  have  found  them.  I  will 
only  say  I  have  found  a  house  with  beautiful  women  in 
it,  and  no  more  than  that." 

When  Conchubar  saw  Bricriu,  he  asked  news  of  him. 
"  What  news  do  you  bring  back  with  you,  Bricriu  ?  "  he 
said.  "  I  came  to  a  fine  well-lighted  house,"  said  Bricriu  ; 
"  I  saw  a  queen,  noble,  kind,  with  royal  looks,  with  curled 
hair  ;  I  saw  a  troop  of  women,  beautiful,  well-dressed  ;  I 
saw  the  man  of  the  house,  tall  and  open-handed  and 
shining."  "  Let  us  go  there  for  the  night,"  said  Con- 
chubar. So  they  brought  their  chariots  and  their  horses 
and  their  arms  ;  and  they  were  hardly  in  the  house  when 
every  sort  of  food  and  of  drink,  some  they  knew  and 


BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN  5 

some  they  did  not  know,  was  put  before  them,  so  that 
they  never  spent  a  better  night.  And  when  they  had 
eaten  and  drunk  and  began  to  be  satisfied,  Conchubar 
said  to  the  young  man :  "  Where  is  the  mistress  of  the 
house  that  she  does  not  come  to  bid  us  welcome  ? " 
"  You  cannot  see  her  to-night,"  said  he,  "  for  she  is  in  the 
pains  of  childbirth." 

So  they  rested  there  that  night,  and  in  the  morning 
Conchubar  was  the  first  to  rise  up ;  but  he  saw  no  more 
of  the  man  of  the  house,  and  what  he  heard  was  the  cry 
of  a  child.  And  he  went  to  the  room  it  came  from, 
and  there  he  saw  Dechtire,  and  her  maidens  about  her, 
and  a  young  child  beside  her.  And  she  bade  Conchubar 
welcome,  and  she  told  him  all  that  had  happened  her, 
and  that  she  had  called  him  there  to  bring  herself  and 
the  child  back  to  Emain  Macha.  And  Conchubar  said : 
"It  is  well  you  have  done  by  me,  Dechtire ;  you  gave 
shelter  to  me  and  to  my  chariots  ;  you  kept  the  cold  from 
my  horses ;  you  gave  food  to  me  and  my  people,  and 
now  you  have  given  us  this  good  gift.  And  let  our 
sister,  Finchoem,  bring  up  the  child,"  he  said.  "  No,  it 
is  not  for  her  to  bring  him  up,  it  is  for  me,"  said  Sencha 
son  of  Ailell,  chief  judge  and  chief  poet  of  Ulster.  "  For 
I  am  skilled  ;  I  am  good  in  disputes  ;  I  am  not  forgetful ; 
I  speak  before  any  one  at  all  in  the  presence  of  the  king ; 
I  watch  over  what  he  says ;  I  give  judgment  in  the 
quarrels  of  kings  ;  I  am  judge  of  the  men  of  Ulster  ;  no  one 
has  a  right  to  dispute  my  claim,  but  only  Conchubar." 

"If  the  child  is  given  to  me  to  bring  up,"  said  Blai, 
the  distributer,  "he  will  not  suffer  from  want  of  care 
or  from  forgetfulness.  It  is  my  messages  that  do  the 
will  of  Conchubar;  I  call  up  the  fighting  men  from 
all  Ireland  ;  I  am  well  able  to  provide  for  them  for  a 
week,  or  even  for  ten  days ;  I  settle  their  business  and 
their  disputes  ;  I  support  their  honour ;  1  get  satisfac- 
tion for  their  insults." 


6  BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

"  You  think  too  much  of  yourself,"  said  Fergus.  "  It 
is  I  that  will  bring  up  the  child ;  I  am  strong  ;  I  have 
knowledge  ;  I  am  the  king's  messenger  ;  no  one  can  stand 
up  against  me  in  honour  or  riches  ;  I  am  hardened  to  war 
and  battles  ;  I  am  a  good  craftsman ;  I  am  worthy  to 
bring  up  a  child.  I  am  the  protector  of  all  the  unhappy  ; 
the  strong  are  afraid  of  me ;  I  am  the  helper  of  the 
weak." 

"  If  you  will  listen  to  me  at  last,  now  you  are  quiet," 
said  Amergin,  "  I  am  able  to  bring  up  a  child  like 
a  king.  The  people  praise  my  honour,  my  bravery, 
my  courage,  my  wisdom  ;  they  praise  my  good  luck, 
my  age,  my  speaking,  my  name,  my  courage,  and 
my  race.  Though  I  am  a  fighter,  I  am  a  poet ;  I  am 
worthy  of  the  king's  favour  ;  I  overcome  all  the  men 
who  fight  from  their  chariots  ;  I  owe  thanks  to  no  one 
except  Conchubar  ;  I  obey  no  one  but  the  king." 

Then  Sencha  said  :  "  Let  Finchoem  keep  the  child 
until  we  come  to  Emain,  and  Morann,  the  judge,  will 
settle  the  question  when  we  are  there  " 

So  the  men  of  Ulster  set  out  for  Emain,  Finchoem 
having  the  child  with  her.  And  when  they  came  there 
Morann  gave  his  judgment.  "  It  is  for  Conchubar,"  he 
said,  "  to  help  the  child  to  a  good  name,  for  he  is  next 
of  kin  to  him  ;  let  Sencha  teach  him  words  and  speak- 
ing ;  let  Fergus  hold  him  on  his  knees ;  let  Amergin  be 
his  tutor."  And  he  said  :  "  This  child  will  be  praised  by 
all,  by  chariot  drivers  and  fighters,  by  kings  and  by  wise 
men  ;  he  shall  be  loved  by  many  men ;  he  will  avenge 
all  your  wrongs  ;  he  will  defend  your  fords  ;  he  will 
fight  all  your  battles." 

And  so  it  was  settled.  And  the  child  was  left  until 
he  should  come  to  sensible  years,  with  his  mother 
Dechtire  and  with  her  husband  Sualtim.  And  they 
brought  him  up  upon  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  and  the 
name  he  was  known  by  was  Setanta,  son  of  Sualtim. 


II 

BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

TT  chanced  one  day,  when  Setanta  was  about  seven 
years  old,  that  he  heard  some  of  the  people  of  his 
mother's  house  talking  about  King  Conchubar's  court 
at  Emain  Macha,  and  of  the  sons  of  kings  and  nobles 
that  lived  there,  and  that  spent  a  great  part  of  their  time 
at  games  and  at  hurling.  "  Let  me  go  and  play  with  them 
there,"  he  said  to  his  mother.  "  It  is  too  soon  for  you  to 
do  that,"  she  said,  "  but  wait  till  such  time  as  you  are 
able  to  travel  so  far,  and  till  I  can  put  you  in  charge 
of  some  one  going  to  the  court,  that  will  put  you  under 
Conchubar's  protection."  "  It  would  be  too  long  for  me 
to  wait  for  that,"  he  said,  "  but  I  will  go  there  by  myself 
if  you  will  tell  me  the  road."  "  It  is  too  far  for  you,"  said 
Dechtire,  "  for  it  is  beyond  Slieve  Fuad,  Emain  Macha 
is."  "  Is  it  east  or  west  of  Slieve  Fuad  ?  "  he  asked. 
And  when  she  had  answered  him  that,  he  set  out 
there  and  then,  and  nothing  with  him  but  his  hurling 
stick,  and  his  silver  ball,  and  his  little  dart  and  spear ; 
and  to  shorten  the  road  for  himself  he  would  give  a  blow 
to  the  ball  and  drive  it  from  him,  and  then  he  would 
throw  his  hurling  stick  after  it,  and  the  dart  after  that 
again,  and  then  he  would  make  a  run  and  catch  them 
all  in  his  hand  before  one  of  them  would  have  reached 
the  ground. 

So  he  went  on  until  he  came  to  the  lawn  at  Emain 

7 


8        BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

Macha,  and  there  he  saw  three  fifties  of  king's  sons 
hurling  and  learning  feats  of  war.  He  went  in  among 
them,  and  when  the  ball  came  near  him  he  got  it 
between  his  feet,  and  drove  it  along  in  spite  of  them  till 
he  had  sent  it  beyond  the  goal.  There  was  great 
surprise  and  anger  on  them  when  they  saw  what  he  had 
done,  and  Follaman,  King  Conchubar's  son,  that  was 
chief  among  them,  cried  out  to  them  to  come  together 
and  drive  out  this  stranger  and  make  an  end  of  him. 
"  For  he  has  no  right,"  he  said,  "  to  come  into  our  game 
without  asking  leave,  and  without  putting  his  life  under 
our  protection.  And  you  may  be  sure,"  he  said,  "  that 
he  is  the  son  of  some  common  fighting  man,  and  it  is 
not  for  him  to  come  into  our  game  at  all."  With  that 
they  all  made  an  attack  on  him,  and  began  to  throw 
their  hurling  sticks  at  him,  and  their  balls  and  darts,  but 
he  escaped  them  all,  and  then  he  rushed  at  them,  and 
began  to  throw  some  of  them  to  the  ground.  Fergus 
came  out  just  then  from  the  palace,  and  when  he  saw 
what  a  good  defence  the  little  lad  was  making,  he 
brought  him  in  to  where  Conchubar  was  playing  chess, 
and  told  him  all  that  had  happened.  "  This  is  no  gentle 
game  you  have  been  playing,"  he  said.  "  It  is  on  them- 
selves the  fault  is,"  said  the  boy ;  "  I  came  as  a  stranger, 
and  I  did  not  get  a  stranger's  welcome."  "  You  did  not 
know  then,"  said  Conchubar,  "  that  no  one  can  play 
among  the  boy  troop  of  Emain  unless  he  gets  their  leave 
and  their  protection."  "  I  did  not  know  that,  or  I  would 
have  asked  it  of  them,"  he  said.  "  What  is  your  name 
and  your  family  ? "  said  Conchubar.  My  name  is 
Setanta,  son  of  Sualtim  and  of  Dechtire,"  he  said. 
When  Conchubar  knew  that  he  was  his  sister's  son,  he 
gave  him  a  great  welcome,  and  he  bade  the  boy  troop  to 
let  him  go  safe  among  them.  "  We  will  do  that,"  they 
said.  But  when  they  went  out  to  play,  Setanta  began 
to  break  through  them,  and  to  overthrow  them,  so  that 


THE   SMITH'S   FEAST  9 

they  could  not  stand  against  him.  "What  are  you 
wanting  of  them  now  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  I  swear  by 
the  gods  my  people  swear  by,"  said  the  boy,  "  I  will  not 
lighten  my  hand  off  them  till  they  have  come  under  my 
protection  the  same  way  I  have  come  under  theirs." 
Then  they  all  agreed  to  give  in  to  this ;  and  Setanta 
stayed  in  the  king's  house  at  Emain  Macha,  and  all  the 
chief  men  of  Ulster  had  a  hand  in  bringing  him  up. 

There  was  a  great  smith  in  Ulster  of  the  name  of 
Culain,  who  made  a  feast  at  that  time  for  Conchubar  and 
for  his  people.  When  Conchubar  was  setting  out  to  the 
feast,  he  passed  by  the  lawn  where  the  boy  troop  were 
at  their  games,  and  he  watched  them  awhile,  and  he  saw 
how  the  son  of  Dechtire  was  winning  the  goal  from  them 
all.  "  That  little  lad  will  serve  Ulster  yet,"  said  Con- 
chubar ;  "  and  call  him  to  me  now,"  he  said,  "  and  let 
him  come  with  me  to  the  smith's  feast."  "  I  cannot  go 
with  you  now,"  said  Setanta,  when  they  had  called  to 
him,  "  for  these  boys  have  not  had  enough  of  play  yet." 
"It  would  be  too  long  for  me  to  wait  for  you,"  said  the 
king.  "  There  is  no  need  for  you  to  wait ;  I  will  follow 
the  track  of  the  chariots,"  said  Setanta. 

So  Conchubar  went  on  to  the  smith's  house,  and  there 
was  a  welcome  before  him,  and  fresh  rushes  were  laid 
down,  and  there  were  poems  and  songs  and  recitals 
of  laws,  and  the  feast  was  brought  in,  and  they  began 
to  be  merry.  And  then  Culain  said  to  the  king  :  "  Will 
there  be  any  one  else  of  your  people  coming  after  you 
to-night?"  "There  will  not,"  said  Conchubar,  for  he 
forgot  that  he  had  told  the  little  lad  to  follow  him. 
"  But  why  do  you  ask  me  that  ?  "  he  said.  "  I  have  a 
great  fierce  hound,"  said  the  smith,  "and  when  I  take 
the  chain  off  him,  he  lets  no  one  come  into  the  one 
district  with  himself,  and  he  will  obey  no  one  but  myself, 
and  he  has  in  him  the  strength  of  a  hundred."  "  Loose 
him  out,"  said  Conchubar,  "  until  he  keeps  a  watch  on 


10      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

the  place."  So  Culain  loosed  him  out,  and  the  dog 
made  a  course  round  the  whole  district,  and  then  he 
came  back  to  the  place  where  he  was  used  to  lie  and 
to  watch  the  house,  and  every  one  was  in  dread  of 
him,  he  was  so  fierce  and  so  cruel  and  so  savage. 

Now,  as  to  the  boys  at  Emain,  when  they  were  done 
playing,  every  one  went  to  his  father's  house,  or  to  who- 
ever was  in  charge  of  him.  But  Setanta  set  out  on  the 
track  of  the  chariots,  shortening  the  way  for  himself  as 
he  was  used  to  do  with  his  hurling  stick  and  his  ball. 
When  he  came  to  the  lawn  before  the  smith's  house, 
the  hound  heard  him  coming,  and  began  such  a  fierce 
yelling  that  he  might  have  been  heard  through  all 
Ulster,  and  he  sprang  at  him  as  if  he  had  a  mind  not 
to  stop  and  tear  him  up  at  all,  but  to  swallow  him  at 
the  one  mouthful.  The  little  fellow  had  no  weapon  but 
his  stick  and  his  ball,  but  when  he  saw  the  hound  coming 
at  him,  he  struck  the  ball  with  such  force  that  it  went 
down  his  throat,  and  through  his  body.  Then  he  seized 
him  by  the  hind  legs  and  dashed  him  against  a  rock 
until  there  was  no  life  left  in  him. 

When  the  men  feasting  within  heard  the  outcry  of  the 
hound,  Conchubar  started  up  and  said  :  "  It  is  no  good 
luck  brought  us  on  this  journey,  for  that  is  surely  my 
sister's  son  that  was  coming  after  me,  and  that  has  got 
his  death  by  the  hound."  On  that  all  the  men  rushed 
out,  not  waiting  to  go  through  the  door,  but  over  walls 
and  barriers  as  they  could.  But  Fergus  was  the  first 
to  get  to  where  the  boy  was,  and  he  took  him  up  and  lifted 
him  on  his  shoulder,  and  brought  him  in  safe  and  sound 
to  Conchubar,  and  there  was  great  joy  on  them  all. 

But  Culain  the  smith  went  out  with  them,  and  when 
he  saw  his  great  hound  lying  dead  and  broken  there 
was  great  grief  in  his  heart,  and  he  came  in  and  said 
to  Setanta :  "  There  is  no  good  welcome  for  you  here." 
"  What  have  you  against  the  little  lad  ?  "  said  Conchubar. 


THE    HOUND   OF   CULAIN  ii 

"  It  was  no  good  luck  that  brought  him  here,  or  that 
made  me  prepare  this  feast  for  yourself,  King,"  he  said  ; 
"  for  from  this  out,  my  hound  being  gone,  my  substance 
will  be  wasted,  and  my  way  of  living  will  be  gone  astray. 
And,  little  boy,"  he  said,  "  that  was  a  good  member  of 
my  family  you  took  from  me,  for  he  was  the  protector 
of  my  goods  and  my  flocks  and  my  herds  and  of  all 
that  I  had."  "Do  not  be  vexed  on  account  of  that," 
said  the  boy,  "  and  I  myself  will  make  up  to  you  for 
what  I  have  done."  "  How  will  you  do  that  ? "  said 
Conchubar.  "  This  is  how  I  will  do  it :  if  there  is  a 
whelp  of  the  same  breed  to  be  had  in  Ireland,  I  will  rear 
him  and  train  him  until  he  is  as  good  a  hound  as  the 
one  killed  ;  and  until  that  time,  Culain,"  he  said,  "  I 
myself  will  be  your  watch-dog,  to  guard  your  goods  and 
your  cattle  and  your  house."  "  You  have  made  a  fair 
offer,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  could  have  given  no  better 
award  myself,"  said  Cathbad  the  Druid.  "  And  from 
this  out,"  he  said,  "your  name  will  be  Cuchulain,  the 
Hound  of  Culain."  "  I  am  better  pleased  with  my  own 
name  of  Setanta,  son  of  Sualtim,"  said  the  boy.  "  Do 
not  say  that,"  said  Cathbad,  "  for  all  the  men  in  the 
whole  world  will  some  day  have  the  name  of  Cuchulain 
in  their  mouths."  "  If  that  is  so,  I  am  content  to 
keep  it,"  said  the  boy.  And  this  is  how  he  came  by  the 
name  Cuchulain. 

It  was  a  good  while  after  that,  Cathbad  the  Druid  was 
one  day  teaching  the  pupils  in  his  house  to  the  north- 
east of  Emain.  There  were  eight  boys  along  with  him 
that  day,  and  one  of  them  asked  him  :  "  Do  your  signs 
tell  of  any  special  thing  this  day  is  favourable  to  ?  "  "If 
any  young  man  should  take  arms  to-day,"  said  Cathbad, 
"his  name  will  be  greater  than  any  other  name  in 
Ireland.     But  his  span  of  life  will  be  short,"  he  said. 

Cuchulain  was  outside  at  play,  but  he  heard  what 
Cathbad  said,  and  there  and  then  he  put  off  his  playing 


12      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

suit,  and  he  went  straight  to  Conchubar's  sleeping-room 
and  said  :  "  All  good  be  with  you,  King  !  "  "  What  is  it 
you  are  wanting  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  What  I  want  is 
to  take  arms  to-day."  "  Who  put  that  into  your  head  ?  " 
"  Cathbad  the  Druid,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  If  that  is  so,  I 
will  not  deny  you,"  said  Conchubar.  Then  he  gave  him 
his  choice  of  arms,  and  the  boy  tried  his  strength  on 
them,  and  there  were  none  that  pleased  him  or  that 
were  strong  enough  for  him  but  Conchubar's  own.  So 
he  gave  him  his  own  two  spears,  and  his  sword  and  his 
shield. 

Just  then  Cathbad  the  Druid  came  in,  and  there  was 
wonder  on  him,  and  he  said  :  ''  Is  it  taking  arms  this 
young  boy  is  ? "  "  He  is  indeed,"  said  the  king.  "It 
is  sorry  I  would  be  to  see  his  mother's  son  take  arms 
on  this  day,"  said  Cathbad.  "  Was  it  not  yourself  bade 
him  do  it  ?  "  said  the  king.  "  I  did  not  surely,"  he  said. 
"Then  you  have  lied  to  me,  boy,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I 
told  no  lie.  King,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  was  he  indeed 
put  it  in  my  mind  when  he  was  teaching  the  others,  for 
when  one  of  them  asked  him  if  there  was  any  special 
virtue  in  this  day,  he  said  that  whoever  would  for  the 
first  time  take  arms  to-day,  his  name  would  be  greater 
than  any  other  in  Ireland,  and  he  did  not  say  any  harm 
would  come  on  him,  but  that  his  life  would  be  short." 
"  And  what  I  said  is  true,"  said  Cathbad,  "  there  will  be 
fame  on  you  and  a  great  name,  but  your  lifetime  will 
not  be  long."  "  It  is  little  I  would  care,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  if  my  life  were  to  last  one  day  and  one  night  only,  so 
long  as  my  name  and  the  story  of  what  I  had  done  would 
live  after  me."  Then  Cathbad  said  :  "  Well,  get  into  a 
chariot  now,  and  let  us  see  if  it  was  the  truth  I  spoke." 

Then  Cuchulain  got  into  a  chariot  and  tried  its 
strength,  and  broke  it  to  pieces,  and  he  broke  in  the 
same  way  the  seventeen  chariots  that  Conchubar  kept 
for  the  boy  troop  at  Emain,  and  he  said  :  "  These  chariots 


THE   TAKING   OF   ARMS  13 

are  no  use,  Conchubar,  they  are  not  worthy  of  me." 
"  Where  is  Jubair,  son  of  Riangabra  ?  "  said  Conchubar. 
"  Here  I  am,"  he  answered.  "  Make  ready  my  own 
chariot,  and  yoke  my  own  horses  to  it  for  this  boy  to 
try,"  said  Conchubar.  So  he  tried  the  king's  chariot 
and  shook  it  and  strained  it,  and  it  bore  him.  "  This  is 
the  chariot  that  suits  me,"  he  said.  "  Now,  Httle  one," 
said  Jubair,  "  let  us  take  out  the  horses  and  turn  them 
out  to  graze."  "  It  is  too  early  for  that,  Jubair ;  let  us 
drive  on  to  where  the  boy  troop  are,  that  they  may 
wish  me  good  luck  on  the  day  of  my  taking  arms."  So 
they  drove  on,  and  all  the  lads  shouted  when  they  saw 
him — "  Have  you  taken  arms  ?  "  "I  have  indeed,"  said 
Cuchulain.  "  That  you  may  do  well  in  wounding  and 
in  first  killing  and  in  spoil-winning,"  they  said ;  "  but 
it  is  a  pity  for  us,  you  to  have  left  playing." 

"  Let  the  horses  go  graze  now,"  said  Jubair.    "  It  is  too 
soon  yet,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  tell  me  where  does  that 
great  road  that  goes  by  Emain  lead  to  ?  "     "  It  leads  to 
Ath-an-Foraire,  the  watchers'  ford  in  Slieve  Fuad,"  said 
Jubair.     "  Why  is  it  called  the  watchers'  ford  ?  "     "  It  is 
easy  to  tell  that ;  it  is  because  some  choice  champion  of 
the  men  of  Ulster  keeps  watch  there  every  day  to  do 
battle  for  the  province  with  any  stranger  that  m.ight 
come   to   the   boundary   with   a  challenge."     "  Do  you 
know  who  is  in  it  to-day  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.     "  I  know 
well    it   is    Conall   Cearnach,  the  Victorious,  the  chief 
champion   of    the    young   men    of    Ulster   and    of    all 
Ireland."      "  We   will    go    on    then    to   the    ford,"    said 
Cuchulain.    So  they  went  on  across  the  plain,  and  at  the 
water's  edge  they  found  Conall,  and  he  said  :  "  And  are 
those  arms  you  have  taken  to-day,  little  boy  ?  "     "  They 
are  indeed,"  Jubair  said  for  him.     "  May  they  bring  him 
triumph  and  victory  and  shedding  of  first  blood,"  said 
Conall.     "  But  I  think,  little  Hound,"  he  said,  "  that  you 
are  too  ready  to  take  them  ;  for  you  are  not  fit  as  yet 


i4      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

to  do  a  champion's  work."  "  What  is  it  you  are  doing 
here,  Conall  ?  "  said  the  boy.  "  I  am  keeping  watch  and 
guard  for  the  province."  "  Rise  out  of  it,  Conall,"  he  said, 
"  and  for  this  one  day  let  me  keep  the  watch."  "  Do  not 
ask  that,  little  one,"  said  Conall ;  "  for  you  are  not  able 
yet  to  stand  against  trained  fighting  men."  "  Then  I 
will  go  down  to  the  shallows  of  Lough  Echtra  and  see  if 
I  can  redden  my  arms  on  either  friend  or  enemy." 
"  Then  I  will  go  with  you  myself,"  said  Conall,  "  to  take 
care  of  you  and  to  protect  you,  that  no  harm  may 
happen  you."  "  Do  not,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  will 
indeed,"  said  Conall,  "  for  if  I  let  you  go  into  a  strange 
country  alone,  all  Ulster  would  avenge  it  on  me." 

So  Conall's  horses  were  yoked  to  his  chariot,  and  he 
set  out  to  follow  Cuchulain,  for  he  had  waited  for  no 
leave,  but  had  set  out  by  himself  When  Cuchulain 
saw  Conall  coming  up  with  him  he  thought  to  himself, 
"  If  I  get  a  chance  of  doing  some  great  thing,  Conall 
will  never  let  me  do  it."  So  he  picked  up  a  stone,  the 
size  of  his  fist,  from  the  ground,  and  made  a  good  cast  at 
the  yoke  of  Conall's  chariot,  so  that  he  broke  it,  and  the 
chariot  came  down,  and  Conall  himself  was  thrown  to 
the  ground  sideways.  "  What  did  you  do  that  for  ?  "  he 
said.  "  It  was  to  see  could  I  throw  straight,  and  if  there 
was  the  making  of  a  good  champion  in  me."  "  Bad  luck 
on  your  throwing  and  on  yourself,"  said  Conall.  "  And 
any  one  that  likes  may  strike  your  head  off  now,  for  I 
will  go  with  you  no  farther."  "  That  is  just  what  I 
wanted,"  said  Cuchulain.  And  with  that,  Conall  went 
back  to  his  place  at  the  ford. 

As  for  the  lad,  he  went  on  towards  Lough  Echtra  in 
the  south.  Then  Jubair  said  :  "  If  you  will  listen  to  me, 
little  one,  I  would  like  that  we  would  go  back  now  to 
Emain  ;  for  at  this  time  the  carving  of  the  food  is 
beginning  there,  and  it  is  all  very  well  for  you  that  have 
your  place  kept  for  you  between   Conchubar's   knees, 


THE   DUN   OF   NECHTAN'S   SONS     15 

But  as  to  myself,"  he  said,  "it  is  among  the  chariot- 
drivers  and  the  jesters  and  the  messengers  I  am,  and  I 
must  find  a  place  and  fight  for  myself  where  I  can." 
"What  is  that  mountain  before  us?"  said  Cuchulain. 
"That  is  Slieve  Mourne,  and  that  is  Finncairn,  the 
white  cairn,  on  its  top."  "  Let  us  go  to  it,"  said 
Cuchulain.  "  We  would  be  too  long  going  there,"  said 
Jubair.  "  You  are  a  lazy  fellow,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  and 
this  my  first  adventure,  and  the  first  journey  you  have 
made  with  me."  "  And  that  it  may  be  my  last,"  said 
Jubair,  "if  ever  I  get  back  to  Emain  again."  They  went 
on  then  to  the  cairn.  "  Good  Jubair,"  said  the  boy, 
"  show  me  now  all  that  we  can  see  of  Ulster,  for  I  do 
not  know  my  way  about  the  country  yet."  So  Jubair 
showed  him  from  the  cairn  all  there  was  to  see  of  Ulster, 
the  hills  and  the  plains  and  the  duns  on  every  side. 
"What  is  that  sloping  square  plain  before  us  to  the 
south?"  "That  is  Magh  Breagh,  the  fine  meadow." 
"  Show  me  the  duns  and  strong  places  of  that  plain." 
So  Jubair  showed  him  Teamhair  and  Tailte,  Cleathra 
and  Cnobhach  and  the  Brugh  of  Angus  on  the  Boyne, 
and  the  dun  of  Nechtan  Sceine's  sons.  "  Are  those  the 
sons  of  Nechtan  that  say  in  their  boasting  they  have 
killed  as  many  Ulstermen  as  there  are  living  in  Ulster 
to-day  ?  "  "  They  are  the  same,"  said  Jubair.  "  On  with 
us  then  to  that  dun,"  said  Cuchulain.  "No  good  will 
come  to  you  through  saying  that,"  said  Jubair;  "and 
whoever  may  go  there  I  will  not  go,"  he  said.  "  Alive 
or  dead,  you  must  go  there  for  all  that,"  said  Cuchulain. 
"  Then  if  so,  it  is  alive  I  will  go  there,"  said  Jubair,  "  and 
it  is  dead  I  will  be  before  I  leave  it." 

They  went  on  then  to  the  dun  of  Nechtan's  sons, 
and  when  they  came  to  the  green  lawn,  Cuchulain  got  out 
of  the  chariot,  and  there  was  a  pillar-stone  on  the  lawn, 
and  an  iron  collar  about  it,  and  there  was  Ogham  writing 
on  it  that  said  no  man  that  came  there,  and  he  carrying 


r6      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

arms,  should  leave  the  place  without  giving  a  challenge 
to  some  one  of  the  people  of  the  dun.  When  Cuchulain 
had  read  the  Ogham,  he  put  his  arms  around  the  stone 
and  threw  it  into  the  water  that  was  there  at  hand. 
"  I  don't  see  it  is  any  better  there  than  where  it 
was  before,"  said  Jubair ;  "  and  it  is  likely  this  time 
you  will  get  what  you  are  looking  for,  and  that  is  a 
quick  death."  "  Good  Jubair,"  said  the  boy,  "  spread 
out  the  coverings  of  the  chariot  now  for  me,  until  I  sleep 
for  a  while."  "  It  is  no  good  thing  you  are  going  to  do," 
said  Jubair,  "to  be  going  to  sleep  in  an  enemy's 
country."  He  put  out  the  coverings  then,  and  Cuchu- 
lain lay  down  and  fell  asleep. 

It  was  just  at  that  time,  Foill,  son  of  Nechtan  Sceine, 
came  out,  and  when  he  saw  the  chariot,  he  called  out  to 
Jubair,  "  Let  you  not  unyoke  those  horses."  "  I  was  not 
going  to  unyoke  them,"  said  Jubair;  "the  reins  are  in 
my  hands  yet."  "  What  horses  are  they  ?  "  "  They  are 
Conchubar's  two  speckled  horses."  "  So  I  thought 
when  I  saw  them,"  said  Foill.  "  And  who  is  it  has 
brought  them  across  our  boundaries  ? "  "A  young  little 
lad,"  said  Jubair,  "  that  has  taken  arms  to-day  for  luck, 
and  it  is  to  show  himself  off  he  has  come  across  Magh 
Breagh."  "  May  he  never  have  good  luck,"  said  Foill, 
"  and  if  he  were  a  fighting  man,  it  is  not  alive  but  dead 
he  would  go  back  to  Emain  to-day."  "  Indeed  he  is 
not  able  to  fight,  or  it  could  not  be  expected  of  him," 
said  Jubair,  "and  he  but  a  child  that  should  be  in  his 
father's  house."  At  that  the  boy  lifted  his  head  from 
the  ground,  and  it  is  red  his  face  was,  and  his  whole 
body,  at  hearing  so  great  an  insult  put  on  him,  and  he 
said  :  "  I  am  indeed  well  able  to  fight."  But  Foill  said  : 
"  I  am  more  inclined  to  think  you  are  not."  "  You  will 
soon  know  what  to  think,"  said  the  boy,  "  and  let  us  go 
down  now  to  the  ford.  But  go  first  and  get  your 
armour,"  he  said,  "  for  I  would  not  like  to  kill  an  un- 


NECHTAN'S   SONS  17 

armed  man."  There  was  anger  on  Foill  then,  and  he 
went  running  to  get  his  arms.  "  You  must  have  a  care 
now,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  that  is  Foill,  son  of  Nechtan,  and 
neither  point  of  spear  or  edge  of  sword  can  harm  him." 
"  That  suits  me  very  well,"  said  the  boy.  With  that 
out  came  Foill  again,  and  Cuchulain  stood  up  to  him, 
and  took  his  iron  ball  in  his  hand,  and  hurled  it  at  his 
head,  and  it  went  through  the  forehead  and  out  at  the 
back  of  his  head,  and  his  brains  along  with  it,  so  that 
the  air  could  pass  through  the  hole  it  made.  And 
then  Cuchulain  struck  off  his  head. 

Then  Tuachel,  the  second  son  of  Nechtan,  came  out 
on  the  lawn.  "  It  is  likely  you  are  making  a  great 
boast  of  what  you  are  after  doing,"  he  said.  "  I  see 
nothing  to  boast  of  in  that,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  a  single 
man  to  have  fallen  by  me."  "  You  will  not  have  long  to 
boast  of  it,"  said  Tuachel,  "  for  I  myself  am  going  to 
make  an  end  of  you  on  the  moment."  "  Then  go  back 
and  bring  your  arms,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  only  a 
coward  would  come  out  without  arms."  He  went  back 
into  the  house  then,  and  Jubair  said  :  "  You  must  have  a 
care  now,  for  that  is  Tuachel,  son  of  Nechtan,  and  if  he 
is  not  killed  by  the  first  stroke,  or  the  first  cast,  or  the 
first  thrust,  he  cannot  be  killed  at  all,  tor  there  is  no  way 
of  getting  at  him  after  that."  "  You  need  not  be  telling 
me  that,  Jubair,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  Conchubar's 
great  spear,  the  Venomous,  I  will  take  in  my  hand,  and 
that  is  the  last  thrust  that  will  be  made  at  him,  for  after 
that,  there  is  no  physician  will  heal  his  wounds  for  ever." 

Then  Tuachel  came  out  on  the  lawn,  and  Cuchulain 
took  hold  of  the  great  spear,  and  made  a  cast  at  him, 
that  went  through  his  shield  and  broke  three  of  his  ribs, 
and  made  a  hole  through  his  heart.  And  then  he  struck 
his  head  off,  before  the  body  reached  the  ground. 

Then  Fainnle,  the  youngest  of  the  three  sons  of 
Nechtan,  came  out.     "  Those  were  foolish  fellows,"  he 

B 


i8       BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

said,  "  to  come  at  you  the  way  they  did.  But  come  out 
now,  after  me,"  he  said,  "into  the  water  where  your 
feet  will  not  touch  the  bottom,"  and  with  that  he  made  a 
plunge  into  the  water.  "  Mind  yourself  well  now,"  said 
Jubair,  "  for  that  is  Fainnle,  the  Swallow,  and  it  is  why 
that  name  was  put  on  him,  he  travels  across  water  with 
the  swiftness  of  a  swallow,  and  there  is  not  one  of  the 
swimmers  of  the  whole  world  can  come  near  him."  "  It 
is  not  to  me  you  should  be  saying  that,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  for  you  know  the  river  Callan  that  runs  through 
Emain,  and  it  is  what  I  used  to  do,"  he  said,  "  when  the 
boy  troop  would  break  off  from  their  games  and  plunge 
into  the  river  to  swim,  I  used  to  take  a  boy  of  them  on 
each  shoulder  and  a  boy  on  each  hand,  and  I  would 
bring  them  through  the  river  without  so  much  as  to  wet 
my  back."  With  that  he  made  a  leap  into  the  water, 
where  it  was  very  deep,  and  himself  and  Fainnle 
wrestled  together,  and  then  he  got  a  grip  of  him,  and 
gave  him  a  blow  of  Conchubar's  sword,  and  struck  his 
head  off,  and  he  let  his  body  go  away  down  the  stream. 

Then  he  and  Jubair  went  into  the  house  and  destroyed 
what  was  in  it,  and  they  set  fire  to  it,  and  left  it  burning, 
and  turned  back  towards  Slieve  Fuad,  and  they  brought 
the  heads  of  the  three  sons  of  Nechtan  along  with  them. 

Presently  they  saw  a  herd  of  wild  deer  before  them. 
"  What  sort  of  cattle  are  those  ?  "  said  the  boy.  "  They 
are  not  cattle,  but  the  wild  deer  of  the  dark  places  of 
Slieve  Fuad."  "  Make  the  horses  go  faster,"  said  Cuchu- 
lain, "  until  we  can  see  them  better."  But  with  all  their 
galloping  the  horses  could  not  come  up  with  the  wild 
deer.  Then  Cuchulain  got  down  from  the  chariot  and 
raced  and  ran  after  them  until  two  stags  lay  moaning 
and  panting  from  the  hardness  of  their  run  through  the 
wet  bog,  and  he  bound  them  to  the  back  of  the  chariot 
with  the  thongs  of  it.  Then  they  went  on  till  they  came 
to  the  plain  of  Emain,  and  there  they  saw  a  flock  of  white 


THE   RETURN   TO   EMAIN  19 

swans  that  were  whiter  than  the  swans  of  Conchubar's 
lake,  and  Cuchulain  asked  where  they  came  from.  "  They 
are  wild  swans,"  said  Jubair,  "  that  are  come  from  the 
rocks  and  the  islands  of  the  great  sea  to  feed  on  the  low 
levels  of  the  country."  "  Would  it  be  best  to  take  them 
alive  or  to  kill  them  ?  "  "  It  would  be  best  to  take  them 
alive,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  many  a  one  kills  them,  and  many 
a  one  makes  casts  at  them,  but  you  would  hardly  find 
any  one  at  all  would  bring  them  in  alive."  With  that, 
Cuchulain  put  a  little  stone  in  his  sling  and  made  a  cast, 
and  brought  down  eight  birds  of  them,  and  then  he  put 
a  bigger  stone  in,  and  with  it  he  brought  down  sixteen 
more.  "  Get  out  now,  Jubair,"  he  said,  "  and  bring  me 
the  birds  here."  "  I  will  not,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  it  would 
not  be  easy  to  stop  the  horses  the  way  they  are  going 
now,  and  if  I  leap  out,  the  iron  wheels  of  the  chariot  will 
cut  through  me,  or  the  horns  of  the  stags  will  make  a 
hole  in  me."  "  You  are  no  good  of  a  warrior,  Jubair ; 
but  give  me  the  reins  and  I  will  quiet  the  horses  and  the 
stags."  So  then  Jubair  went  and  brought  in  the  swans, 
and  tied  them,  and  they  alive,  to  the  chariot  and  to  the 
harness.  And  it  is  like  that  they  went  on  till  they  came 
to  Emain. 

It  was  Levarcham,  daughter  of  Aedh,  the  conversation 
woman  and  messenger  to  the  king,  that  was  there  at  that 
time,  and  was  sometimes  away  in  the  hills,  was  the  first 
to  see  them  coming.  "  There  is  a  chariot-fighter  coming, 
Conchubar,"  she  said,  "  and  he  is  coming  in  anger.  He 
has  the  bleeding  heads  of  his  enemies  with  him  in  the 
chariot,  and  wild  stags  are  bound  to  it,  and  white  birds 
are  bearing  him  company.  By  the  oath  of  my  people  !  " 
she  said,  "  if  he  comes  on  us  with  his  anger  still  upon 
him,  the  best  of  the  men  of  Ulster  will  fall  by  his  hand." 
"  I  know  that  chariot-fighter,"  said  Conchubar.  "  It  is 
the  young  lad,  the  son  of  Dechtire,  that  went  over  the 
boundaries  this  very  day.     He  has  surely  reddened  his 


20      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

hand,  and  if  his  anger  cannot  be  cooled,  the  young  men 
of  Emain  will  be  in  danger  from  him,"  he  said. 

Then  they  all  consulted  together,  and  it  is  what  they 
agreed,  to  send  out  three  fifties  of  the  women  of  Emain 
to  meet  him,  and  they  uncovered.  When  the  boy  saw 
the  women  coming,  there  was  shame  on  him,  and  he 
leaned  down  his  head  into  the  cushions  of  the  chariot, 
and  hid  his  face  from  them.  And  the  wildness  went  out  of 
him,  and  his  feasting  clothes  were  brought,  and  water 
for  washing  ;  and  there  was  a  great  welcome  before  him. 

This  is  the  story  of  the  boy  deeds  of  Cuchulain,  as  it 
was  told  by  Fergus  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve  at  the  time 
of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


Ill 

THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

TIT' HEN  Cuchulain  was  growing  out  of  his  boyhood 
^  ^  at  Emain  Macha,  all  the  women  of  Ulster  loved 
him  for  his  skill  in  feats,  for  the  lightness  of  his  leap,  for 
the  weight  of  his  wisdom,  for  the  sweetness  of  his  speech, 
for  the  beauty  of  his  face,  for  the  loveliness  of  his  looks, 
for  all  his  gifts.  He  had  the  gift  of  caution  in  fighting, 
until  such  time  as  his  anger  would  come  on  him,  and  the 
hero  light  would  shine  about  his  head  ;  the  gift  of  feats, 
the  gift  of  chess-playing,  the  gift  of  draught-playing,  the 
gift  of  counting,  the  gift  of  divining,  the  gift  of  right 
judgment,  the  gift  of  beauty.  And  all  the  faults  they 
could  find  in  him  were  three,  that  he  was  too  young  and 
smooth-faced,  so  that  young  men  who  did  not  know 
him  would  be  laughing  at  him,  that  he  was  too  daring, 
and  that  he  was  too  beautiful. 

The  men  of  Ulster  took  counsel  together  then  about 
Cuchulain,  for  their  women  and  their  maidens  loved  him 
greatly,  and  it  is  what  they  settled  among  themselves, 
that  they  would  seek  out  a  young  girl  that  would  be  a 
fitting  wife  for  him,  the  way  that  their  own  wives  and 
their  daughters  would  not  be  making  so  much  of  him. 
And  besides  that  they  were  afraid  he  might  die  young,, 
and  leave  no  heir  after  him. 

So  Conchubar  sent  out  nine  men  into  each  of  the 
provinces  of  Ireland  to  look  for  a  wife  for  Cuchulain,  to 
see  if  in  any  dun  or  in  any  chief  place,  they  could  find  the 

21 


22  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

daughter  of  a  king  or  of  an  owner  of  land  or  a  house- 
holder, who  would  be  pleasing  to  him,  that  he  might 
ask  her  in  marriage. 

All  the  messengers  came  back  at  the  end  of  a  year, 
but  not  one  of  them  had  found  a  young  girl  that  would 
please  Cuchulain.  And  then  he  himself  went  out  to 
court  a  young  girl  he  knew  in  Luglochta  Loga,  the 
Garden  of  Lugh,  Emer,  the  daughter  of  Forgall  Manach, 
the  Wily. 

He  set  out  in  his  chariot,  that  all  the  chariots  of 
Ulster  could  not  follow  by  reason  of  its  swiftness,  and  of 
the  chariot  chief  who  sat  in  it.  And  he  found  the 
young  girl  on  her  playing  field,  with  her  companions 
about  her,  daughters  of  the  landowners  that  lived 
near  Forgall's  dun,  and  they  learning  needlework  and 
fine  embroidery  from  Emer.  And  of  all  the  young 
girls  of  Ireland,  she  was  the  one  Cuchulain  thought 
worth  courting ;  for  she  had  the  six  gifts — the  gift  of 
beauty,  the  gift  of  voice,  the  gift  of  sweet  speech,  the 
gift  of  needlework,  the  gift  of  wisdom,  the  gift  of 
chastity.  And  Cuchulain  had  said  that  no  woman 
should  marry  him  but  one  that  was  his  equal  in  age,  in 
appearance,  and  in  race,  in  skill  and  handiness  ;  and  one 
who  was  the  best  worker  with  her  needle  of  the  young 
girls  of  Ireland,  for  that  would  be  the  only  one  would 
be  a  fitting  wife  for  him.  And  that  is  why  it  was  Emer 
he  went  to  ask  above  all  others. 

And  it  was  in  his  rich  clothes  he  went  out  that  day,  his 
crimson  five-folded  tunic,  and  his  brooch  of  inlaid  gold, 
and  his  white  hooded  shirt,  that  was  embroidered  with 
red  gold.  And  as  the  young  girls  were  sitting  together 
on  their  bench  on  the  lawn,  they  heard  coming  towards 
them  the  clatter  of  hoofs,  the  creaking  of  a  chariot,  the 
cracking  of  straps,  the  grating  of  wheels,  the  rushing 
of  horses,  the  clanking  of  arms.  "  Let  one  of  you  see," 
said  Emer,  "  what  is  it  that  is  coming  towards  us."     And 


CUCHULAIN'S   RIDDLES  23 

Fiall,  daughter  of  Forgall,  went  out  and  met  him,  and  he 
came  with  her  to  the  place  where  Emer  and  her  com- 
panions were,  and  he  wished  a  blessing  to  them.  Then 
Emer  lifted  up  her  lovely  face  and  saw  Cuchulain,  and  she 
said,  "  May  the  gods  make  smooth  the  path  before  you." 
"  And  you,"  he  said,  "  may  you  be  safe  from  every  harm." 
"  Where  are  you  come  from  ? "  she  asked  him.  And 
he  answered  her  in  riddles,  that  her  companions  might 
not  understand  him,  and  he  said,  "  From  Intide  Emna." 
"  Where  did  you  sleep  ?  "  "  We  slept,"  he  said,  "  in  the 
house  of  the  man  that  tends  the  cattle  of  the  plain  of 
Tethra."  "  What  was  your  food  there  ?  "  "  The  ruin  of 
a  chariot  was  cooked  for  us,"  he  said.  "  Which  way  did 
you  come  ?  "  "  Between  the  two  mountains  of  the  wood." 
"  Which  way  did  you  take  after  that  ?  "  "  That  is  not 
hard  to  tell,"  he  said.  "  From  the  Cover  of  the  Sea, 
over  the  Great  Secret  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan,  and 
the  Foam  of  the  horses  of  Emain,  over  the  Morrigu's 
Garden,  and  the  Great  Sow's  back ;  over  the  Valley  of 
the  Great  Dam,  between  the  God  and  his  Druid ;  over 
the  Marrow  of  the  Woman,  between  the  Boar  and  his 
Dam  ;  over  the  Washing-place  of  the  horses  of  Dea ; 
between  the  King  of  Ana  and  his  servant,  to  Mandchuile 
of  the  Four  Corners  of  the  World  ;  over  Great  Crime  and 
the  Remnants  of  the  Great  Feast ;  between  the  Vat  and 
the  Little  Vat,  to  the  Gardens  of  Lugh,  to  the  daughters  of 
Tethra,  the  nephew  of  the  King  of  the  Fomor."  "  And 
what  account  have  you  to  give  of  yourself?"  said  Emer. 
"  I  am  the  nephew  of  the  man  that  disappears  in  another 
in  the  wood  of  Badb,"  said  Cuchulain. 

"  And  now,  maiden,"  he  said,  "  what  account  have  you 
to  give  of  yourself?"  "That  is  not  hard  to  tell,"  said 
Emer,  "  for  what  should  a  maiden  be  but  Teamhair  upon 
the  hills,  a  watcher  that  sees  no  one,  an  eel  hiding  in  the 
water,  a  rush  out  of  reach.  The  daughter  of  a  king 
should  be  a  flame  of  hospitality,  a  road  that  cannot  be 


24  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

entered.  And  I  have  champions  that  follow  me,"  she 
said,  "to  keep  me  from  whoever  would  bring  me  away 
against  their  will,  and  against  the  will  and  the  know- 
ledge of  Forgall,  the  dark  king." 

"  Who  are  the  champions  that  follow  you,  maiden  ?  " 
said  Cuchulain. 

"It  is  not  hard  to  tell  you  that,"  said  Emer.  "  Two 
of  the  name  of  Lui ;  two  Luaths  ;  Luath  and  Lath  Goible, 
sons  of  Tethra  ;  Triath  and  Trescath  ;  Brion  and  Bolor  ; 
Bas,  son  of  Omnach  ;  the  eight  Condla,  and  Cond,  son  of 
Forgall.  Every  man  of  them  has  the  strength  of  a 
hundred  and  the  feats  of  nine.  And  it  would  be  hard 
for  me,"  she  said,  "  to  tell  of  all  the  many  powers  Forgall 
has  himself  He  is  stronger  than  any  labouring  man, 
more  learned  than  any  Druid,  more  quick  of  mind  than 
any  poet.  You  will  have  more  than  your  games  to  do 
when  you  fight  against  Forgall,  for  many  have  told  of 
his  power  and  of  the  strength  of  his  doings." 

"  Why  do  you  not  count  me  as  a  strong  man  as  good 
as  those  others  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  Why  would  I  not 
indeed,  if  your  doings  had  been  spoken  of  like  theirs  ?  " 
she  said.  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "  I  will  make  my  doings  be  spoken  of 
among  the  great  doings  of  heroes  in  their  strength." 
"  What  is  your  strength,  then  ?  "  said  Emer.  "  That  is 
easily  told  ;  when  my  strength  in  fighting  is  weakest  I 
defend  twenty ;  a  third  part  of  my  strength  is  enough 
for  thirty  ;  in  my  full  strength  I  fight  alone  against  forty  ; 
and  a  hundred  are  safe  under  my  protection.  For  dread 
of  me,  fighting  men  avoid  fords  and  battles  ;  armies  and 
armed  men  go  backward  from  the  fear  of  my  face." 

"  That  is  a  good  account  for  a  young  boy,"  said  Emer, 
"  but  you  have  not  reached  yet  to  the  strength  of  chariot 
chiefs."  "  But,  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  well  I  have 
been  reared  by  Conchubar,  my  dear  foster-father.  It  is 
not  as  a  countryman  strives  to  bring  up  his  children. 


HIS   TEACHERS  25 

between  the  flags  and  the  kneading  trough,  between  the 
fire  and  the  wall,  on  the  floor  of  the  one  room,  that 
Conchubar  has  brought  me  up ;  but  it  is  among  chariot 
chiefs  and  heroes,  among  jesters  and  Druids,  among  poets 
and  learned  men,  among  landowners  and  farmers  of 
Ulster  I  have  been  reared,  so  that  I  have  all  their 
manners  and  their  gifts." 

''  Who  are  these  men,  then,  that  have  brought  you  up 
to  do  the  things  you  are  boasting  of?"  said  Emer. 

"  That  is  easily  told,"  he  said.  "  Fair-speaking  Sencha 
taught  me  wisdom  and  right  judgment ;  Blai,  lord  of 
lands,  my  kinsman,  took  me  to  his  house,  so  that  I 
have  entertained  the  men  of  Conchubar's  province ; 
Fergus  brought  me  up  to  fights  and  to  battles,  so 
that  I  am  able  to  use  my  strength.  I  stood  by  the 
knee  of  Amergin  the  poet,  he  was  my  tutor,  so  that 
I  can  stand  up  to  any  man,  I  can  make  praises  for 
the  doings  of  a  king.  Finchoem  helped  to  rear  me,  so 
that  Conall  Cearnach  is  my  foster-brother.  Cathbad  of 
the  Gentle  Face  taught  me,  for  the  sake  of  Dechtire,  so 
that  I  understand  the  arts  of  the  Druids,  and  I  have 
learned  all  the  goodness  of  knowledge.  All  the  men 
of  Ulster  have  had  a  hand  in  bringing  me  up,  chariot- 
drivers  and  chiefs  of  chariots,  kings  and  chief  poets,  so 
that  I  am  the  darling  of  the  whole  army,  so  that  I 
fight  for  the  honour  of  all  alike.  And  as  to  yourself, 
Emer,"  he  said,  "what  way  have  you  been  reared  in 
the  Garden  of  Lugh?" 

"  It  is  easy  to  tell  you  that,"  said  Emer.  "  I  was 
brought  up,"  she  said, "  in  ancient  virtues,  in  lawful 
behaviour,  in  the  keeping  of  chastity,  in  stateliness  of 
form,  in  the  rank  of  a  queen,  in  all  noble  ways  among 
the  women  of  Ireland."  "  These  are  good  virtues 
indeed,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  And  why,  then,  would  it 
not  be  right  for  us  two  to  become  one  ?  For  up  to 
this  time,"  he  said,  "  I  have  never  found  a  young  girl 


26  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

able  to  hold  talk  with  me  the  way  you  have  done." 
"  Have  you  no  wife  already  ? "  said  Emer.  "  I  have 
not,  indeed."  "  I  may  not  marry  before  my  sister 
is  married,"  she  said  then,  "  for  she  is  older  than 
myself."  "  Truly,  it  is  not  with  your  sister,  but  with 
yourself,  I  have  fallen  in  love,"  said  Cuchulain. 

While  they  were  talking  like  this,  Cuchulain  saw 
the  breasts  of  the  maiden  over  the  bosom  of  her  dress, 
and  he  said  :  "  Fair  is  this  plain,  the  plain  of  the  noble 
yoke."  And  Emer  said,  "  No  one  comes  to  this  plain 
who  does  not  overcome  as  many  as  a  hundred  on  each 
ford,  from  the  ford  at  Ailbine  to  Banchuig  Arcait." 

"  Fair  is  the  plain,  the  plain  of  the  noble  yoke,"  said 
Cuchulain.  "  No  one  comes  to  this  plain,"  said  she, 
"  who  does  not  go  out  in  safety  from  Samhain  to  Oilmell, 
and  from  Oilmell  to  Beltaine,  and  again  from  Beltaine 
to  Bron  Trogain." 

"  Everything  you  have  commanded,  so  it  will  be  done 
by  me,"  said  Cuchulain. 

"  And  the  offer  you  have  made  me,  it  is  accepted,  it 
is  taken,  it  is  granted,"  said  Emer. 

With  that  Cuchulain  left  the  place,  and  they  talked 
no  more  with  one  another  on  that  day. 

When  he  was  driving  across  the  plain  of  Bregia,  Laeg, 
his  chariot-driver,  asked  him,  "  What,  now,  was  the 
meaning  of  the  words  you  and  the  maiden  Emer  were 
speaking  together  ?  "  "  Do  you  not  know,"  said  Cuchu- 
lain, "  that  I  came  to  court  Emer  ?  And  it  is  for  this 
reason  we  put  a  cloak  on  our  words,  that  the  young  girls 
with  her  might  not  understand  what  I  had  come  for. 
For  if  Forgall  knew  it,  he  would  not  consent  to  it,  but  to 
you,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  I  will  tell  the  meaning  of  our  talk. 

" '  Where  did  you  come  from,'  said  she.  '  From  Intide 
Emna,'  said  I,  and  I  meant  by  that,  from  Emain  Macha. 
For  it  took  its  name  from  Macha,  daughter  of  Aed  the 
Red,  one  of  the  three  kings  of  Ireland.     When  he  died 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  RIDDLES  27 

Macha  asked  for  the  kingship,  but  the  sons  of  Dithorba 
said  they  would  not  give  kingship  to  a  woman.  So 
she  fought  against  them  and  routed  them,  and  they 
went  as  exiles  to  the  wild  places  of  Connaught.  And 
after  a  while  she  went  in  search  of  them,  and  she  took 
them  by  treachery,  and  brought  them  all  in  one  chain 
to  Ulster.  The  men  of  Ulster  wanted  to  kill  them,  but 
she  said,  '  No,  for  that  would  be  a  disgrace  on  my  good 
government.  But  let  them  be  my  servants,'  she  said, 
'  and  let  them  dig  a  rath  for  me,  that  shall  be  the  chief 
seat  of  Ulster  for  ever.'  Then  she  marked  out  the  rath 
for  them  with  the  gold  pin  on  her  neck,  and  its  name 
came  from  that ;  a  brooch  in  the  neck  of  Macha. 

"  The  man,  in  whose  house  we  slept,  is  Ronca,  the 
fisherman  of  Conchubar.  'A  man  that  tends  cattle,' 
I  said.  For  he  catches  fish  on  his  line  under  the  sea,  and 
the  fish  are  the  cattle  of  the  sea,  and  the  sea  is  the  plain 
of  Tethra,  a  king  of  the  kings  of  the  Fomor. 

" '  Our  food  was  the  ruin  of  a  chariot,'  I  said.  For  a 
foal  was  cooked  for  us  on  the  hearth,  and  it  is  the 
horse  that  holds  up  the  chariot. 

" '  Between  the  two  mountains  of  the  wood,'  I  said. 
These  are  the  two  mountains  between  which  we  came, 
Slieve  Fuad  to  the  west,  and  Slieve  Cuilinn  to  the 
east  of  us,  and  we  were  in  Oircil  between  them,  the 
wood  that  is  between  the  two. 

"  *  The  road,'  I  said, '  from  the  Cover  of  the  Sea.'  That 
is  from  the  plain  of  Muirthemne.  And  it  is  from  this  it 
got  its  name ;  there  was  at  one  time  a  magic  sea  on  it, 
with  a  sea  turtle  in  it  that  was  used  to  suck  men  down, 
until  the  Dagda  came  with  his  club  of  anger  and  sang 
these  words,  so  that  it  ebbed  away  on  the  moment : — 

'  Silence  on  your  hollow  head  ; 
Silence  on  your  dark  body  ; 
Silence  on  your  dark  brow.' 

" '  Over  the  Great  Secret  of  the  men  of  Dea,'  I  said.    That 


28  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

is  a  wonderful  secret  and  a  wonderful  whisper,  because 
it  was  there  that  the  gathering  to  the  battle  of  Magh 
Tuireadh  was  first  whispered  of  bytheTuatha  De  Danaan. 

" '  Over  the  horses  of  Emain/  I  said.  When  Ema 
Nemed,  son  of  Nama,  reigned  over  the  Gael,  he  had  his 
two  horses  reared  for  him  in  Sidhe  Ercman  of  the  Tuatha 
De  Danaan,  and  when  those  horses  were  let  loose  from 
the  Sidhe,  a  bright  stream  burst  out  after  them,  and  the 
foam  spread  over  the  land  for  a  great  length  of  time, 
and  was  there  to  the  end  of  a  year,  so  that  the  water 
was  called  Uanib,  that  is,  foam  on  the  water,  and  it  is 
Uanib  to-day. 

"'The  Back  of  the  Great  Sow,'  I  said.  That  is 
Drimne  Breg,  the  Ridge  of  Bregin.  For  the  shape  of 
a  sow  appeared  to  the  sons  of  Milid  on  every  hill  and  on 
every  height  in  Ireland,  when  they  came  over  the  sea, 
and  wanted  to  land  by  force,  after  a  spell  had  been  cast 
on  it  by  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan. 

" '  The  Valley  of  the  Great  Dam,'  I  said,  '  between  the 
God  and  his  Druid.'  That  is,  between  Angus  Og  of  the 
Sidhe  of  the  Brugh  and  his  Druid,  to  the  west  of  the 
Brugh,  and  between  them  was  the  one  woman,  the  wife 
of  the  Smith.  That  is  the  way  I  went,  between  the  hill 
of  the  Sidhe  of  the  Brugh  where  Angus  is,  and  the  Sidhe 
of  Bresal,  the  Druid. 

" '  Over  the  Marrow  of  the  Woman/  I  said.  That 
is  the  Boinne,  and  it  gets  its  name  from  Boann,  the 
wife  of  Nechtan,  son  of  Labraid.  She  went  down 
to  the  hidden  well  at  the  bottom  of  the  dun  with  the 
three  cup-bearers  of  Nechtan,  Flex  and  Lex  and  Luam. 
No  one  came  back  from  that  well  without  blemish  un- 
less the  three  cup-bearers  went  with  him.  But  the 
queen  went  out  of  pride  and  overbearing  to  the  well, 
and  it  is  what  she  said,  that  nothing  would  spoil  her 
shape  or  put  a  blemish  on  her.  She  passed  left-hand- 
wise  round  the  well,  to  mock  at  its  powers.     Then  three 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  RIDDLES  29 

waves  broke  over  her  and  bruised  her  two  knees  and  her 
right  hand  and  one  of  her  eyes,  and  she  ran  out  of  the 
dun  to  escape  until  she  came  to  the  sea,  and  wherever 
she  ran,  the  water  followed  after  her.  Segain  was  its 
name  on  the  dun  ;  the  River  Segsa  from  the  dun  to  the 
Pool  of  Mochua ;  the  hand  of  the  wife  of  Nechtan  and 
the  knee  of  the  wife  of  Nechtan  after  that ;  the  Boinne  in 
Meath  ;  Arcait  it  is  called  from  the  Finda  to  the  Troma ; 
the  Marrow  of  the  Woman  from  the  Troma  to  the  sea. 

" '  The  Boar,'  I  said,  '  and  his  Dam.'  That  is,  between 
Cleitech  and  Fessi.  For  Cleitech  is  the  name  for  a 
boar,  but  it  is  also  the  name  for  a  king,  the  leader  of 
great  hosts,  and  Fessi  is  the  name  for  the  great  sow  of 
a  farmer's  house. 

" '  The  King  of  Ana,'  I  said, '  and  his  servant'  That  is 
Cerna,  through  which  we  passed,  and  that  is  its  name 
since  Enna  Aignech  put  Cerna,  king  of  Ana,  to  death 
on  that  hill,  and  he  put  his  steward  to  death  in  the  east 
of  that  place. 

" '  The  Washing  of  the  Horses  of  Dea,'  I  said.  That 
is  Ange,  for  in  it  the  men  of  Dea  washed  their  horses 
when  they  came  from  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh. 
And  it  was  called  Ange,  because  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan 
washed  their  horses  in  it. 

"'The  Four-cornered  Mandchuile,'  I  said.  That  is 
Muincille.  It  is  there  Mann,  the  farmer,  was,  and  there 
he  made  spells  in  his  great  four-cornered  chambers 
underground,  to  keep  off  the  plague  from  the  cattle 
of  Ireland  in  the  time  of  Bresel  Brec,  king  of  Leinster. 

"  *  Great  Crime,'  I  said.  That  is  Ailbine.  There  was 
a  king  here  in  Ireland,  Ruad,  son  of  Rigdond  of  Munster. 
He  had  an  appointment  of  meeting  with  foreigners,  and 
he  set  out  for  the  meeting  round  the  south  of  Alban  with 
three  ships,  and  thirty  men  were  in  each  ship.  But 
the  ships  were  stopped,  and  were  held  from  below  in 
the  middle  of  the  sea,  and  throwing  jewels  and  precious 


30  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

things  into  the  sea  did  not  get  them  off.  Then  lots 
were  cast  among  them  who  should  go  into  the  sea 
and  find  out  what  was  holding  them.  The  lot  fell  on 
the  king  himself,  Ruad,  son  of  Rigdond,  and  he  leaped 
into  the  sea,  and  it  closed  over  him.  He  lit  upon  a 
large  plain,  where  nine  beautiful  women  met  him,  and 
they  confessed  that  it  was  they  themselves  had  stopped 
the  ships,  the  way  that  he  might  come  to  them.  And 
he  stopped  with  them  nine  days,  and  they  gave  him 
nine  vessels  of  gold  ;  and  through  the  length  of  that 
time  his  men  were  not  able  to  go  on,  through  the 
power  of  the  women.  When  he  was  going  away,  a 
woman  of  them  said  she  would  bear  him  a  son,  and 
that  he  must  come  back  to  them  and  bring  away  his 
son,  when  he  would  be  coming  from  the  east. 

"  Then  he  joined  his  men,  and  they  went  on  their 
voyage,  and  they  stopped  away  seven  years,  and  then 
they  came  back  by  a  different  way,  and  they  did  not 
go  near  the  same  spot.  They  landed  in  the  bay,  and 
the  sea-women  came  up  to  them  there,  and  the  men 
heard  them  playing  music  in  their  brazen  ship.  And 
then  the  women  came  to  the  shore,  and  they  put  the 
boy  out  of  the  ship  on  the  land  where  the  men  were. 
And  the  harbour  was  stony  and  rocky,  and  the  boy 
slipped  and  fell  on  one  of  the  rocks,  so  that  he  died 
there.  And  the  women  saw  it,  and  they  cried  all  to- 
gether, '  Olbine,  Olbine,'  that  is  '  Great  Crime.'  And 
it  is  from  that  it  is  called  Ailbine. 

" '  The  Remnants  of  the  Great  Feast,'  I  said.  That  is 
Tailne.  It  was  there  the  great  feast  was  given  to  Lugh, 
son  of  Ethlenn,  to  comfort  him  after  the  battle  of  Magh 
Tuireadh,  for  that  was  his  wedding  feast  of  kingship. 

" '  In  the  Garden  of  Lugh,  to  the  daughters  of  Tethra's 
nephew,'  I  said  ;  for  Forgall  Manach  is  sister's  son  of 
Tethra,  king  of  the  Fomor. 

"As  to  the  account  of  myself  I  gave  her,  there  are 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  RIDDLES  31 

two  rivers  in  the  land  of  Ross  ;  Conchubar  is  the  name 
of  one  of  them,  and  it  mixes  with  the  other ;  and  I  am 
the  nephew  of  Conchubar ;  and  as  to  the  plague  that 
comes  on  dogs,  it  is  wild  fierceness,  and  truly  I  am  a 
strong  fighter  of  that  plague,  for  I  am  wild  and  fierce  in 
battles  and  in  fights.  And  the  Wood  of  Badb,  that  is 
the  land  of  Ross,  the  Wood  of  the  Morrigu,  the  Battle 
Crow,  the  Goddess  of  Battle. 

"  And  when  she  said  that  no  man  should  come  to  the 
plain  of  her  breasts  until  he  had  killed  three  times  nine 
men  with  one  blow,  and  yet  had  saved  one  man  from 
each  nine,  it  is  what  she  meant,  that  three  brothers  of 
her  own  will  be  guarding  her,  Ibur  and  Seibur  and  Catt, 
and  a  company  of  nine  with  each  of  them.  And  it  is 
what  I  must  do,  I  must  strike  a  blow  on  each  nine,  from 
which  eight  will  die,  but  no  stroke  will  reach  any  of  her 
brothers  among  them  ;  and  I  must  carry  her  and  her 
foster-sister,  with  their  share  of  gold  and  silver,  out  of 
the  dun  of  Forgall. 

"'Go  out  from  Samhain  to  Oimell,'  she  said.  That 
is,  that  I  shall  fight  without  harm  to  myself  from 
Samhain,  the  end  of  summer,  to  Oimell,  the  beginning 
of  spring  ;  and  from  the  beginning  of  spring  to  Beltaine, 
and  from  that  to  Bron  Trogain.  For  Oi,  in  the 
language  of  poetry,  is  a  name  for  sheep,  and  Oimell  is 
the  time  v/hen  the  sheep  come  out  and  are  milked,  and 
Suain  is  a  gentle  sound,  and  it  is  at  Samhain  that  gentle 
voices  sound  ;  and  Beltaine  is  a  favouring  fire ;  for  it  is 
at  that  time  the  Druids  used  to  make  fires  with  spells 
and  to  drive  the  cattle  between  them  against  the  plagues 
every  year.  And  Bron  Trogain,  that  is  the  beginning 
of  autumn,  for  it  is  then  the  earth  is  in  labour,  that  is,  the 
earth  under  fruit,  Bron  Trogain,  the  trouble  of  the  earth." 

Then  Cuchulain  went  on  his  way,  and  he  slept  that 
night  in  Emain  Macha. 


32  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

When  Forgall  came  back  to  his  dun,  and  his  lords 
of  land  with  him,  their  daughters  were  telling  them  of 
the  young  man  that  had  come  in  a  splendid  chariot, 
and  how  himself  and  Emer  had  been  talking  together, 
and  they  could  not  understand  their  talk  with  one 
another.  The  lords  of  land  told  this  to  Forgall,  and  it 
is  what  he  said,  "  You  may  be  sure  it  is  the  mad  boy 
from  Emain  Macha  has  been  here,  and  he  and  the  girl 
have  fallen  in  love  with  one  another.  But  they  will 
gain  nothing  by  that,"  he  said  ;  "  for  it  is  I  will  hinder 
them." 

With  that  Forgall  went  out  to  Emain,  with  the 
appearance  of  a  foreigner  on  him,  and  he  gave  out  that 
he  was  sent  by  the  king  of  the  Gall,  to  speak  with 
Conchubar,  and  to  bring  him  a  present  of  golden 
treasures,  and  wine  of  the  Gall,  and  many  other  things. 
And  he  brought  some  of  his  men  with  him,  and  there 
was  a  great  welcome  before  them. 

And  on  the  third  day,  Cuchulain  and  Conall  and 
other  chariot  chiefs  of  Ulster  were  praised  before  him, 
and  he  said  it  was  right  for  them  to  be  praised,  and 
that  they  did  wonderful  feats,  and  Cuchulain  above 
them  all.  But  he  said  that  if  Cuchulain  would  go  to 
Scathach,  the  woman-warrior  that  lived  in  the  east  of 
Alban,  his  skill  would  be  more  wonderful  still,  for  he 
could  not  have  perfect  knowledge  of  the  feats  of  a 
warrior  without  that. 

But  his  reason  for  saying  this  was  that  he  thought  if 
Cuchulain  set  out,  he  would  never  come  back  again, 
through  the  dangers  he  would  put  around  him  on  the 
journey,  and  through  the  wildness  and  the  fierceness 
of  the  people  about  Scathach. 

So  then  Forgall  v/ent  home,  and  Cuchulain  rose  up 
in  the  morning,  and  made  ready  to  set  out  for  Alban,  and 
Laegaire  Buadach,  the  Battle  Winner,  and  Conall  Cear- 
nach  said  they  would  go  with  him.     But  first  Cuchulain 


CUCHULAIN'S   JOURNEY  33 

went  across  the  plain  of  Bregia  to  visit  Emer,  and  to  talk 
with  her  before  going  in  the  ship.  And  she  told  him 
how  it  was  Forgall  had  gone  to  Emain,  and  had  advised 
him  to  go  and  learn  warriors'  feats,  the  way  they  two 
might  not  meet  again.  Then  each  of  them  promised  to 
be  true  to  the  other  till  they  would  meet  again,  unless 
death  should  come  between  them,  and  they  said  farewell 
to  one  another,  and  Cuchulain  turned  towards  Alban. 

When  they  came  there,  they  stopped  for  a  while  at 
the  forge  of  Donall,  the  smith,  and  then  they  set  out  to 
go  to  the  east  of  Alban.  But  before  they  had  gone  far, 
a  vision  came  before  their  eyes  of  Emain  Macha,  and 
Laegaire  and  Conall  were  not  able  to  pass  by  it,  and 
they  turned  back.  It  was  Forgall  raised  that  vision,  to 
draw  them  away  from  Cuchulain,  that  he  might  be  in 
the  more  danger,  being  alone.  Then  Cuchulain  went 
on  by  himself  on  a  strange  road,  and  he  was  sad  and 
tired  and  down-hearted  for  the  loss  of  his  comrades,  but 
he  held  to  his  word  that  he  would  not  go  back  to  Emain 
without  finding  Scathach,  even  if  he  should  die  in  the 
attempt. 

But  now  he  was  astray  and  ignorant,  and  not  know- 
ing which  way  to  take,  and  he  saw  a  terrible  grqat  beast 
like  a  lion  coming  towards  him,  and  it  watching  him, 
but  it  did  not  try  to  harm  him.  Whatever  way  he 
went,  the  beast  went  before  him,  and  then  it  stopped 
and  turned  its  side  to  him.  So  he  made  a  leap  and 
was  on  its  back,  and  he  did  not  guide  it,  but  went  what- 
ever way  it  chose.  They  travelled  like  that  through 
four  days,  till  they  came  to  the  end  of  the  bounds  of 
men,  and  to  an  island  where  lads  were  rowing  in  a 
small  loch ;  and  the  lads  began  to  laugh  when  they 
saw  a  beast  of  that  sort,  and  a  man  riding  it.  And 
then  Cuchulain  leaped  off,  and  the  beast  left  him,  and 
he  bade  it  farewell. 

He  passed  on  till  he  came  to  a  large  house  in  a  deep 

C 


34  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

valley,  and  a  comely  young  girl  in  it,  and  she  spoke  to 

him,  and  bade  him  welcome.     "  A  welcome  before  you, 

Cuchulain,"  she  said.     He  asked  her  how  did  she  know 

him,  and  she  said,  "  I  was  a  foster-child  of  Wulfkin,  the 

Saxon,  the  time  you  came  there  to  learn  sweet  speech 

from  him."     And  she  gave  him  meat  and  drink,  and  he 

went  away  from  her.     Then  he  met  with  a  young  man, 

and  he  gave  him  the  same  welcome,  and  he   said   his 

name     was    Eochu,    and    they    talked    together,    and 

Cuchulain  asked  him  what  was  the  way  to  Scathach's 

dun.     The   young   man   told    him   the  way,  across  the 

Plain  of  Ill-Luck,  that  lay  before  him,  and  he  said  that 

on  the  near  side  of  the  plain  the  feet  of  men  would  stick 

fast,  and  on  the  far  side  every  blade  of  grass  would  rise 

and  hold  them  fast  on  its  points.     And  he  gave  him  a 

wheel,  and  bade  him  to  follow  its  track  across  the  one 

half  of  the  plain.     And  he  gave  him  an  apple  along 

with  that,  and  bade  him  to  throw  it,  and  to  follow  the 

way  it  went,  till  he  would  reach  the  end  of  the  plain. 

And  he  told  him  many  other  things  that  would  happen 

him,  and  how  he  would  win  a  great  name  at  the  last. 

And  then  each  of  them  wished  a  blessing  to  the  other, 

and  Cuchulain  did  as  he  bade  him,  and  so  he  got  across 

the  plain  and  went  on  his  journey.     And  then,  as  the 

young  man  had  told  him,  he  came  to  a  valley,  and  it 

full  of  monsters,  sent  there  by  Forgall  to  destroy  him, 

and  only   one   narrow   path   through   it,   but   he  went 

through  it  safely.     And  after  that  his  road  led  through 

a  terrible,  wild  mountain.     Then  he  came  to  the  place 

where    Scathach's    scholars   were,  and  among  them  he 

saw  Ferdiad,  son   of  Daman,  and  Naoise,  Ainnle,  and 

Ardan,  the  three  sons  of  Usnach,  and  when  they  knew 

that   he   was   from    Ireland    they   welcomed   him   with 

kisses,  and  asked  for  news  of  their  own  country.     He 

asked    them    where   was    Scathach.      "  In    that    island 

beyond,"  they  said,     "  What  way  must  I  take  to  reach 


CROSSING   THE    BRIDGE  35 

her  ?  "  he  asked.  "  By  the  bridge  of  the  cliff,"  they  said, 
"  and  no  man  can  cross  it  till  he  has  proved  himself  a 
champion,  and  many  a  king's  son  has  got  his  death 
there." 

And  this  is  the  way  the  bridge  was  :  the  two  ends  of 
it  were  low,  and  the  middle  was  high,  and  whenever 
any  one  would  leap  on  it,  the  first  time  it  would  narrow 
till  it  was  as  narrow  as  the  hair  of  a  man's  head,  and  the 
second  time  it  would  shorten  till  it  was  as  short  as  an 
inch,  and  the  third  time  it  would  get  slippery  till  it  was 
as  slippery  as  an  eel  of  the  river,  and  the  fourth  time 
it  would  rise  up  on  high  against  you  till  it  was  as  tall  as 
the  mast  of  a  ship. 

All  the  warriors  and  people  on  the  lawn  came  down 
to  see  Cuchulain  making  his  attempt  to  cross  the  bridge, 
and  he  tried  three  times  to  do  it,  and  he  could  not,  and 
the  others  were  laughing  at  him,  that  he  should  think 
he  could  cross  it,  and  he  so  young.  Then  his  anger 
came  on  him,  and  the  hero  light  shone  round  his  head, 
and  it  was  not  the  appearance  of  a  man  that  was  on 
him,  but  the  appearance  of  a  god  ;  and  he  leaped  upon 
the  end  of  the  bridge  and  made  the  hero's  salmon  leap, 
so  that  he  landed  on  the  middle  of  it,  and  he  reached  the 
other  end  of  the  bridge  before  it  could  raise  itself  fully 
up,  and  threw  himself  from  it,  and  was  on  the  ground  of 
the  island  where  Scathach's  sunny  house  was,  and  it 
having  seven  great  doors,  and  seven  great  windows 
between  every  two  doors,  and  three  times  fifty  couches 
between  every  two  windows,  and  three  times  fifty  young 
girls,  with  scarlet  cloaks  and  beautiful  blue  clothing  on 
them,  waiting  on  Scathach. 

And  Scathach's  daughter,  Uacthach,  was  sitting  by  a 
window,  and  when  she  saw  the  young  man,  and  he  a 
stranger,  and  comeliest  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  making 
his  attempt  to  cross  the  bridge,  she  loved  him,  and  her 
face  and  her  colour  began  to   change   continually,  so 


36  THE   COURTING  OF   EMER 

that  now  she  would  be  as  white  as  a  Httle  flower,  and 
then  again  she  would  grow  crimson  red.  And  in  her 
needlework  that  she  was  doing,  she  would  put  the  gold 
thread  where  the  silver  thread  should  be,  and  the  silver 
thread  in  the  place  where  the  gold  thread  should  be. 
And  when  Scathach  saw  that,  she  said  :  "  I  think  this 
young  man  has  pleased  you."  And  Uacthach  said : 
"  There  would  be  great  grief  on  me  indeed,  were  he  not 
to  return  alive  to  his  own  people,  in  whatever  part  of  the 
world  they  may  be,  for  I  know  there  is  surely  some  one 
to  whom  it  would  be  great  anguish  to  know  the  way  he 
is  now." 

Then,  when  Cuchulain  had  crossed  the  bridge,  he 
went  up  to  the  house,  and  struck  the  door  with  the 
shaft  of  his  spear,  so  that  it  went  through  it.  And 
when  Scathach  was  told  that,  she  said,  "  Truly  this 
must  be  some  one  who  has  finished  his  training  in  some 
other  place."  Then  Uacthach  opened  the  door  for 
him,  and  he  asked  for  Scathach,  and  Uacthach  told 
him  where  she  was,  and  what  he  had  best  do  when  he 
found  her.  So  he  went  out  to  the  place  where  she  was 
teaching  her  two  sons.  Guar  and  Cett,  under  the  great 
yew-tree ;  and  he  took  his  sword  and  put  its  point 
between  her  breasts,  and  he  threatened  her  with  a 
dreadful  death  if  she  would  not  take  him  as  her  pupil, 
and  if  she  would  not  teach  him  all  her  own  skill  in 
arms.     So  she  promised  him  she  would  do  that. 

Now  it  was  while  Cuchulain  was  with  Scathach  that 
a  great  king  in  Munster,  Lugaid,  son  of  Ros,  went 
northward  with  twelve  chariot  chiefs  to  look  for  a  wife 
among  the  daughters  of  the  men  of  Mac  Rossa,  but 
they  had  all  been  promised  before. 

And  when  Forgall  Manach  heard  this,  he  went  to 
Emain,  and  he  told  Lugaid  that  the  best  of  the  maidens 
of  Ireland,  both  as  to  form  and  behaviour  and  handi- 
work^ was  in   his  house  unwed.     Lugaid  said  he  was 


THE   WARWITH    AOIFE  37 

well  pleased  to  hear  that,  and  Forgall  promised  him  his 
daughter  Emer  in  marriage.  And  to  the  twelve  chariot 
chiefs  that  were  with  him,  he  promised  twelve  daughters 
of  twelve  lords  of  land  in  Bregia,  and  Lugaid  went  back 
with  him  to  his  dun  for  the  wedding. 

But  whem  Emer  was  brought  to  Lugaid  to  sit  by  his 
side,  she  laid  one  of  her  hands  on  each  side  of  his  face, 
and  she  said  on  the  truth  of  her  good  name  and  of  her 
life,  that  it  was  Cuchulain  she  loved,  although  her  father 
was  against  him,  and  that  no  one  that  was  an  honour- 
able man  should  force  her  to  be  his  wife. 

Then  Lugaid  did  not  dare  take  her,  for  he  was  in 
dread  of  Cuchulain,  and  so  he  returned  home  again. 

As  to  Cuchulain,  after  he  had  been  a  good  time  with 
Scathach,  a  war  began  between  herself  and  Aoife, 
queen  of  the  tribes  that  were  round  about.  The 
armies  were  going  out  to  fight,  but  Cuchulain  was  not 
with  them,  for  Scathach  had  given  him  a  sleeping- 
drink  that  would  keep  him  safe  and  quiet  till  the  fight 
would  be  over,  for  she  was  afraid  some  harm  would 
come  to  him  if  he  met  Aoife,  for  she  was  the  greatest 
woman-warrior  in  the  world,  and  she  understood  en- 
chantments and  witchcraft.  But  after  one  hour,  Cuchu- 
lain started  up  out  of  his  sleep,  for  the  sleeping-drink 
that  would  have  held  any  other  man  for  a  day  and  a 
night,  held  him  for  only  that  length  of  time.  And  he 
followed  after  the  army,  and  he  met  with  the  two  sons 
of  Scathach,  and  they  three  went  against  the  three  sons 
of  Ilsuanach,  three  of  the  best  warriors  of  Aoife,  and  it 
was  by  Cuchulain  they  were  killed,  one  after  the  other. 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow  the  fight  was  begun 
again,  and  the  two  sons  of  Scathach  were  going  up  the 
path  of  feats  to  fight  against  three  others  of  the  best 
champions  of  Aoife,  Cire,  Bire,  and  Blaicne,  sons  of 
Ess  Enchenn.  When  Scathach  saw  them  going  up 
she   gave  a   sigh,  for  she  was  afraid  for  her  two  sons, 


38  THE    COURTING   OF   EM  ER 

but  just  then  Cuchulain  came  up  with  them,  and  he 
leaped  before  them  on  to  the  path  of  feats,  and  met 
the  three  champions,  and  all  three  fell  by  him. 

When  Aoife  saw  that  her  best  champions  were  after 
being  killed,  she  challenged  Scathach  to  fight  against 
herself,  but  Cuchulain  went  out  in  her  place.  And 
before  he  went,  he  asked  Scathach,  "  What  things  does 
Aoife  think  most  of  in  all  the  world  ?  "  "  Her  two  horses 
and  her  chariot  and  her  chariot-driver,"  said  Scathach. 

So  then  Cuchulain  and  Aoife  attacked  one  another 
and  began  a  fierce  fight,  and  she  broke  Cuchulain's 
spear  in  pieces,  and  his  sword  she  broke  off  at  the 
hilt.  Then  Cuchulain  called  out,  '*  Look,  the  chariot 
and  the  horses  and  the  driver  of  Aoife  are  fallen 
down  into  the  valley  and  are  lost ! "  At  that  Aoife 
looked  about  her,  and  Cuchulain  took  a  sudden  [hold 
of  her,  and  lifted  her  on  his  shoulders,  and  brought 
her  down  to  where  the  army  was,  and  laid  her  on 
the  ground,  and  held  his  sword  to  her  breast,  and  she 
begged  for  her  life,  and  he  gave  it  to  her.  And  after 
that  she  made  peace  with  Scathach,  and  bound  her- 
self by  sureties  not  to  go  against  her  again.  And  she 
gave  her  love  to  Cuchulain  ;  and  out  of  that  love  great 
sorrow  came  afterwards. 

And  as  Cuchulain  was  going  home  by  the  narrow 
path,  he  met  an  old  hag,  and  she  blind  of  the  left  eye. 
She  asked  him  to  leave  room  for  her  to  pass  by,  but 
he  said  there  was  no  room  on  that  path,  unless  he 
would  throw  himself  down  the  great  sea-cliff  that  was 
on  the  one  side  of  it.  But  she  asked  him  again  to 
leave  the  road  to  her,  and  he  would  not  refuse,  and 
he  dropped  down  the  cliff,  with  only  his  one  hand 
keeping  a  hold  of  the  path.  Then  she  came  up,  and  as 
she  passed  him,  she  gave  a  hit  of  her  foot  at  his  hand, 
the  way  he  would  leave  his  hold  and  drop  into  the 
sea.     But   at   that,   he   gave   a   leap   up   again   on  the 


DEVORGILL  39 

path,  and  struck  off  the  hag's  head.  For  she  was 
Ess  Enchenn,  the  mother  of  the  last  three  warriors  that 
had  fallen  by  him,  and  it  was  to  destroy  him  she  had 
come  out  to  meet  him,  for  she  knew  that  under  his 
rules  of  championship,  he  would  make  way  for  her 
when  she  asked  it. 

After  that,  he  stayed  for  another  while  with  Scathach, 
until  he  had  learned  all  the  arts  of  war  and  all  the  feats 
of  a  champion  ;  and  then  a  message  came  to  him  to 
come  back  to  his  own  country,  and  he  bade  her  fare- 
well. And  Scathach  told  him  what  would  happen  him 
in  the  time  to  come,  for  she  had  the  Druid  gift ;  and  she 
told  him  there  were  great  dangers  before  him,  and  that 
he  would  have  to  fight  against  great  armies,  and  he 
alone;  and  that  he  would  scatter  his  enemies,  so  that 
his  name  would  come  again  to  Alban  ;  but  that  his  life 
would  not  be  long,  for  he  would  die  in  his  full  strength. 

Then  Cuchulain  went  on  board  his  ship  to  set  out  for 
Ireland,  and  in  the  same  ship  with  him  were  Lugaid 
and  Luan,  the  two  sons  of  Loch,  and  Ferbaeth  and 
Larin  and  Ferdiad,  and  Durst,  son  of  Derb. 

On  the  night  of  Samhain  they  came  to  the  island  of 
Rechrainn,  and  Cuchulain  left  his  ship  and  came  to 
the  strand.  And  there  he  heard  a  sound  of  crying, 
and  he  saw  a  beautiful  young  girl,  and  she  sitting 
there  alone.  He  asked  her  who  was  she,  and  what 
ailed  her,  and  she  said  she  was  Devorgill,  daughter  of 
the  king  of  Rechrainn,  and  that  every  year  he  was 
forced  to  pay  a  heavy  tax  to  the  Fomor,  and  this 
year,  when  he  could  not  pay  it,  they  made  him  leave 
her  there  near  the  sea,  till  they  would  come  and  bring 
her  away  in  place  of  it. 

"  Where  do  these  men  come  from  ? "  said  Cuchulain. 
"  From  that  far  country  over  there,"  she  said,  "  and  let 
you  not  stop  here  or  they  will  see  you  when  they  come." 
But  Cuchulain  would  not  leave  her,  and  presently  three 


40  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

fierce  men  of  the  Fomor  landed  in  the  bay,  and  made 
straight  for  the  spot  where  the  girl  was.  But  before  they 
had  time  to  lay  a  hand  on  her,  Cuchulain  leaped  on  them 
and  he  killed  the  three  of  them,  one  after  the  other. 
The  last  man  wounded  him  in  the  arm,  and  the  girl  tore 
a  strip  from  her  dress,  and  gave  it  to  him  to  bind  round 
the  wound.  And  then  she  ran  to  her  father's  house  and 
told  him  all  that  had  happened.  After  that  Cuchulain 
came  to  the  king's  house,  like  any  other  guest,  and  his 
companions  with  him,  and  Conall  Cearnach  and  Laegaire 
Buadach  were  there  before  them,  where  they  had  been 
sent  from  Emain  Macha  to  collect  tribute.  For  at  that 
time  a  tribute  was  paid  to  Ulster  from  the  islands  of 
the  Gall. 

And  they  were  all  talking  about  the  escape  Devorgill 
had,  and  some  were  boasting  that  it  was  they  themselves 
had  saved  her,  for  she  could  not  be  sure  who  it  was  had 
come  to  her,  because  of  the  dusk  of  the  evening.  Then 
there  was  water  brought  for  them  all  to  wash  before  they 
would  go  to  the  feast ;  and  when  it  came  to  Cuchulain's 
turn  to  bare  his  arms,  she  knew  by  the  strip  of  her  dress 
that  was  bound  about  it,  that  it  was  he  had  saved  her. 
"  I  will  give  the  girl  to  you  as  your  wife,"  said  the  king, 
"  and  I  myself  will  pay  her  wedding  portion."  *'  Not  so," 
said  Cuchulain,  "  for  I  must  make  no  delay  in  going  back 
to  Ireland." 

So  then  he  made  his  way  back  to  Emain  Macha,  and 
he  told  his  whole  story  and  all  that  had  happened  him. 
And  as  soon  as  he  had  rested  from  the  journey,  he  set 
out  to  look  for  Emer  at  her  father's  house.  But  Forgall 
and  his  sons  had  heard  he  was  come  home  again,  and 
they  had  made  the  place  so  strong,  and  they  kept  so 
good  a  watch  round  it,  that  for  the  whole  length  of  a 
year  he  could  not  get  so  much  as  a  sight  of  her. 

It  was  one  day  at  that  time  he  went  down  to  the 
shore  of  Lough  Cuan  with  Laeg,  his  chariot-driver,  and 


THEFIGHTFOREMER  41 

with  Lugaid.  And  when  they  were  there,  they  saw  two 
birds  coming  over  the  sea.  Cuchulain  put  a  stone  in  his 
sling,  and  made  a  cast  at  the  birds,  and  hit  one  of  them. 
And  when  they  came  to  where  the  birds  were,  they 
found  in  their  place  two  women,  and  one  of  them  the 
most  beautiful  in  the  world,  and  they  were  Devorgill, 
daughter  of  the  king  of  Rechrainn,  that  had  come  from 
her  own  country  to  find  Cuchulain,  and  her  serving-maid 
along  with  her  ;  and  it  was  Devorgill  that  Cuchulain  had 
hit  with  the  stone.  "  It  is  a  bad  thing  you  have  done, 
Cuchulain,'\she  said,  "for  it  was  to  find  you  I  came, 
and  now  you  have  wounded  me."  Then  Cuchulain  put 
his  mouth  to  the  wound  and  sucked  out  the  stone  and 
the  blood  along  with  it.  And  he  said,  "  You  cannot  be 
my  wife,  for  I  have  drunk  your  blood.  But  I  will  give 
you  to  my  comrade,"  he  said,  "  to  Lugaid  of  the  Red 
Stripes."  And  so  it  was  done,  and  Lugaid  gave  her 
his  love  all  through  her  life,  and  when  she  died  he  died 
of  the  grief  that  was  on  him  after  her. 

After  that,  Cuchulain  got  his  scythe  chariot  made 
ready,  and  he  set  out  again  for  Forgall's  dun.  And 
when  he  got  there,  he  leaped  with  his  hero  leap  over  the 
three  walls,  so  that  he  was  inside  the  court,  and  there  he 
made  three  attacks,  so  that  eight  men  fell  from  each 
attack,  but  one  escaped  in  every  troop  of  nine  ;  that  is  the 
three  brothers  of  Emer,  Seiburand  Ibur  and  Catt.  And 
Forgall  made  a  leap  from  the  wall  of  the  court  to  escape 
Cuchulain,  and  he  fell  in  the  leap  and  got  his  death  from 
the  fall. 

And  then  Cuchulain  went  out  again,  and  brought 
Emer  with  him  and  her  foster-sister,  and  their  two 
loads  of  gold  and  silver. 

And  then  they  heard  cries  all  around  them,  and 
Scenmend,  Forgall's  sister,  came  following  them  with 
her  men,  and  came  up  with  them  at  the  ford ;  and 
Cuchulain   killed  her  in  the   fight,  and  it  is  from  that 


42  THE    COURTING   OF   EMER 

it  is  called  the  Ford  of  Scenmend.  And  her  men  came 
up  with  them  again  at  the  next  ford,  and  he  killed  a 
hundred  of  them  there.  "  It  is  a  great  thing  you  have 
done,"  said  Emer.  "  You  have  killed  a  hundred 
strong  armed  men  ;  and  Glondath,  the  Ford  of  Deeds, 
is  the  name  that  shall  be  on  it  for  ever."  Then  they 
came  to  Racban,  the  white  field,  and  he  gave  three  great 
angry  blows  to  his  enemies  there,  so  that  streams  of 
blood  went  over  it  on  every  side.  "  This  white  hill  is  a 
hill  of  red  sods  to-day,  through  your  work,  Cuchulain," 
said  Emer.  And  from  that  time  it  has  been  called  the 
Ford  of  the  Sods. 

Then  they  were  overtaken  again  at  another  ford  on 
the  Boinne,  and  Emer  quitted  the  chariot,  and 
Cuchulain  followed  his  enemies  along  the  banks,  so  that 
the  sods  were  flying  from  the  feet  of  ^the  horses  across 
the  ford  northward  ;  and  then  he  turned  and  followed 
them  northward,  so  that  the  sods  flew  over  the  ford 
southward.  And  from  that  it  is  called  Ath  na  Imfuait, 
the  Ford  of  the  Two  Clods.  And  at  each  of  these  fords 
Cuchulain  killed  a  hundred,  and  so  he  kept  his  word  to 
Emer,  and  he  came  safely  out  of  it  all,  and  they  came 
to  Emain  Macha,  toward  the  fall  of  night. 

And  then  Cuchulain  was  given  the  headship  of  the 
young  men  of  Ulster,  of  the  warriors,  the  poets,  the 
trumpeters,  the  musicians,  the  three  pipers,  the  three 
jesters  to  say  sharp  words  ;  the  three  distributers  of 
fame.  It  is  of  them  the  poet  spoke,  and  set  out  their 
names,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : — ''  The  young  men  of 
Ireland,  when  they  were  in  the  Red  Branch,  it  is  they 
were  the  fairest  of  all  hosts."  And  of  Cuchulain  he  said, 
"  He  is  as  hard  as  steel  and  as  bright,  Cuchulain,  the 
victorious  son  of  Dcchtire." 

And  then  Cuchulain  took  Emer  for  his  wife,  after  that 
long  courting,  and  all  the  hardships  he  had  gone  through. 
And  he  brought  her  into  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch, 


EMAINMACHA  43 

and  Conchubar  and  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  gave  her 
a  great  welcome. 

It  was  at  Emain  Macha,  that  was  sometimes  called 
Macha  of  the  Spears,  Conchubar,  the  High  King,  had  the 
Eachrais  Uladh,  the  Assembly  House  of  Ulster,  and  it 
was  there  he  had  his  chief  palace. 

A  fine  palace  it  was,  having  three  houses  in  it, 
the  Royal  House,  and  the  Speckled  House,  and  the 
House  of  the  Red  Branch. 

In  the  Royal  House  there  were  three  times  fifty 
rooms,  and  the  walls  were  made  of  red  yew,  with  copper 
rivets.  And  Conchubar's  own  room  was  on  the  ground, 
and  the  walls  of  it  faced  with  bronze,  and  silver  up 
above,  with  gold  birds  on  it,  and  their  heads  set  with 
shining  carbuncles  ;  and  there  were  nine  partitions  from 
the  fire  to  the  wall,  and  thirty  feet  the  height  of  each 
partition.  And  there  was  a  silver  rod  before  Conchubar 
with  three  golden  apples  on  it,  and  when  he  shook  the 
rod  or  struck  it,  all  in  the  house  would  be  silent. 

It  was  in  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  were  kept  the 
heads  and  the  weapons  of  beaten  enemies,  and  in  the 
Speckled  House  were  kept  the  swords  and  the  shields 
and  the  spears  of  the  heroes  of  Ulster.  And  it  was 
called  the  Speckled  House  because  of  the  brightness  and 
the  colours  of  the  hilts  of  the  swords,  and  the  bright 
spears,  green  or  grey,  with  rings  and  bands  of  silver 
and  gold  about  them,  and  the  gold  and  silver  that  were 
on  the  rims  and  the  bosses  of  the  shields,  and  the 
brightness  of  the  drinking-cups  and  the  horns. 

It  was  the  custom  with  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch, 
if  one  of  them  heard  a  word  of  insult,  to  get  satisfaction 
for  it  on  the  moment.  He  would  get  up  in  the  feasting 
hall  itself,  and  make  his  attack  ;  and  it  was  to  prevent 
that,  the  arms  were  kept  together  in  one  place.  Con- 
chubar's shield,  the  Ochain,  that  is  the  Moaning  One, 
was  hanging  there  ;  whenever  Conchubar  would  be  in 


44  THE    COURTING   OF   EMER 

danger,  it  would  moan,  and  all  the  shields  of  Ulster 
would  moan  in  answer  to  it.  And  Conall  Cearnach's 
Lam-tapaid,  the  Quick  Hand,  was  in  it.  And  Fergus's 
Leochain,  and  Dubthach's  Uathach,  and  Laegaire's 
Nithach ;  and  Sencha's  Sciath-arglan  and  Celthair's 
Comla  Catha,  the  Gate  of  Battle,  and  a  great  many- 
others  along  with  these. 

And  Cuchulain's  shield  was  there,  and  the  way  he 
got  it  was  this. 

There  was  a  law  made  by  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch 
that  the  carved  device  on  every  shield  should  be  different 
from  every  other.  And  the  name  of  the  man  that  used 
to  make  the  shields  was  Mac  Enge.  Cuchulain  went 
to  him  after  coming  back  from  Scathach,  and  bade  him 
make  him  a  shield,  and  put  some  new  device  on  it.  "  I 
cannot  do  that,"  iaid  Mac  Enge,  "  for  all  I  can  do  I  have 
done  already  on  the  shields  of  the  men  of  Ulster." 
There  was  anger  on  Cuchulain  then,  and  he  threatened 
Mac  Enge  with  death,  was  he,  or  was  he  not,  under 
Conchubar's  protection. 

Mac  Enge  was  greatly  put  out  at  what  had  happened, 
and  he  was  thinking  what  was  best  for  him  to  do,  when 
he  saw  a  man  coming  towards  him.  "There  is  some 
trouble  on  you,"  he  said.  "  There  is,  indeed,"  said  the 
shield-maker,  "  for  I  am  in  danger  of  death  unless  I 
make  a  shield  for  Cuchulain."  "  Clear  out  your  work- 
shop," said  the  strange  man,  "  and  spread  ashes  a  foot 
deep  on  the  floor." 

And  when  this  was  done,  Mac  Enge  saw  the  man 
coming  over  the  outer  wall  to  him  again,  and  a  fork 
in  his  hand,  and  it  having  two  prongs.  And  he  put  one 
of  the  prongs  in  the  ashes,  and  with  the  other  he  made 
the  pattern  that  was  to  be  cut  on  Cuchulain's  shield. 
And  so  Cuchulain  got  it,  and  the  name  it  had  was 
Dubhan,  the  Black  One. 

And  as  to  Cuchulain's  sword  that  was  hanging  along 


THEGAEBULG  45 

with  the  shield,  its  name  was  the  Cruaidin  Cailid- 
cheann ;  that  is,  the  Hard,  Hard  Headed.  And  it  had 
a  hilt  of  gold  with  ornaments  of  silver,  and  if  the  point 
of  the  sword  would  be  bent  back  to  its  hilt,  it  would 
come  as  straight  as  a  rod  back  again.  It  would  cut 
a  hair  on  the  water,  or  it  would  cut  a  hair  off  the  head 
without  touching  the  skin,  or  it  would  cut  a  man  in 
two,  and  the  one  half  of  him  would  not  miss  the  other 
for  some  time  after. 

And  as  to  Cuchulain's  spear,  the  Gae  Bulg,  whether 
it  was  or  was  not  kept  in  the  Speckled  House,  this  is 
the  way  he  came  by  it.  There  were  two  monsters 
fighting  in  the  sea  one  time,  the  Curruid  and  the 
Coinchenn  their  names  were,  and  at  the  last  the 
Coinchenn  made  for  the  strand  to  escape,  but  the 
other  followed  him  and  killed  him  there. 

Then  Bolg,  son  of  Buan,  a  champion  of  the  eastern 
part  of  the  world,  found  the  bones  of  the  Coinchenn 
on  the  strand,  and  he  made  a  spear  with  them.  And 
he  gave  it  to  a  great  fighting  man,  the  son  of  Jubar, 
and  it  went  from  one  to  another  till  it  came  to  the 
woman  -  champion,  Aoife.  And  Aoife  gave  it  to 
Cuchulain,  and  he  brought  it  to  Ireland.  And  it 
was  with  it  he  killed  his  own  son,  and  his  friend 
Ferdiad  afterwards. 

There  were  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  men  belong- 
ing to  Conchubar's  household ;  and  one  among  them 
served  the  supper  every  night,  and  when  the  year  came 
round,  he  would  take  his  turn  again.  And  it  is  not  a 
small  thing  that  supper  was  :  beef  and  pork  and  beer 
for  every  man.  But  the  three  days  before  and  the  three 
days  after  Samhain,  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  used  to 
come  together,  and  to  eat  together  in  Conchubar's 
palace,  and  Conchubar  himself  took  charge  of  the 
supper  at  that  feast ;  for  every  man  that  did  not 
come    on    Samhain    night,    his    wits    would    go    from 


46  THE    COURTING   OF   EMER 

him,  and  it  was  as  well  to  make  his  grave  and  to  put 
his  memorial  stone  over  him  the  next  day. 

And  there  were  a  great  many  poets  and  learned  men 
used  to  come  to  Conchubar's  court,  for  they  were  made 
welcome  there  when  they  were  driven  out  of  other 
places.  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  was  among  them,  and  his 
son,  bright-faced  Geanann,  and  Sencha,  and  Ferceirtne, 
that  was  very  learned,  and  Morann,  that  could  not  give 
a  wrong  judgment,  for  if  he  did,  the  collar  round  his 
neck  would  tighten  ;  and  many  others. 

Adhna  was  the  chief  poet  there  at  one  time,  and 
after  he  died  Athairne  was  made  chief  poet  of  Ulster 
in  his  place.  But  Neidhe,  Adhna's  son,  came  back  from 
Alban,  expecting  to  be  made  chief  poet.  And  it  was 
the  waves  of  the  sea,  breaking  on  the  strand  where 
he  was,  that  told  him  of  his  father's  death.  And  when 
he  got  to  Emain,  he  went  into  the  palace  and  sat  down 
in  the  chief  poet's  chair,  that  he  found  empty,  and  put 
the  chief  poet's  cloak  about  him,  that  was  lying  there, 
and  that  was  ornamented  with  beautiful  birds'  feathers. 
And  then  Athairne  came  in  and  found  him  there,  and 
they  began  an  argument  with  one  another  in  the 
language  of  poetry,  and  Conchubar  and  all  the  chief 
men  of  Ulster  came  in  to  listen  to  them,  and  some 
of  the  other  poets  joined  in  the  argument. 

And  Neidhe  proved  himself  to  be  the  best,  but  if  he 
did,  as  soon  as  it  was  given  in  his  favour,  he  came 
down  from  the  chair,  and  took  off  the  cloak  and  put 
it  about  Athairne,  and  said  that,  his  father  being  dead, 
he  would  take  him  for  his  master. 

So  Athairne  was  chief  poet,  but  no  one  had  any 
great  liking  for  him,  for  he  was  too  fond  of  riches, 
and  was  no  way  hospitable  or  open-handed.  It  was 
he  went  to  Midhir,  and  brought  away  secretly  his 
three  cranes  of  churlishness  and  denial,  the  way  none 
of  the  men  of  Ireland  would  get  a  good  reception  if 


THEREDBRANCH  47 

they  would  come  to  ask  anything  at  his  house.  "  Do 
not  come,  do  not  come,"  the  first  crane  would  say. 
"  Get  away,  get  away,"  the  second  would  say.  "  Go 
past  the  house,  past  the  house,"  the  third  would  say 
to  any  one  that  came  near  it. 

It  was  after  that  argument  between  Athairne  and 
Neidhe,  king  Conchubar  made  a  change  in  the  laws. 
For  it  had  been  a  law  that  no  one  that  was  not  a  poet 
could  be  a  judge.  But  the  language  of  the  poets  was 
hard  to  understand,  and  the  king  was  vexed  when  he 
could  understand  but  a  small  part  of  their  argument. 
So  he  said  that  from  that  time  out,  any  fitting  man  might 
be  made  judge,  was  he  or  was  he  not  a  poet.  And  all 
the  people  agreed  to  that,  and  the  new  law  turned  out 
very  well  in  the  end. 

And  the  twelve  chief  heroes  of  Conchubar's  Red 
Branch  were  these :  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh ;  Conall 
Cearnach,  the  Victorious  ;  Laegaire  Buadach,  the  Battle- 
Winner  ;  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim  ;  Eoghan,  son  of 
Durthact,  chief  of  Fernmaige ;  Celthair,  son  of 
Uthecar;  Dubthach  Doel  Uladh,  the  Beetle  of 
Ulster ;  Muinremar,  son  of  Geirgind ;  Cethern,  son 
of  Findtain  ;  and  Naoise,  Ainnle,  and  Ardan,  the  three 
sons  of  Usnach. 


IV 


BRICRIU'S  FEAST,  AND  THE  WAR  OF  WORDS 
OF  THE  WOMEN  OF  ULSTER 

DRICRIU  of  the  Bitter  Tongue  made  a  great  feast  one 
time  for  Conchubar,  son  of  Ness,  and  for  all  the 
chief  men  of  Ulster.  He  was  the  length  of  a  year 
getting  the  feast  ready,  and  he  built  a  great  house  to 
hold  it  in  at  Dun-Rudraige.  He  built  it  in  the  likeness 
of  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  in  Emain,  but  it  was 
entirely  beyond  all  the  buildings  of  that  time  in  shape 
and  in  substance,  in  plan  and  in  ornament,  in  pillars  and 
in  facings,  in  doors  and  in  carvings,  so  that  it  was  spoken 
of  in  all  parts.  It  was  on  the  plan  of  the  drinking-hall 
at  Emain  it  was  made  inside,  and  it  having  nine  divisions 
from  hearth  to  wall,  and  every  division  faced  with  bronze 
that  was  overlaid  with  gold,  thirty  feet  high.  In  the 
front  part  of  the  hall  there  was  a  royal  seat  made  for 
Conchubar,  high  above  all  the  other  seats  of  the  house. 
It  was  set  with  carbuncles  and  other  precious  stones  of 
all  colours,  that  shone  like  gold  and  silver,  so  that  they 
made  the  night  the  same  as  the  day ;  and  round  about 
it  were  the  twelve  seats  of  the  twelve  heroes  of  Ulster. 

Good  as  the  material  was,  the  work  done  on  it  was  as 
good.  It  took  six  horses  to  bring  home  every  beam, 
and  the  strength  of  six  men  to  fix  every  pole,  and 
thirty  of  the  best  skilled  men  in  Ireland  were  ordering 
it  and  directing  it, 

48 


BRICRIU'S    INVITATION  49 

Then  Bricriu  made  a  sunny  parlour  for  himself,  on  a 
level  with  Conchubar's  seat  and  the  seats  of  the  heroes 
of  valour,  and  it  had  every  sort  of  ornament,  and  windows 
of  glass  were  put  on  every  side  of  it,  the  way  he  could 
see  the  hall  from  his  seat,  for  he  knew  the  men  of  Ulster 
would  not  let  him  stop  inside. 

When  he  had  finished  building  the  hall  and  the  sunny 
parlour,  and  had  furnished  them  with  quilts  and  coverings, 
beds  and  pillows,  and  with  a  full  supply  of  meat  and 
drink,  so  that  nothing  was  wanting,  he  set  out  for  Emain 
Macha  to  see  Conchubar  and  the  chief  men  of  Ulster. 

It  happened  that  day  they  were  all  gathered  together 
at  Emain  Macha,  and  they  made  him  welcome,  and  they 
put  him  to  sit  beside  Conchubar,  and  he  said  to  Conchu- 
bar and  to  them  all,  "  Come  with  me  to  a  feast  I  have 
made  ready."  "  I  am  willing  to  go,"  said  Conchubar, 
"  if  the  men  of  Ulster  are  willing." 

But  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  and  the  others,  said :  "  We 
will  not  go,  for  if  we  do,  our  dead  will  be  more  than 
our  living,  after  Bricriu  has  set  us  to  quarrel  with  one 
another."  "  It  will  be  worse  for  you  if  you  do  not 
come,"  said  Bricriu.  "What  will  you  do  if  they  do 
not  go  with  you  ? "  said  Conchubar.  "  I  will  stir  up 
strife,"  said  Bricriu,  "  between  the  kings  and  the  leaders, 
and  the  heroes  of  valour,  and  the  swordsmen,  till  every 
one  makes  an  end  of  the  other,  if  they  will  not  come 
with  me  to  use  my  feast."  "  We  will  not  go  for  the  sake 
of  pleasing  you,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  will  stir  up  anger 
between  father  and  son,  so  that  they  will  be  the  death 
of  one  another,"  said  Bricriu  ;  "  if  I  fail  in  doing  that,  I 
will  make  a  quarrel  between  mother  and  daughter ;  if 
that  fails,  I  will  put  the  two  breasts  of  every  woman  of 
Ulster  striking  one  against  the  other,  and  destroying 
one  another."  "  It  is  better  for  us  to  go,"  said  Fergus. 
"  Let  us  consult  with  the  chief  men  of  Ulster,"  said 
Sencha,  son  of  Ailell.     "Some  harm  will  come  of  it," 

D 


50  BRICRIU'S    FEAST 

said  Conchubar,  "  if  we  do  not  consult  together  against 
this  man." 

On  that,  all  the  chief  men  met  together  in  council,  and 
it  is  what  Sencha  advised  :  "  It  is  best  for  you  to  get 
securities  from  Bricriu,  as  you  have  to  go  along  with 
him ;  and  put  eight  swordsmen  around  him,  to  make 
him  leave  the  house  as  soon  as  he  has  laid  out  the  feast 
for  you."  So  Ferbenn  Ferbeson,  son  of  Conchubar, 
brought  the  answer  to  Bricriu.  "  I  am  satisfied  to  do 
that,"  said  Bricriu.  With  that  the  men  of  Ulster  set 
out  from  Emain,  host,  troop,  and  company  under  king, 
chief,  and  leader,  and  it  was  a  good  march  they  all  made 
together  to  Dun-Rudraige. 

Then  Bricriu  set  himself  to  think  how  with  the  securi- 
ties that  were  given  for  him,  he  could  best  manage  to  set 
the  men  of  Ulster  one  against  the  other.  After  he  had 
been  thinking  a  while,  he  went  over  to  Laegaire  Buadach, 
son  of  Connad,  son  of  Iliath.  "  All  good  be  with  you, 
Laegaire,  Winner  of  Battles,  you  mighty  mallet  of 
Bregia,  you  hot  hammer  of  Meath,  you  flame-red 
thunderbolt,  what  hinders  you  from  getting  the 
championship  of  Ireland  for  ever?"  "If  I  want  it 
I  can  get  it,"  said  Laegaire.  "  You  will  be  head  of 
all  the  champions  of  Ireland,"  said  Bricriu,  "if  you 
do  as  I  advise."  "  I  will  do  that,  indeed,"  said 
Laegaire. 

"  Well,"  said  Bricriu,  "  if  you  can  get  the  Champion's 
Portion  at  the  feast  in  my  house,  the  championship  of 
Ireland  will  be  yours  for  ever.  And  the  Champion's 
Portion  of  my  house  is  worth  fighting  for,"  he  said,  ''  for 
it  is  not  the  portion  of  a  fool's  house.  There  goes  with  it 
a  vat  of  good  wine,  with  room  enough  in  it  to  hold  three 
of  the  brave  men  of  Ulster ;  with  that  a  seven-year-old 
boar,  that  has  been  fed  since  it  was  born  on  no  other 
thing  but  fresh  milk,  and  fine  meal  in  spring-time,  curds 
and  sweet  milk  in  summer,  the  kernel  of  nuts  and  wheat 


BRICRIU'S   TREACHERY  51 

in  harvest,  beef  and  broth  in  the  winter ;  with  that  a 
seven-year-old  bullock  that  never  had  in  its  mouth,  since 
it  was  a  sucking  calf,  either  heather  or  twig  tops,  but  only 
sweet  milk  and  herbs,  meadow  hay  and  corn  ;  along 
with  that,  five-score  wheaten  cakes  made  with  honey. 
That  is  the  Champion's  Portion  of  my  house.  And  since 
you  are  yourself  the  best  hero  among  the  men  of  Ulster," 
he  said,  "  it  is  but  right  to  give  it  to  you  ;  and  that  is  my 
wish,  you  to  get  it.  And  at  the  end  of  the  day,  when 
the  feast  is  spread  out,  let  your  chariot-driver  rise  up, 
and  it  is  to  him  the  Champion's  Portion  will  be  given." 
"  There  will  be  dead  men  if  that  is  not  done,"  said  Laegaire. 
Then  Bricriu  laughed,  for  he  liked  to  hear  that. 

When  he  had  done  stirring  up  Laegaire  Buadach,  he 
went  on  till  he  met  with  Conall  Cearnach.  "  May  good 
be  with  you,  Conall,"  he  said.  "  It  is  you  are  the  hero 
of  fights  and  of  battles  ;  it  is  many  victories  you  have 
won  up  to  this  over  the  heroes  of  Ulster.  By  the  time 
the  men  of  Ulster  cross  the  boundary  of  a  strange 
country,  it  is  three  days  and  three  nights  in  advance  of 
them  you  are,  over  many  a  ford  and  river ;  it  is  you  who 
protect  their  rear  coming  back  again,  so  that  no  enemy 
can  get  past  you  or  through  you,  or  over  you.  What 
would  hinder  you  from  being  given  the  Champion's 
Portion  of  Emain  to  hold  for  ever  ? "  Great  as  was  his 
treachery  with  Laegaire,  he  showed  twice  as  much  in 
what  he  said  to  Conall  Cearnach. 

When  he  had  satisfied  himself  that  Conall  was  stirred 
up  to  a  quarrel,  he  went  on  to  Cuchulain.  "  May  all 
good  be  with  you,  Cuchulain,  conqueror  of  Bregia,  bright 
banner  of  the  Life,  darling  of  Emain,  beloved  by  wives 
and  by  maidens,  Cuchulain  is  no  nickname  for  you 
to-day,  for  you  are  the  champion  of  the  men  of  Ulster  ; 
it  is  you  keep  off  their  great  quarrels  and  disputes  ;  it  is 
you  get  justice  for  every  man  of  them ;  it  is  you  have 
what  all  the  men  of  Ulster  are  wanting  in  ;  all  the  men 


52  BRICRIU'S    FEAST 

of  Ulster  acknowledge  that  your  bravery,  your  valour, 
and  your  deeds  are  beyond  their  own.  Why,  then, 
would  you  leave  the  Champion's  Portion  for  some  other 
one  of  the  men  of  Ulster,  when  not  one  of  them  would 
be  able  to  keep  it  from  you  ?  " 

"  By  the  god  of  my  people,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  whoever 
comes  to  try  and  keep  it  from  me  will  lose  his  head." 
With  that  Bricriu  left  them  and  followed  after  the  army, 
as  if  he  had  done  nothing  to  stir  up  a  quarrel  at  all. 

After  that  they  came  to  the  feasting-houses  and  went 
in,  and  every  one  took  his  place,  king,  prince,  landowner, 
swordsman,  and  young  fighting  man.  One  half  of  the 
house  was  set  apart  for  Conchubar  and  his  following,  and 
the  other  half  was  kept  for  the  wives  of  the  heroes  of 
Ulster. 

And  there  were  attending  on  Conchubar  in  the  front 
part  of  the  house  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh  ;  Celthair,  son  of 
Uthecar ;  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthact ;  the  two  sons  of  the 
king,  Fiacha  and  Fiachaig ;  Fergus,  son  of  Leti ; 
Cuscraid,  the  Stutterer  of  Macha  ;  Sencha,  son  of  Ailell ; 
the  three  sons  of  Fiachach,  that  is  Rus  and  Dare  and 
Imchad  ;  Muinremar,  son  of  Geirgind  ;  Errge  Echbel ; 
Amergin,  son  of  Ecit  ;  Mend,  son  of  Salchah  ;  Dubthach 
Doel  Uladh,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster ;  Feradach  Find 
Fectnach ;  Fedelmid,  son  of  Hair  Cheting ;  Furbaide 
Ferbend  ;  Rochad,  son  of  Fathemon  ;  Laegaire  Buadach  ; 
Conall  Cearnach ;  Cuchulain  ;  Conrad,  son  of  Mornai ; 
Ere,  son  of  Fedelmid  ;  lollan,  son  of  Fergus  ;  Fintan,  son 
of  Nial ;  Cethern,  son  of  Fintan  ;  Factna,  son  of  Sencad  ; 
Conla  the  False  ;  Ailell  the  Honey-Tongued  ;  the  chief 
men  of  Ulster,  with  the  young  men  and  the  song- 
makers. 

While  the  feast  was  being  spread  out,  the  musicians 
and  players  made  music  for  them.  As  soon  as  Bricriu 
had  spread  the  feast  with  its  well-tasting,  savoury  meats, 
he  was  ordered  by  his  sureties  to  leave  the  hall  on  the 


THE   CHAMPION'S   PORTION        53 

moment ;  and  they  rose  up  with  their  drawn  swords  in 
their  hands  to  put  him  out.  So  he  and  his  followers 
went  out,  and  when  he  was  on  the  threshold  of  the 
house  he  turned  and  called  out :  "  The  Champion's 
Portion  of  my  house  is  not  the  portion  of  a  fool's 
house ;  let  it  be  given  to  whoever  you  think  the  best 
hero  of  Ulster."     And  with  that  he  left  them. 

Then  the  distributers  rose  up  to  divide  the  food,  and 
the  chariot-driver  of  Laegaire  Buadach,  Sedlang,  son  of 
Riangabra,  rose  up  and  said  to  them,  "  Let  you  give 
the  Champion's  Portion  to  Laegaire,  for  he  has  the  best 
right  to  it  of  all  the  young  heroes  of  Ulster." 

Then  Id,  son  of  Riangabra,  chariot-driver  to  Conall 
Cearnach,  rose  up,  and  bade  them  to  give  it  to  his  master. 
But  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  said,  "  It  is  to  Cuchulain 
it  must  be  brought ;  and  it  is  no  disgrace  for  all  the  men 
of  Ulster  to  give  it  to  him,  for  it  is  he  is  the  bravest  of 
you  all."  "  That  is  not  true,"  said  Conall,  and  Laegaire 
said  the  same. 

With  that  they  got  up  upon  the  floor,  and  put  on 
their  shields  and  took  hold  of  their  swords,  and  they 
attacked  and  struck  at  one  another  till  the  one  half  of 
the  hall  was  as  if  on  fire  with  the  clashing  of  swords  and 
spears,  and  the  other  half  was  as  white  as  chalk  with  the 
whiteness  of  the  shields.  There  was  fear  on  the  whole 
gathering ;  all  the  men  were  put  from  their  places,  and 
there  was  great  anger  on  Conchubar  himself  and  on 
Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  to  see  the  injustice  and  the  hard- 
ship of  two  men  fighting  against  one,  Conall  and 
Laegaire  both  together  attacking  Cuchulain  ;  but  there 
was  no  one  among  the  men  of  Ulster  dared  part  them 
till  Sencha  spoke  to  Conchubar.  "  It  is  time  for  you  to 
part  these  men,"  he  said. 

With  that,  Conchubar  and  Fergus  came  between 
them,  and  the  fighters  let  their  hands  drop  to  their 
sides.        "  Will   you    do    as    1    advise  ? "    said    Sencha. 


54  BRICRIU'S   FEAST 

"  We  will  do  it,"  they  said.  "  Then  my  advice  is," 
said  Sencha,  "  for  this  night  to  divide  the  Champion's 
Portion  among  the  whole  gathering,  and  after  that  to 
let  it  be  settled  according  to  the  judgment  of  Ailell, 
king  of  Connaught,  for  it  will  be  better  for  the  men  of 
Ulster,  this  business  to  be  settled  in  Cruachan." 

So  with  that  they  sat  down  to  the  feast  again, 
and  gathered  round  the  fire  and  drank  and  made 
merry. 

All  this  time  Bricriu  and  his  wife  were  in  their  upper 
room,  and  from  there  he  had  seen  how  things  were 
going  on  in  the  great  hall.  And  he  began  to  search 
his  mind  how  he  could  best  stir  up  the  women  to 
quarrel  with  one  another  as  he  had  stirred  up  the  men. 
When  he  had  done  searching  his  mind,  it  just  chanced 
as  he  could  have  wished,  that  Fedelm  of  the  Fresh  Heart 
came  from  the  hall  with  fifty  women  after  her,  laughing 
and  merry.  Bricriu  went  to  meet  her.  "  All  good  be 
with  you  to-night,  wife  of  Laegaire  Buadach.  Fedelm 
of  the  Fresh  Heart  is  no  nickname  for  you,  with  respect 
to  your  appearance  and  your  wisdom  and  your  family. 
Conchubar,  king  of  Ulster,  is  of  your  kindred  ;  Laegaire 
Buadach  is  your  husband.  I  would  not  think  well  of  it 
that  any  of  the  women  of  Ulster  should  go  before  you 
into  the  hall,  for  it  is  at  your  heel  that  all  the  other 
women  of  Ulster  should  walk.  If  you  go  first  into 
the  hall  to-night,  you  will  be  queen  over  them  all 
for  ever  and  ever." 

Fedelm  went  on  after  that,  the  length  of  three 
ridges  from  the  hall. 

After  that  there  came  out  Lendabair,  the  Favourite, 
daughter  of  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthact,  wife  of  Conall 
Cearnach. 

Bricriu  came  over  to  her,  and  he  said,  "  Good  be  with 
you,  Lendabair ;  and  that  is  no  nickname,  for  you 
are  the  favourite  and   the  darling  of  the   men   of  the 


THE    RACE    OF  THE    WOMEN        55 

whole  world,  because  of  the  brightness  of  your  beauty. 
As  far  as  your  husband  is  beyond  the  whole  world 
in  bravery  and  in  comeliness,  so  far  are  you  before 
the  women  of  Ulster."  Great  as  his  deceit  was  in 
what  he  said  to  Fedelm,  it  was  twice  as  great  in  what 
he  said  to  Lendabair. 

Then  Emer  came  out  and  fifty  women  after  her. 
"  Health  be  with  you,  Emer,  daughter  of  Forgall 
Manach,  wife  of  the  best  man  in  Ireland  !  Emer  of  the 
Beautiful  Hair  is  no  nickname  for  you  ;  the  kings  and 
princes  of  Ireland  are  quarrelling  with  one  another 
about  you.  So  far  as  the  sun  outshines  the  stars 
of  heaven,  so  far  do  you  outshine  the  women  of  the 
whole  world  in  form,  and  shape,  and  birth,  in  youth, 
and  beauty,  and  nicety,  in  good  name,  and  wisdom, 
and  speech."  However  great  his  deceit  was  towards 
the  other  women,  it  was  twice  as  much  towards  Emer. 

The  three  women  went  on  then  till  they  met  at  one 
spot,  three  ridges  from  the  house,  but  none  of  them  knew 
that  Bricriu  had  been  speaking  to  the  other.  They  set 
out  then  to  go  back  to  the  house.  Their  walk  was  even 
and  quiet  and  easy  on  the  first  ridge ;  hardly  did  one 
of  them  put  her  foot  before  the  other.  But  on  the  next 
ridge  their  steps  were  closer  and  quicker ;  and  when 
they  came  to  the  ridge  next  the  house,  it  was  hardly 
one  of  them  could  keep  up  with  the  other,  so  that 
they  took  up  their  skirts  nearly  to  their  knees,  each 
one  trying  to  get  first  into  the  hall,  because  of  what 
Bricriu  had  said  to  them,  that  whoever  would  be 
first  to  enter  the  house,  would  be  queen  of  the  whole 
province.  And  such  was  the  noise  they  made  in 
their  race,  that  it  was  like  the  noise  of  forty  chariots 
coming.  The  whole  palace  shook,  and  all  the  men 
started  up  for  their  arms,  striking  against  one  another. 

"  Stop,"  said  Sencha,  "  it  is  not  enemies  that  are 
coming,  it  is  Bricriu   has  set   the   women   quarrelling 


56  BRICRIU'S   FEAST 

By  the  god  of  my  people  !  "  he  said,  "  unless  the  hall 
is  shut  against  them,  those  that  are  dead  among  us 
will  be  more  than  those  that  are  living."  With  that 
the  doorkeepers  shut  the  doors.  But  Emer  was  quicker 
than  the  other  women,  and  outran  them,  and  put  her 
back  against  the  door,  and  called  to  the  doorkeepers 
before  the  other  women  came  up,  so  that  the  men 
rose  up,  each  of  them  to  open  the  door  before  his 
own  wife,  so  that  she  might  be  the  first  to  come 
within. 

"  It  is  a  bad  night  this  will  be,"  said  Conchubar ;  and 
he  struck  the  silver  rod  he  had  in  his  hand  against  the 
bronze  post  of  the  hall,  and  they  all  sat  down.  "  Quiet 
yourselves,"  said  Sencha  ;  "  it  is  not  a  war  of  arms  we 
are  going  to  have  here,  it  is  a  war  of  words."  Each 
woman  then  put  herself  under  the  protection  of  her 
husband  outside,  and  then  there  followed  the  war  of 
words  of  the  women  of  Ulster. 

Fedelm  of  the  Fresh  Heart  was  the  first  to  speak,  and 
it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  The  mother  who  bore  me  was  free,  noble,  equal  to 
my  father  in  rank  and  in  race  ;  the  blood  that  is  in  me 
is  royal ;  I  was  brought  up  like  one  of  royal  blood.  I 
am  counted  beautiful  in  form  and  in  shape  and  in 
appearance ;  I  was  brought  up  to  good  behaviour,  to 
courage,  to  mannerly  ways.  Look  at  Lacgaire,  my 
husband,  and  what  his  red  hand  does  for  Ulster.  It 
was  by  himself  alone  its  boundaries  were  kept  from 
the  enemies  that  were  as  strong  as  all  Ulster  put 
together  ;  he  is  a  defence  and  a  protection  against 
wounds ;  he  is  beyond  all  the  heroes ;  his  victories 
are  greater  than  their  victories.  Why  should  not  I, 
Fedelm,  the  beautiful,  the  lovely,  the  joyful,  be  the 
first  to  step  into  the  drinking-hall  to-night?" 

Then  Lendabair  spoke,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  I  myself  have  beauty  too,  and  good  sense  and  good 


THE   WAR   OF  WORDS  57 

carnage ;  it  is  I  should  walk  into  the  hall  with  free,  even 
steps  before  all  the  women  of  Ulster. 

"  For  my  husband  is  pleasant  Conall  of  the  great 
shield,  the  Victorious  ;  he  is  proud,  going  with  brave 
steps  up  to  the  spears  of  the  fight ;  he  is  proud  coming 
back  to  me  after  it,  with  the  heads  of  his  enemies  in  his 
hands. 

"  He  brings  his  hard  sword  into  the  battle  for  Ulster  ; 
he  defends  every  ford  or  he  destroys  it  to  keep  out  the 
enemy ;  he  is  a  hero  will  have  a  stone  raised  over 
him. 

"  The  son  of  noble  Amergin,  who  can  speak  against 
his  courage  or  his  deeds?  It  is  Conall  who  leads  the 
heroes. 

"  All  eyes  look  on  the  glory  of  Lendabair ;  why 
would  she  not  go  first  into  the  hall  of  the  king?" 

Then  Emer  spoke,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"There  is  no  woman  comes  up  to  me  in  appearance, 
in  shape,  in  wisdom  ;  there  is  no  one  comes  up  to  me 
for  goodness  of  form,  or  brightness  of  eye,  or  good  sense, 
or  kindness,  or  good  behaviour. 

"  No  one  has  the  joy  of  loving  or  the  strength  of 
loving  that  I  have  ;  all  Ulster  desires  me ;  surely  I  am 
a  nut  of  the  heart.  If  I  were  a  light  woman,  there  would 
not  be  a  husband  left  to  any  of  you  to-morrow. 

"  And  my  husband  is  Cuchulain.  It  is  he  is  not  a 
hound  that  is  weak  ;  there  is  blood  on  his  spear,  there 
is  blood  on  his  sword,  his  white  body  is  black  with 
blood,  his  soft  skin  is  furrowed  with  sword  cuts,  there 
are  many  wounds  on  his  thigh. 

"  But  the  flame  of  his  eyes  is  turned  westward  ;  he 
is  the  strong  protector  ;  his  chariot  is  red,  its  cushions 
are  red ;  he  fights  from  over  the  ears  of  horses,  from 
over  the  breath  of  men  ;  he  leaps  in  the  air  like  a  salmon 
when  he  makes  his  hero  leap ;  he  does  strange  feats, 
the  dark  feat,  the  blind  feat,  the  feat  of  nine ;  he  breaks 


58  BRICRIU'S   FEAST 

down  armies  in  the  hard  fight ;  he  saves  the  life  of 
proud  armies ;  he  finds  joy  in  the  terror  of  the 
ignorant. 

"  Your  fine  heroes  of  Ulster  are  not  worth  a  stalk  of 
grass  compared  with  my  husband,  Cuchulain,  letting 
on  to  have  a  woman's  sickness  on  them ;  he  is  like 
the  clear  red  blood,  they  are  like  the  scum  and  the 
leavings,  worth  no  more  than  a  stalk  of  grass. 

"Your  fine  women  of  Ulster,  they  are  shaped  like 
cows  and  led  like  cows,  when  they  are  put  beside  the 
wife  of  Cuchulain." 

"When  the  men  in  the  hall  heard  what  the  women 
said,  Laegaire  and  Conall  made  a  rush  at  the  wall, 
and  broke  a  plank  out  of  it  at  their  own  height,  to 
let  their  own  wives  in.  But  Cuchulain  raised  up  that 
part  of  the  house  that  was  opposite  to  his  place,  so 
that  the  stars  and  the  sky  could  be  seen  through  the 
wall.  By  that  opening  Emer  came  in  with  the  fifty 
women  that  waited  on  her,  and  with  them  the  women 
that  waited  on  the  other  two.  None  of  the  other 
women  could  be  compared  at  all  with  Emer,  and  no 
one  at  all  could  be  compared  with  her  husband.  And 
then  Cuchulain  let  the  wall  he  had  lifted  fall  suddenly 
again,  so  that  seven  feet  of  it  went  into  the  ground, 
and  the  whole  house  shook,  and  Bricriu's  upper  room 
was  laid  flat  in  such  a  way  that  Bricriu  himself  and 
his  wife  were  thrown  into  the  dirt  among  the  dogs. 
"  My  grief,"  cried  Bricriu,  "  enemies  are  come  in ! " 
And  he  got  up  quickly  and  took  a  turn  round,  and 
he  saw  that  the  hall  was  now  crooked  and  leaning 
entirely  to  one  side.  He  clapped  his  hands  together 
and  went  inside,  but  he  was  so  covered  with  dirt  that 
none  of  the  Ulster  people  could  know  him,  it  was 
only  by  his  way  of  speaking  they  made  out  who  he  was. 

Then  he  said,  from  the  middle  of  the  floor,  "  It  is 
a   pity   I    ever   made  a  feast  for  you,  men  of  Ulster. 


THE    CROOKED   WALL  59 

My  house  is  more  to  me  than  everything  else  I  have. 
I  put  geasa^  that  is,  bonds,  on  you,  not  to  drink  or 
to  eat  or  to  sleep  till  you  leave  my  house  the  same 
way  as  you  found  it."  At  that,  all  the  men  of 
Ulster  went  out  and  tried  to  pull  the  house  straight, 
but  they  did  not  raise  it  by  so  much  as  a  hand's 
breadth. 

"  What  are  we  to  do  ?  "  they  said.  "  There  is  nothing 
for  you  to  do,"  said  Sencha,  "but  to  ask  the  man 
that  pulled  it  crooked  to  set  it  straight  again." 

Upon  that  they  bid  Cuchulain  to  put  the  wall  up 
straight  again,  and  Bricriu  said,  "O  king  of  the 
heroes  of  Ireland,  unless  you  can  set  it  up  straight, 
there  is  no  man  in  the  world  can  do  it."  And  all  the 
men  of  Ulster  begged  and  prayed  of  Cuchulain  to 
settle  the  matter.  And  that  they  might  not  have  to 
go  without  food  or  drink,  Cuchulain  rose  up  and  tried 
to  lift  the  house  with  a  tug,  and  he  failed.  Anger  came 
on  him  then,  and  the  hero  light  shone  about  him,  and 
he  put  out  all  his  strength,  and  strained  himself  till  a 
man's  foot  could  find  place  between  each  of  his  ribs, 
and  he  lifted  the  house  up  till  it  was  as  straight  as  it 
was  before.  After  that  they  enjoyed  the  feast,  with 
the  chief  men  on  the  one  side  round  about  Conchubar, 
High  King  of  Ulster,  and  their  wives  on  the  other 
side — Fedelm  of  the  Nine  Shapes  (nine  shapes  she  could 
take  on,  and  each  shape  more  beautiful  than  the 
other),  and  Findchoem,  daughter  of  Cathbad,  wife  of 
Amergin  of  the  Iron  Jaw,  and  Devorgill,  wife  of  Lugaid 
of  the  Red  Stripes,  besides  Emer,  and  Fedelm  of  the 
Fresh  Heart,  and  Lendabair ;  and  it  would  be  too  long 
to  count  and  to  tell  of  all  the  other  noble  women 
besides. 

There  was  soon  a  buzzing  of  words  in  the  hall  again, 
with  the  women  praising  their  men,  as  if  to  stir  up 
another  quarrel  between  them.     Then    Sencha,  son  of 


6o  BRICRIU'S    FEAST 

Ailell,  got  up  and  shook  his  bell  branch,  and  they  all 
stopped  to  listen  to  him,  and  then  to  quiet  the  women 
he  said  : 

"  Have  done  with  this  word-fighting,  lest  you  drive 
the  men  of  Ulster  to  grow  white-faced  in  the  anger 
and  the  pride  of  battle  with  one  another. 

"  It  is  through  the  fault  of  women  the  shields  of 
men  are  broken,  heroes  go  out  to  fight  and  struggle 
with  one  another  in  their  anger. 

"  It  is  the  folly  of  women  brings  men  to  do  these 
things,  to  bruise  what  they  cannot  bind  up  again,  to 
strike  down  what  they  cannot  raise  up  again.  Wives 
of  heroes,  keep  yourself  from  this." 

But  Emer  answered  him,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"It  is  right  for  me  to  speak,  Sencha,  and  I  the  wife 
of  the  comely,  pleasant  hero,  who  is  beyond  all  others 
in  beauty,  in  wisdom,  in  speaking,  since  the  learning 
that  was  easy  to  him  is  done  with. 

'■  No  one  can  do  his  feats,  the  over-breath  feat,  the 
apple  feat,  the  ghost  feat,  the  screw  feat,  the  cat  feat, 
the  red-whirling  feat,  the  barbed-spear  feat,  the  quick 
stroke,  the  fire  of  the  mouth,  the  hero's  cry,  the  wheel 
feat,  the  sword-edge  feat ;  no  one  can  throw  himself 
against  hard-spiked  places  the  way  he  does. 

"  There  is  no  one  is  his  equal  in  youth,  in  form,  in 
brightness,  in  birth,  in  mind,  in  voice,  in  bravery,  in 
boldness,  in  fire,  in  skill ;  no  one  is  his  equal  in  hunt- 
ing, in  running,  in  strength,  in  victories,  in  greatness. 
There  is  no  man  to  be  found  who  can  be  put  beside 
Cuchulain." 

"  If  it  is  truth  you  are  speaking,  Emer,"  said  Conall 
Cearnach,  "  let  this  lad  of  feats  stand  up,  that  we  may 
see  them." 

"  I  will  not,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  tired  and  broken 
to-day,  I  will  do  no  more  till  after  I  have  had  food 
and  sleep."     It  was  true  what  he  said,  for  it  was  on 


THE   GREY   OF   MACHA  6i 

that  morning  he  had  met  with  the  Grey  of  Macha  by 
the  side  of  the  grey  lake  at  Slieve  Fuad.  When  it 
came  out  of  the  lake,  Cuchulain  slipped  his  hands  round 
the  neck  of  the  horse,  and  the  two  of  them  struggled 
and  wrestled  with  one  another,  and  in  that  way  they 
went  all  round  Ireland,  till  late  in  the  day  he  brought 
the  horse  home  to  Emain.  It  was  in  the  same  way  he 
got  the  Black  Sainglain  from  the  black  lake  of  Sainglen. 

And  Cuchulain  said :  "  To-day  myself  and  the  Grey 
of  Macha  have  gone  through  the  great  plains  of  Ireland, 
Bregia  of  Meath,  the  seashore  marsh  of  Muirthemne 
Macha,  through  Moy  Medba,  Currech  Cleitech  Cerna, 
Lia  of  Linn  Locharn,  Per  Femen  Fergna,  Curros  Dom- 
nand,  Ros  Roigne,  and  Eo.  And  now  I  would  sooner 
eat  and  sleep  than  do  any  other  thing.  But  I  swear 
by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,"  he  said,  "  I  would  be 
ready  to  fight  with  any  man  of  you  if  I  had  but  my 
fill  of  food  and  of  sleep."  "  Well,"  said  Bricriu,  "  this 
has  gone  on  long  enough.  Let  food  and  drink  be 
brought,  and  let  the  women's  war  be  put  a  stop  to 
till  the  feast  is  done." 

They  did  so,  and  it  was  a  pleasant  time  they  had  till 
the  end  of  three  days  and  three  nights. 


THE  CHAMPIONSHIP  OF  ULSTER 

A  FTER  they  were  gone  back  to  Emain  after  Bricriu's 
feast,  a  quarrel  began  between  Conall  and 
Lacgaire  and  Cuchulain  about  the  Champion's  Portion, 
and  Conchubar  and  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  came 
between  them  to  settle  it.  And  Conchubar  bade  them 
to  go  to  Cruachan  in  Connaught,  to  have  the  matter 
judged  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve.  "  And  if  that  fails 
you,"  he  said,  "  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  go  to  Curoi, 
son  of  Daire,  at  Slieve  Mis,  in  Munster.  And  it  is  a 
true  judgment  he  will  give,  for  he  is  just  and  fair- 
minded,  his  house  is  open  to  guests,  his  hand  is  good 
in  battle,  in  leading  he  is  a  king.  He  will  give  you  a 
right  judgment,  but  it  is  only  a  brave  man  will  ask 
it  from  him,  for  he  is  wise  in  all  sorts  of  enchantments, 
and  can  do  things  that  no  other  man  can  do." 

"  We  will  go  first  to  Cruachan,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I 
agree  to  that,"  said  Laegaire.  "  Let  us  go  then,"  said 
Conall  Cearnach.  "  Let  horses  be  brought,  and  your 
chariot  yoked,  Conall,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  and  go  on  the 
first."  "  I  would  not  like  that,"  said  Conall.  "  That  is 
no  wonder,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  every  one  knows  the 
awkwardness  of  your  horses,  and  the  unsteadiness  of 
your  chariot ;  it  is  so  heavy  that  each  of  the  wheels 
raises  the  sod  on  each  side  wherever  it  goes,  the  way 

62 


CUCHULAIN   AND   THE   WOMEN   63 

that  for  the  length  of  a  year  it  is  easy  for  the  men  of 
Ulster  to  know  the  track  it  has  left  after  it." 

"  Do  you  hear  that,  Laegaire  ?  "  said  Conall.  "  It  is 
for  you  to  go  first."  "  Do  not  begin  to  mock  at  me," 
said  Laegaire,  "  for  I  am  good  at  crossing  fords,  and  I 
am  ready  to  go  up  and  face  a  storm  of  spears  before 
any  man.  But  do  not  put  me  beside  chariot  kings  till 
I  practise  going  through  hard  and  narrow  places,  and 
racing  against  single  chariots,  till  the  champion  of  a 
single  chariot  will  be  afraid  to  pass  me." 

With  that  Laegaire  had  his  chariot  yoked,  and  leaped 
into  it.  He  drove  over  Magh  da  Gabal,  the  Plain  of 
the  Two  Forks,  over  Bernaid  na  Foraire,  the  Gap  of  the 
Watch,  over  the  Ford  of  Carpat  Fergus,  over  the  Ford 
of  the  Morrigu,  to  Caerthund  Cluana  da  Dam,  the  Rowan 
Meadow  of  the  Two  Oxen,  in  the  Fews  of  Firbuide ; 
by  the  four  ways,  past  Dundealgan,  across  Magh  Slicech, 
the  Peeled  Plain,  westward  by  Bregia.  And  it  was  not 
long  till  Conall  Cearnach  followed  after  him,  and  many 
of  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  with  them. 

But  Cuchulain  stayed  behind  the  others,  amusing  the 
women  of  Ulster  with  his  feats.  He  did  nine  feats  with 
apples,  nine  with  spears,  and  nine  with  knives,  without 
ever  letting  one  touch  the  other.  And  he  took  three 
times  fifty  needles  from  the  women,  and  threw  them  up, 
one  after  the  other,  so  that  each  needle  went  into  the 
eye  of  the  other,  and  in  that  way  they  were  all  joined 
together.  Then  he  gave  every  woman  her  needle  back 
into  her  own  hand. 

But  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  went  to  look  for  him, 
and  reproached  him,  and  said  :  "  You  pitiful  squinter, 
your  couragehas  gone  from  you !  The  Champion's  Portion 
is  lost  to  you,  the  men  of  Ulster  have  got  to  Cruachan 
before  this."  "  I  never  thought  of  it,  my  Laeg,"  said 
Cuchulain ;  "  but  yoke  the  chariot  for  me  now."  So 
Laeg  yoked  it,  and  they  set  out  on  their  journey.     By 


64       CHAMPIONSHIP    OF    ULSTER 

that  time  the  men  of  Ulster  were  come  to  Magh  Breagh, 
the  Fine  Meadow ;  but  Cuchulain,  after  he  was  roused 
up  by  Laeg,  travelled  so  fast,  and  the  Grey  of  Macha 
and  the  Black  Sainglain  went  racing  in  such  a  way 
with  his  chariot  across  the  whole  province  of  Conchubar, 
across  Slieve  Fuad  and  the  plain  of  Bregia,  that  he  came 
up  with  the  others  before  they  came  to  Cruachan. 

The  noise  the  whole  troop  made  was  so  great,  going 
at  such  speed  as  they  did,  that  a  great  shaking  came  on 
Cruachan,  and  the  arms  fell  from  the  racks  to  the 
ground,  and  the  whole  of  the  dun  began  to  shake,  so 
that  every  man  was  trembling  like  a  rush  in  a  stream. 
On  that  Maeve  said  :  "  Since  the  day  I  first  came  to 
Cruachan  I  never  before  heard  thunder,  there  being  no 
clouds  in  the  sky."  Then  Findabair  of  the  Fair  Eye- 
brows, daughter  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  went  up,  for  she 
had  a  bird's  sight,  to  her  sunny  parlour  over  the  great 
door  of  the  fort,  to  tell  them  what  was  coming.  "  Dear 
mother,"  she  said,  "  I  see  a  chariot  coming  over  the 
plain."  "  Tell  me  what  is  its  appearance,"  said  Maeve, 
"  and  the  colour  of  its  horses,  and  the  appearance  of  the 
man  that  sits  in  it."  "  I  see  well,"  said  Findabair,  "  the 
two  horses  that  are  in  the  chariot.  Two  fiery  dappled 
greys,  of  the  one  colour,  shape,  and  goodness,  having 
the  one  speed,  keeping  the  one  pace  ;  their  ears  pricked, 
their  heads  high,  their  nostrils  broad,  foreheads  broad, 
manes  and  tails  curled,  thin-sided,  wide-chested,  gallop- 
ing together.  The  chariot  is  made  of  fine  wood  with 
wicker-work  newly  polished,  the  yoke  curved,  with  silver 
ornaments  on  it ;  it  has  two  black  wheels,  soft  looped 
yellow  reins.  I  see  in  the  chariot  a  big  stout  man,  with 
reddish  yellow  hair,  with  long  forked  beard.  He  has  a 
soft  purple  coat  about  him,  and  it  striped  with  bright 
gold.  His  bronze  shield  is  edged  with  gold  ;  there  is  a 
five-pronged  javelin  at  his  wrist,  a  cover  of  strange  birds' 
feathers  over  his  head." 


CONALLCEARNACH  65 

"  I  know  well  who  that  man  is,"  said  Maeve,  and  it 
is  what  she  said  :  "  A  companion  of  kings,  an  old  be- 
stower  of  victories,  a  storm  of  war,  a  flame  of  judgment, 
a  long  knife  of  victory  that  will  cut  us  to  pieces,  mighty 
Laegaire  of  the  Red  Hand.  His  sword  cuts  through 
men  as  a  knife  cuts  through  a  leek ;  his  stroke  is  the 
back  stroke  of  the  wave  to  the  land.  And  I  swear  by 
the  gods  my  people  swear  by,"  she  said,  "  if  it  is  in 
anger  and  for  fighting  Laegaire  Buadach  is  coming  at 
us,  that  as  leeks  are  cut  close  to  the  ground  with  a 
sharp  knife,  the  same  way  we  will  be  cut  down,  as 
many  of  us  as  are  in  Cruachan,  unless  v/e  smooth  down 
his  anger  by  giving  in  to  everything  he  asks." 

"  Good  mother,"  said  Findabair,  "  I  see  another 
chariot  as  good  as  the  first  coming  over  the  plain." 
"  Tell  me  what  is  its  appearance,"  said  Maeve. 

"  I  see,"  she  said,  "  yoked  to  the  chariot,  on  the  one 
side  a  red  horse,  taking  strong,  high  strides  across  fords 
and  splashes,  over  banks  and  gaps,  over  plains  and 
hollows,  with  the  quickness  of  birds  that  the  quick 
eye  loses  in  following.  On  the  other  side  a  bay  horse 
of  great  strength  ;  it  is  at  full  speed  he  races  over  the 
plain,  between  stones  and  hard  places ;  he  finds  no 
hindrance  in  the  land  of  oaks,  hurrying  on  his  way. 
A  chariot  of  fine  wood  with  wicker-work,  on  two  wheels 
of  bright  bronze ;  its  pole  bright  with  silver,  its  frame 
very  high  and  creaking,  having  a  curved,  firm  yoke, 
with  looped  yellow  reins. 

"  In  the  chariot  a  fair  man,  with  wavy,  hanging  hair ; 
his  face  white  and  red,  his  vest  clean  and  white,  his 
cloak  blue  and  crimson,  his  shield  brown  with  yellow 
bosses,  its  edge  worked  with  bronze.  In  his  hand  a 
bright  spear ;  a  cover  of  the  feathers  of  strange  birds 
over  the  wicker  frame  of  his  chariot." 

"  I  know  who  that  man  is,"  said  Maeve,  and  she  said 
then :  "  The   growling  of  a  lion  ;  a  flame  that  can  cut 


66      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

like  a  sharpened  stone ;  he  heaps  head  on  head,  battle  on 
battle.  As  a  trout  is  cut  upon  red  sandstone,  so  would 
the  son  of  Finchoem  cut  us  if  he  came  on  us  in  anger. 

"  For,  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  she  said,  "  as  a 
speckled  fish  is  beaten  upon  a  shining  red  stone  with 
iron  rods,  so  would  we  be  broken  by  Conall  Cearnach, 
if  he  came  against  us." 

"  I  see  another  chariot  coming  over  the  plain,"  said 
Findabair.  "  Tell  me  what  its  appearance  is,"  said 
Maeve.  "  I  see  two  horses  of  the  one  size  and  beauty, 
the  one  fierceness  and  speed,  with  ears  pricked,  heads 
high,  spirited  and  powerful,  with  fine  nostrils,  wide  fore- 
heads, mane  and  tail  curled,  leaping  together.  The  one 
grey,  handsome,  with  broad  thighs,  eager,  leaping, 
thundering,  and  trampling.  As  he  goes,  his  fierce 
hoofs  throw  up  sods  of  earth  like  a  flock  of  swift  birds 
after  him.  As  he  gallops  on  his  way,  he  breathes  out 
a  blast  of  hot  breath,  a  fire  comes  from  his  curbed  jaws. 
The  other,  dark,  small-headed,  well-shaped,  broad- 
hoofed,  thin-sided,  high-couraged,  broad-backed,  sure- 
footed, spirited ;  he  takes  long  strides  in  the  race ; 
he  leaps  over  streams,  he  throws  off  heaviness,  he 
crosses  the  plains  of  the  middle  valley.  They  come 
together  with  fast,  joyful  steps,  moving  over  the  plain 
like  a  swift  mountain  mist,  or  like  the  speed  of  a  hill 
hind,  or  like  a  hare  on  level  ground,  or  like  the  rushing 
of  a  loud  wind  in  winter. 

''The  chariot  is  of  fine  wood  with  wicker-work, 
having  two  iron  wheels,  a  bright  silver  pole  with 
bronze  ornaments,  a  frame  very  high  and  creaking 
strengthened  with  iron,  a  curved  yoke  overlaid  with 
gold,  two  soft  looped  yellow  reins. 

"  I  see  in  the  chariot  a  dark,  sad  man,  comeliest  of 
the  men  of  Ireland.  A  pleated  crimson  tunic  about 
him,  fastened  at  the  breast  with  a  brooch  of  inlaid  gold  ; 
a  long-sleeved  linen  cloak  on  him  with  a  white  hood 


CUCHULAIN   AND   LAEG  67 

embroidered  with  flame-red  gold.  His  eyebrows  as 
black  as  the  blackness  of  a  spit,  seven  lights  in  his 
eyes,  seven  colours  about  his  head,  love  and  fire  in 
his  look.  Across  his  knees  there  lies  a  gold-hilted 
sword,  there  is  a  blood-red  spear  ready  to  his  hand,  a 
sharp- tempered  blade  with  a  shaft  of  wood.  Over  his 
shoulders  a  crimson  shield  with  a  rim  of  silver,  overlaid 
with  shapes  of  beasts  in  gold. 

"  There  is  before  him  in  the  chariot  a  driver,  a  very 
thin,  tall,  freckled  man ;  very  bright  red  hair,  kept 
back  from  his  face  with  a  golden  thread,  a  cup  of  gold 
at  each  side  of  his  head.  A  short  cloak  about  him  with 
sleeves  opening  at  the  two  elbows ;  in  his  hand  a  goad 
of  red  gold  to  guide  his  horses." 

"  That  is  truly  a  drop  before  a  downpour,"  said  Maeve. 
"  I  know  well  who  that  man  is."  And  it  is  what  she 
said  :  "  Like  the  sound  of  an  angry  sea,  like  a  great 
moving  wave,  with  the  madness  of  a  wild  beast  that  is 
vexed,  he  leaps  through  his  enemies  in  the  crash  of 
battle,  they  hear  their  death  in  his  shout.  He  heaps 
deed  upon  deed,  head  upon  head  ;  his  is  a  name  to  be 
put  in  songs.  As  fresh  malt  is  ground  in  the  mill,  so 
shall  we  be  ground  by  Cuchulain. 

"  For  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  she  said, 
"  that  as  a  mill  of  ten  spokes  grinds  very  hard  malt,  so 
he,  with  only  himself,  would  grind  us  to  dust  and  to 
gravel,  if  we  had  the  whole  province  with  us,  unless  his 
anger  and  his  heat  go  down. 

"And  what  way  are  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ulster 
coming  ?  "  she  said.  And  Findabair  answered  her,  and 
it  is  what  she  said  :  "  Hand  to  hand,  arm  to  arm,  side 
to  side,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  wheel  to  wheel,  axle  to 
axle,  that  is  the  way  they  are  coming.  Their  horses  are 
coming  on  us  like  thunder  on  the  roof,  like  heavy  waves 
stirred  by  the  storm  ;  the  trampling  of  their  feet  makes 
the  earth  sh^ke  under  them," 


68       CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

And  Maeve  said,  "  Let  our  women  be  ready  before 
them  with  vats  of  cold  water ;  let  the  beds  be  made 
ready,  bring  the  best  of  food,  the  best  of  ale.  Open  the 
courtyard,  have  a  welcome  before  them,  and  surely  they 
will  not  harm  us." 

Then  Maeve  went  out  by  the  high  door  of  the  dun 
into  the  courtyard,  and  three  times  fifty  young  girls 
attending  her,  with  three  vats  of  cold  water  to  cool  the 
heat  of  the  three  heroes  in  front  of  the  rest.  And  she 
gave  them  their  choice,  would  each  man  have  a  house 
for  himself,  or  would  they  have  one  house  for  the  three  ? 
"  A  house  for  each  to  himself,"  said  Cuchulain.  And 
when  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ulster  came,  Ailell  and 
Maeve  with  their  whole  household  went  out  and  bade 
them  welcome.  "We  are  well  pleased  with  the  wel- 
come," said  Sencha  for  them. 

After  that,  they  all  came  into  the  fort  and  into  the 
palace.  They  went  round  from  one  door  to  the  other, 
and  there  was  room  for  them  all,  and  the  musicians  were 
playing  music  while  everything  was  being  made  ready. 
And  Conchubar,  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  were  in 
Ailell's  division,  with  nine  others  along  with  them,  and 
there  was  a  great  feast  made  ready  then,  and  they 
stopped  there  the  length  of  three  days  and  three  nights. 

At  the  end  of  that  time  Ailell  asked  Conchubar  what 
was  the  business  that  had  brought  them  there.  And 
Sencha  told  him  the  whole  story,  about  the  quarrel  of 
the  women  as  to  who  should  walk  first,  and  the  quarrel 
of  their  husbands  for  the  Champion's  Portion.  "  And 
they  were  not  satisfied  to  be  judged  by  any  one  but 
yourself,"  he  said.  Ailell  did  not  seem  to  be  well  pleased 
at  that.  "  Indeed,  it  was  no  friend  of  mine  that  left  this 
judgment  on  me,"  he  said.  "There  is  no  better  judge 
than  yourself,"  said  Sencha.  "Well,"  said  Ailell,  "you 
must  give  me  time  to  think  upon  it."  "  Do  not  make 
too  much   delay,"  said  Sencha,  "  for  we   cannot   spare 


THETHREECATS  69 

our  heroes  long  from  us."  "  Three  days  and  three 
nights  will  be  enough  for  me,"  said  Ailell.  "  That  much 
will  not  break  friendship,"  said  Sencha. 

With  that  the  men  of  Ulster  went  home  to  Emain, 
leaving  Laegaire  and  Conall  and  Cuchulain  to  be 
judged  by  Ailell,  and  they  left  their  blessing  with 
Ailell  and  with  Maeve,  and  their  curse  with  Bricriu, 
because  it  was  he  had  first  started  the  quarrel. 

That  night  the  three  heroes  were  given  as  good  a 
feast  as  before,  but  they  were  put  to  eat  it  in  a  room 
by  themselves.  When  night  came  on,  three  enchanted 
monsters,  with  the  shape  of  cats,  were  let  out  from  the 
cave  that  was  in  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe  at  Cruachan,  to 
attack  them.  When  Conall  and  Laegaire  saw  them, 
they  got  up  into  the  rafters,  leaving  their  food  after 
them,  and  there  they  stayed  till  morning.  Cuchulain 
did  not  leave  his  place,  but  when  one  of  the  monsters 
came  to  attack  him,  he  gave  a  blow  of  his  sword  at  its 
head  ;  but  the  sword  slipped  off  as  if  from  a  stone. 
Then  the  monster  stayed  quiet,  and  Cuchulain  sat  there 
through  the  night  watching  it.  With  the  break  of  day 
the  cats  were  gone,  and  Ailell  came  in  and  saw  what 
way  the  three  heroes  were.  "  Are  you  not  satisfied  to 
give  the  Championship  to  Cuchulain,  after  this  ?  "  he  said. 
"  We  are  not,"  said  Conall  and  Laegaire  ;  "  it  is  not 
against  beasts  we  are  used  to  fight,  but  against  men." 

Then  Maeve  said  to  them,  "  Go  and  spend  the  night 
with  my  foster-father,  Ercol,  and  his  wife  Garmna."  So 
they  went,  but  first  they  were  given  their  choice  of  food 
for  their  horses.  Conall  and  Laegaire  chose  oats  two 
years  old  for  theirs,  but  Cuchulain  chose  barley  grain 
for  his.  Then  they  set  out,  racing  all  the  way,  and 
Cuchulain  winning  the  race. 

Ercol  and  Garmna  bade  them  welcome,  and  they 
knew  it  was  to  try  them  they  had  been  sent  there,  so 


JO      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

they  sent  them  out  that  night,  one  after  the  other,  to 
fight  with  the  witches  of  the  valley. 

Laegaire  went  first,  but  he  could  not  stand  against 
them,  and  he  came  back,  and  left  his  arms  and  his 
clothes  with  them. 

Then  Conall  went,  and  he  was  driven  back,  and  left 
his  spear  with  them,  but  he  brought  his  sword  that  was 
his  best  weapon  away  with  him. 

Then  Cuchulain  went  down  into  the  valley  and  the 
witches  screamed  at  him  and  attacked  him,  and  he  and 
they  fought  together  till  his  spear  was  in  splinters,  his 
shield  broken  and  his  ^clothes  torn  off  him.  The  witches 
were  beating  him  and  getting  the  better  of  him,  but 
Laeg  saw  it,  and  he  called  out.  "  O  Cuchulain,"  he  said^ 
"  you  poor  coward,  you  squinting  clown  !  Your  courage 
is  gone  from  you,  witches  to  be  beating  you  !  "  Then 
great  anger  came  on  Cuchulain,  and  he  turned  on  the 
witches  and  cut  and  gashed  them  till  the  valley  was 
filled  with  their  blood,  and  he  brought  away  their  cloaks 
of  battle  with  him,  and  went  back  to  the  house  where 
his  comrades  were.  And  Garmna  and  her  daughter 
Buan  made  much  of  him  and  bade  him  welcome. 

They  slept  there  that  night,  and  the  next  day  Ercol 
challenged  them  to  come  one  by  one,  each  man  with  his 
horse,  to  fight  against  himself  and  his  horse.  Laegaire 
was  the  first  to  go  against  him,  and  his  horse  was  killed 
by  Ercol's  horse,  and  he  himself  was  overcome  by  Ercol, 
so  that  he  took  to  flight,  and  did  not  stop  till  he  got 
back  to  Cruachan,  and  he  brought  the  story  there  that 
both  his  companions  had  been  killed  by  Ercol.  Conall 
was  the  next  to  run  away,  after  his  horse  being 
killed  by  Ercol's  horse ;  and  his  servant  Rathand  was 
drowned  in  the  river  as  he  ran,  and  it  takes  its  name 
after  him,  Snam  Rathand,  from  that  day. 

But  the  Grey  of  Macha  killed  Ercol's  horse,  and 
Cuchulain   put   down    Ercol   and   tied  him   behind  his 


MAEVE'S   TREACHERY  71 

chariot  and  set  out  for  Cruachan.  And  Buan,  Garmna's 
daughter,  ran  out  after  the  chariot  for  love  of  Cuchulain 
to  follow  him.  And  she  knew  the  track  of  his  chariot, 
for  it  was  no  roundabout  track  it  used  to  take,  but  to 
be  breaking  through  gaps  or  going  over  them  ;  and  in 
following  it  at  last  she  gave  a  great  leap  and  fell,  and 
her  forehead  struck  against  a  rock,  and  she  died  ;  and 
it  is  from  this  the  place  was  given  the  name  of  Buan's 
Grave. 

And  when  Conall  and  Cuchulain  got  back  to 
Cruachan,  they  found  the  people  of  the  dun  keening 
them,  for  by  the  report  Laegaire  brought,  they  were  sure 
they  had  been  killed. 

Then  Ailell  went  to  his  inner  room,  and  leaned  his 
back  against  the  wall,  for  he  was  not  quiet  in  his  mind, 
and  he  knew  there  was  danger  in  whatever  judgment 
he  might  give  ;  and  he  had  not  eaten  or  slept  for  three 
days  and  three  nights.  Then  Maeve  said  to  him,  "  It  is 
a  coward  you  are,  and  if  you  do  not  settle  this  matter  I 
will  settle  it  myself"  "  It  is  hard  for  me  to  give  judg- 
ment," said  Ailell,  "  it  is  a  misfortune  for  any  one  to  have 
to  do  it."  "  It  is  easy  enough,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  Laegaire 
and  Conall  Cearnach  are  as  different  as  bronze  and 
silver,  and  Conall  Cearnach  and  Cuchulain  are  as 
different  as  silver  and  red  gold." 

After  a  while,  when  Maeve  had  searched  her  mind, 
Laegaire  Buadach  was  called  to  her.  "  Welcome,  Laegaire 
Buadach,"  she  said, "  it  is  right  for  you  to  have  the  Cham- 
pion's Portion.  We  give  you  the  headship  of  the  heroes 
of  Ireland  from  this  out,  and  the  Champion's  Portion, 
and  along  with  that  this  cup  of  bronze,  having  a  bird 
in  raised  silver  on  the  bottom.  Take  it  with  you  as  a 
token  of  the  judgment,  but  let  no  one  see  it  till  you 
come  to  Conchubar  and  his  Red  Branch  at  the  end  of 
the  day.  When  the  Champion's  Portion  is  set  out,  then 
bring  out  your  cup  in  the  presence  of  all  the  great  men 


72       CHAMPIONSHIP    OF   ULSTER 

of  Ulster,  and  not  one  of  them  will  dispute  it  with  you 
any  more,  for  they  will  know  by  this  token  that  the 
Championship  has  been  given  to  you."  With  that,  the 
cup  was  given  to  him  with  its  full  of  rich  wine,  and  he 
drank  it  off  at  a  draught.  "  Now  you  have  the  Champion- 
ship," said  Maeve  ;  "  and  I  wish  you  may  enjoy  it  a 
hundred  years  at  the  head  of  all  Ulster." 

So  Laegaire  left  her,  and  Conall  Cearnach  was  called 
up  to  the  queen.  "  Welcome,  Conall  Cearnach,"  she  said  ; 
"  it  is  right  for  us  to  give  you  the  Champion's  Portion, 
and  a  silver  cup  along  with  it,  having  a  bird  on  the 
bottom  in  raised  gold."  And  she  said  the  same  to  him 
as  she  had  said  to  Laegaire  before. 

Then  Conall  went  away,  and  a  messenger  was  sent  to 
bring  Cuchulain.  "  Come  up  to  speak  with  the  king  and 
queen,"  said  the  messenger. 

Cuchulain  was  playing  chess  at  the  time  with  Laeg, 
his  chariot-driver.  "  I  am  not  a  fool  to  be  mocked  at," 
he  said,  and  he  hurled  one  of  the  chessmen  at  the 
messenger,  and  hit  him  between  the  eyes,  so  that  it  is 
hardly  he  could  get  back  to  Ailell  and  Maeve. 

"  By  my  word,"  said  Maeve,  "  this  Cuchulain  is  hard 
to  deal  with."  And  then  she  came  down  herself  to 
Cuchulain,  and  put  her  two  arms  round  his  neck.  "  Give 
your  flattery  to  some  other  one,"  said  Cuchulain. 

But  Maeve  said,  "Great  son  of  Ulster,  flame  of  the 
heroes  of  Ireland,  there  is  no  flattery  in  our  mind  when 
it  is  you  we  have  to  do  with.  P'or  if  all  the  heroes  of 
Ireland  should  come  here,  it  is  to  you  we  would  give 
the  Champion's  Portion,  for  as  to  bravery  and  a  great 
name,  and  as  to  youth  and  great  deeds,  it  is  well-known 
that  you  are  far  beyond  all  the  men  of  Ireland." 

Cuchulain  rose  up  then,  and  went  with  Maeve  into 
the  palace,  and  Ailell  gave  him  a  great  welcome.  And 
he  was  given  a  gold  cup  full  of  wine,  and  it  having  on 
the  bottom  of  it  a  bird  in  precious  stones.     "  Now,  you 


THETHREECUPS  73 

have  the  Championship,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  it  is  my  wish 
you  may  enjoy  it  a  hundred  years  at  the  head  of  all  the 
heroes  of  Ulster."  "And  besides  that,"  Ailell  and 
Maeve  said,  "  it  is  our  judgment,  that  as  much  as  you 
are  beyond  the  heroes  of  Ulster,  so  far  is  your  wife 
beyond  their  wives.  And  we  think  it  right  that  she 
should  walk  before  all  the  women  of  Ulster  when  they 
go  together  into  the  drinking-hall." 

Then  Cuchulain  drank  at  one  draught  the  full  of  the 
cup,  and  bade  farewell  to  the  king  and  the  queen  and 
the  whole  household.  And  he  went  till  he  came  to 
Emain  Macha  at  the  end  of  the  day.  And  there  was 
no  one  among  the  men  of  Ulster  would  venture  to  ask 
news  of  any  of  the  three  until  the  time  came  to  eat  and 
to  drink  in  the  great  hall. 

When  the  feast  was  laid  out,  they  all  stopped  thqir 
arguing  and  their  talking,  and  gave  themselves  up  to 
eating  and  to  enjoyment.  It  was  Sualtim,  son  of  Roig, 
father  of  Cuchulain,  was  attending  the  feast  that  night, 
and  Conchubar's  great  vat  had  been  filled  for  it.  The 
distributers  began  serving  out  the  meat,  but  at  first  they 
kept  back  the  Champion's  Portion.  Then  Dubthach 
of  the  Chafer  Tongue  said,  "  Why  is  not  the  Champion's 
Portion  given  to  one  of  these  three  heroes  that  are  come 
back  from  Cruachan  ?  They  must  surely  have  brought 
some  token  with  them,  that  we  may  know  which  one 
is  to  have  it." 

Upon  that,  Laegaire  Buadach  rose  up  and  held  out  the 
bronze  cup  with  the  silver  bird  on  it.  "  The  Champion's 
Portion  is  mine,"  he  said,  "and  no  one  can  dispute  it 
with  me." 

"  That  is  not  so,"  said  Conall  Cearnach  ;  "  here  is  my 
token.  Yours  is  a  bronze  cup  but  mine  is  a  silver  cup. 
You  see  by  the  difference  in  them  it  is  to  me  the 
Champion's  Portion  belongs." 

"  It  belongs  to  neither  of  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  and 


74      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

he  rose  up  and  he  said,  "  It  was  only  to  deceive  you 
and  to  keep  up  the  quarrel  between  us,  the  king  and 
queen  we  went  to  gave  you  those.  It  is  to  me  the 
Champion's  Portion  belongs,  for  you  see  my  token,  that 
it  is  far  above  the  others." 

With  that  he  lifted  high  up  the  cup  of  red  gold,  with 
the  bird  on  it  of  precious  stones,  and  all  the  men  in  the 
feasting-hall  saw  it.  "  It  is  I  myself  that  will  get  the 
Championship,"  he  said,  "  if  I  get  fair  play."  "  It  is  yours 
indeed,"  said  Conchubar,  and  Fergus,  and  all  the  chief 
men.  "  It  is  yours  by  the  judgment  of  Ailell  and 
Maeve."  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said 
Laegaire,  "  that  the  cup  you  have  with  you  was  not 
given  to  you,  but  bought.  You  gave  riches  and 
treasures  for  it  to  Ailell  and  Maeve,  the  way  the 
Championship  would  not  go  to  any  other  person  ;  but 
by  my  hand  of  valour,"  he  said,  "that  judgment  shall 
not  stand." 

Then,  with  their  swords  drawn,  they  sprang  at  one 
another,  but  Conchubar  went  between  them,  and  then 
they  let  down  their  hands  and  sheathed  their  swords. 
"It  is  best,"  said  Sencha,  "for  you  to  go  to  Curoi  for 
judgment."     "  We  agree  to  that,"  said  they. 

So  on  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  the  three — Cuchu- 
lain,  Conall,  and  Laegaire — set  out  for  Curoi's  dun.  At 
the  gate  of  the  dun  they  unyoked  their  chariots,  and 
they  went  into  the  courtyard,  and  Blanad,  daughter  of 
Mind,  Curoi's  wife,  gave  them  a  good  welcome.  Curoi 
was  not  at  home  that  night,  but  knowing,  by  his  en- 
chantments, they  would  come,  he  had  left  instructions 
with  his  wife  how  to  entertain  them  ;  and  she  did  ac- 
cording to  his  wish,  giving  them  water  for  washing,  and 
drinks  for  refreshing,  and  beds  of  the  best,  so  that  they 
were  well  satisfied. 

When  bedtime  came,  Blanad  told  them  they  were 
each  to  take  a  night  to  watch  the  fort,  till  Curoi  would 


THE   GREAT   SHADOW  75 

come  back.  "  And  it  is  what  he  said,  that  you  should 
take  your  turn  according  to  age." 

Now  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  Curoi  was,  he 
made  a  spell  every  night  over  the  dun,  so  that  it  went 
round  like  a  mill,  and  no  entrance  could  be  found  in 
it  after  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

The  first  night  Laegaire  Buadach  took  the  watch,  for 
he  was  the  oldest  of  the  three.  As  he  was  keeping 
watch,  towards  the  end  of  the  night  he  saw  a  great 
shadow  coming  towards  him  from  the  sea  westward. 
Very  huge  and  ugly  and  terrible  he  thought  it,  and  it 
took  the  shape  of  a  giant  and  reached  up  to  the  sky, 
and  the  shining  of  the  sea  could  be  seen  between  its 
legs.  It  is  how  it  came,  its  hands  full  of  what  had  the 
appearance  of  stripped  oaks,  and  each  of  them  enough 
for  a  load  for  six  horses  ;  and  he  hurled  one  of  them  at 
Laegaire,  but  it  went  past  him.  He  did  this  two  or 
three  times,  but  the  beam  did  not  reach  either  the  skin 
or  the  shield  of  Laegaire.  Then  Laegaire  hurled  a 
spear  at  him,  and  it  did  not  hit  him. 

He  stretched  out  his  hand  then  to  Laegaire,  and  the 
length  of  it  reached  across  the  three  ridges  that  were 
between  them  while  they  were  throwing  at  one  another, 
and  he  gripped  hold  of  him.  Big  and  strong  as  Laegaire 
was,  he  fitted  like  a  child  of  a  year  old  into  his  hand. 
The  giant  turned  him  round  between  his  two  palms  as 
a  chessman  is  turned  in  a  groove,  and  then  he  threw 
him  half  dead  over  the  wall  of  the  fort,  into  a  heap  of 
mud.  There  was  no  opening  there,  and  the  people 
inside  the  dun  thought  he  had  leaped  over  from  outside, 
as  a  challenge  to  the  others  to  do  the  same. 

There  they  stayed  until  the  end  of  the  day,  and  at  the 
fall  of  night  Conall  went  out  to  take  the  watch,  as  he 
was  older  than  Cuchulain.  Everything  happened  as  it 
did  to  Laegaire  the  first  night.  And  when  the  third 
night  came,  Cuchulain  went  into  the  seat  of  the  watch. 


76      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

When  midnight  was  come  he  heard  a  noise,  and  by 
the  light  of  the  cold  moon  he  saw  nine  grey  shapes  coming 
towards  him  over  the  marsh.  "  Stop,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"who  is  there?  If  they  are  friends,  let  them  not  stir; 
if  they  are  enemies,  let  them  come  on."  Then  they 
raised  a  great  shout  at  him,  and  Cuchulain  rushed  at 
them  and  attacked  them,  so  that  the  nine  fell  dead  to 
the  ground,  and  he  cut  their  heads  off  and  made  a  heap 
of  them,  and  sat  down  again  to  keep  the  watch.  An- 
other nine  and  then  another  shouted  at  him,  but 
he  made  an  end  of  the  three  nines,  and  made  one  heap 
of  their  heads  and  their  arms. 

While  he  was  watching  on  through  the  night,  tired 
and  down-hearted,  he  heard  a  sound  rising  from  the  lake, 
like  the  sound  of  a  very  heavy  sea.  However  tired  he 
was,  his  mind  would  not  let  him  keep  quiet,  without 
going  to  see  what  was  the  cause  of  that  great  noise  he 
heard.  Then  he  saw  a  great  worm  coming  up  from  the 
lake,  and  it  raised  itself  into  the  air  over  him  and  made 
for  the  dun,  and  opened  its  mouth,  and  it  seemed  to  him 
that  one  of  the  houses  would  fit  into  its  gullet. 

Then  Cuchulain  with  one  leap  reached  its  head  and 
put  his  arm  round  its  neck,  and  stretched  his  hand  across 
its  gullet,  and  tore  the  monster's  heart  out  and  threw  it 
to  the  ground.  Then  the  beast  fell  down,  and  Cuchulain 
hacked  it  with  his  sword,  and  made  little  bits  of  it,  and 
brought  the  head  along  with  him  to  the  heap  of  skulls. 

He  was  sitting  there,  towards  the  break  of  day,  worn 
out  and  discouraged,  and  he  saw  the  great  shadow 
shaped  like  a  giant  coming  to  him  westward  from  the 
sea.  "  This  is  a  bad  night,"  he  said.  "It  will  be  worse  for 
you  yet,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  he  threw  one  of  the 
beams  at  Cuchulain,  but  it  passed  by  him,  and  he  did 
that  two  or  three  times,  but  it  did  not  reach  either  his 
shield  or  his  skin.  Then  he  stretched  out  his  hand  to 
grip   Cuchulain   as   he   did   the   others,  but   Cuchulain 


CUCHULAIN'S   LEAP  yj 

leaped  his  salmon  leap  at  the  head  of  the  monster,  with 
his  drawn  sword,  and  broug^ht  him  down.  ''  Life  for 
life,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  and  with  that  he  vanished  and 
was  no  more  seen. 

Then  Cuchulain  wondered  to  himself  how  his  fellows 
had  made  their  leap  over  the  fort,  for  the  wall  was  big 
and  broad  and  high,  and  twice  he  tried  it  and  failed. 
Then  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  went  a  good  way  back 
and  made  a  run,  and  with  the  dint  of  the  anger  that  was 
on  him,  and  the  courage  of  his  heart  and  of  his  mind,  he 
hardly  took  the  dew  off  the  tips  of  the  grass  in  the  run, 
and  he  made  one  leap  over  the  wall,  and  lit  in  the 
middle,  at  the  door  of  the  house.  Then  he  went  in 
through  the  door  and  gave  a  sigh.  And  Blanad,  wife  of 
Curoi,  said,  "  That  is  not  the  sigh  of  a  beaten  man,  but  a 
conqueror's  sigh  of  triumph."  For  the  daughter  of  the 
King  of  the  Isle  of  the  Men  of  Falga  knew  well  all 
Cuchulain  had  gone  through  that  night. 

"  The  Champion's  Portion  must  go  now  to  Cuchulain," 
she  said  to  the  others ;  "  for  you  see  by  this  that  you 
are  not  equal  to  him."  "  We  do  not  agree  to  that,"  said 
they ;  "  for  we  know  it  was  one  of  his  friends  among 
the  Sidhe  came  to  put  us  down  and  to  put  us  out  of  the 
Championship.  We  will  not  give  up  for  that,"  they 
said. 

Then  she  gave  them  a  message  she  had  from  Curoi, 
that  the  three  champions  were  to  go  back  to  Emain, 
until  he  would  bring  his  judgment  there  himself  So 
they  bade  her  farewell,  and  went  back  to  the  Red 
Branch. 

It  was  a  good  while  after  this,  as  the  men  of  Ulster 
were  in  Emain*  tired  after  the  gathering  and  the  games, 
Conchubar  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  with  the  chief  men, 
went  from  the  field  of  sports  outside,  and  sat  down  in 
the  house  of  the  Red  Branch  ;  but  Cuchulain  was  not 


7S      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

there  that  night,  or  Conall  Cearnach,  but  all  the  rest  of 
the  chief  heroes  were  in  it. 

As  they  were  sitting  there  towards  evening,  and  the 
day  wearing  to  its  close,  they  saw  a  big  awkward 
fellow,  very  ugly,  coming  to  them  into  the  hall.  It 
seemed  to  them  as  if  none  of  the  men  of  Ulster  could 
reach  to  half  his  height.  He  was  frightful  to  look  at ; 
next  his  skin  he  had  an  old  cow's  hide,  and  a  grey  cloak 
around  him,  and  over  him  he  had  a  great  spreading 
branch  the  size  of  a  winter  shed  under  which  thirty 
cattle  could  find  shelter.  Ravenous  yellow  eyes  he  had, 
and  in  his  right  hand  an  axe  weighing  fifty  cauldrons  of 
melted  metal,  its  sharpness  such  that  it  would  cut 
through  hairs,  if  the  wind  would  blow  them  against  its 
edge. 

He  went  over  and  leaned  against  the  branched  beam 
that  was  beside  the  fire. 

"  Who  are  you  at  all  ?  "  said  Dubthach  of  the  Chafer 
Tongue.  "  Is  there  no  other  place  for  you  in  the  hall 
that  you  come  up  here  ?  Is  it  to  be  candlestick  to  the 
house  you  want,  or  is  it  to  set  the  house  on  fire  you 
want  ?  " 

"  Uath,  the  Stranger,  is  my  name,"  said  he  ;  "  and 
neither  of  those  things  is  the  thing  I  want.  The  thing 
I  want  is  the  thing  I  cannot  find,  and  I  after  going 
through  the  world  of  Ireland  and  the  whole  world  look- 
ing for  it,  and  that  is  a  man  that  will  keep  his  word  and 
will  hold  to  his  agreement  with  me." 

"  What  agreement  is  that  ?  "  said  Fergus.  "  Here  is 
this  axe,"  he  said,  "  and  the  man  into  whose  hands  it  is 
put  is  to  cut  off  my  head  to-day,  I  to  cut  his  head  off 
to-morrow.  And  as  you  men  of  Ulster  have  a  name 
beyond  the  men  of  all  other  countries  for  strength  and 
skill,  for  courage,  for  greatness,  for  highmindedness, 
for  behaviour,  for  truth  and  generosity,  for  worthiness, 
let  you  find  one  among  you  that  will  hold  to  bis  word 


UATH,   THE   STRANGER  79 

and  keep  to  his  bargain.  Conchubar  I  put  aside 
because  of  his  kingship,  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  for 
the  same  reason.  But  outside  these  two,  come,  which- 
ever of  you  will  venture,  he  to  cut  off  my  head  to-night, 
I  to  cut  off  his  head  to-morrow  night." 

"  It  is  not  right  for  dishonour  to  be  put  on  a  whole 
province,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  the  want  of  one  man  that 
will  keep  his  word."  "  Sure  there  is  no  champion  here 
after  these  two  are  left  out,"  said  Dubthach.  "  By  my 
word,  there  will  be  one  this  moment,"  said  Laegaire, 
and  he  leaped  out  on  the  floor  of  the  hall.  "  Stoop 
down,  clown,  that  I  may  cut  off  your  head  to-night, 
you  to  cut  off  mine  to-morrow  night."  "  By  the  oath 
of  my  people,"  said  Dubthach,  "  it  is  no  good  prospect 
you  have  if  the  man  killed  to-night  comes  to  kill  you 
to-morrow." 

Then  Uath  put  spells  on  the  edge  of  the  axe  and 
laid  his  neck  down  on  a  block,  and  Laegaire  struck  a 
blow  across  it  with  the  axe,  till  it  went  into  the  block 
underneath,  and  the  head  fell  on  the  floor  and  the 
house  was  filled  with  the  blood.  But  presently  Uath 
rose  up  and  gathered  his  head  and  his  axe  to  his 
breast  and  went  out  from  the  hall,  his  neck  streaming 
with  blood,  so  that  there  was  terror  on  all  the  people 
in  the  house. 

"  I  swear,"  said  Dubthach,  "  if  this  stranger,  being 
killed,  comes  back  to-morrow  night,  he  will  not  leave  a 
man  alive  in  Ulster." 

Back  he  came  the  next  night  to  have  his  agreement 
kept.  But  Laegaire's  heart  failed  him,  and  he  was 
nowhere  to  be  found.  But  Conall  Cearnach  was  in  the 
hall,  and  he  said  he  would  make  a  new  agreement 
with  him.  So  all  happened  the  same  as  the  night 
before,  but  when  Uath  came  the  next  day,  it  was  the 
same  with  Conall  as  with  Laegaire,  his  heart  failed 
hinrj  when  it  came  to  the  keeping  of  his  bargain. 


8o      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

Cuchulain  was  there  that  night  when  Uath  came  in 
and  began  to  reproach  and  to  mock  at  them  all.  "  As 
for  you,  men  of  Ulster,"  he  said,  "  all  your  courage  and 
your  daring  is  gone  from  you  ;  you  covet  a  great  name, 
but  you  are  not  able  to  earn  it.  Where  is  that  poor 
squinting  fellow  that  is  called  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  till 
I  see  if  his  word  is  any  better  than  the  word  of  the 
others  ? "  "I  will  keep  my  word  without  any  agree- 
ment," said  Cuchulain.  "  That  is  likely,  you  miserable 
fly,  it  is  in  great  fear  of  death  you  are." 

On  that,  Cuchulain  made  a  leap  towards  him  and 
gave  him  a  blow  with  the  axe,  and  hurled  his  head  to 
the  top  rafter  of  the  hall,  so  that  the  whole  house 
shook. 

On  the  morrow  the  men  of  Ulster  were  watching 
Cuchulain  to  see  if  he  would  break  his  word  to  the 
stranger,  as  the  others  had  done.  As  Cuchulain  sat 
there  waiting  for  him,  they  saw  that  he  was  very 
down  -  hearted,  and  they  made  sure  his  life  was  at 
its  end,  and  that  they  might  as  well  begin  keening 
him.  And  then  Cuchulain  said  to  Conchubar,  and 
there  was  hanging  of  the  head  on  him,  "  Do  not  go 
from  this  till  my  agreement  is  fulfilled,  for  death  is 
coming  to  me,  but  I  would  sooner  meet  with  death 
than  break  my  word," 

They  were  there  till  the  close  of  day,  and  then 
they  saw  Uath  coming.  "  Where  is  Cuchulain  ? "  he 
said.  "  Here  I  am,"  he  answered.  "It  is  dull  your 
speech  is  to-night,"  saicl  the  stranger ;  "  it  is  in  great 
fear  of  death  you  are.  But  however  great  your  fear, 
you  have  not  failed  me." 

Then  Cuchulain  went  to  him  and  laid  his  head  on 
the  block.  "  Stretch  out  your  head  better,"  said  he. 
"  You  are  keeping  me  in  torment,"  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  put  an  end  to  me  quickly.  For  last  night,"  he  said, 
"  by   my   oath,  I   made  no  delay  with  you."     Then  he 


CUROrS   DECISION  8i 

stretched  out  his  neck,  and  Uath  raised  his  axe  till 
it  reached  the  rafters  of  the  hall,  and  the  creaking  of 
the  old  hide  that  was  about  him,  and  the  crashing  of 
the  axe  through  the  rafters,  was  like  the  loud  noise  of 
a  wood  in  a  stormy  night.  But  when  the  axe  came 
down,  it  was  with  its  blunt  side,  and  it  was  the  floor 
it  struck,  so  that  Cuchulain  was  not  touched  at  all. 
And  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  were  standing  around 
looking  on,  and  they  saw  on  the  moment  that  it 
was  no  strange  clown  was  in  it,  but  Curoi,  son  of 
Daire,  that  had  come  to  try  the  heroes  through  his 
enchantments. 

"  Rise  up,  Cuchulain,"  he  said.  "  Of  all  the  heroes 
of  Ulster,  whatever  may  be  their  daring,  there  is  not  one 
to  compare  with  you  in  courage  and  in  bravery  and  in 
truth.  The  Championship  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland  is 
yours  from  this  out,  and  the  Champion's  Portion  with 
it,  and  to  your  wife  the  first  place  among  all  the 
women  of  Ulster.  And  whoever  tries  to  put  himself 
before  you  after  this,"  he  said,  "  I  swear  by  the  oath 
my  people  swear  by,  his  own  life  will  be  in  danger." 

With  that  he  left  them.  And  this  was  the  end  of 
the  Women's  War  of  Words,  and  of  the  quarrel  among 
the  heroes  for  the  Championship  of  Ulster. 


VI 

THE   HIGH   KING   OF   IRELAND 

'T^HERE  was  a  king  over   Ireland  before  this   time 
^       whose  name  was  Eochaid  Feidlech,  and  it  is  he 
was  grandfather  to  Conaire  the  Great. 

He  was  going  one  time  over  the  fair  green  of  Bri 
Leith,  and  he  saw  at  the  side  of  a  well  a  woman,  with 
a  bright  comb  of  silver  and  gold,  and  she  washing  in  a 
silver  basin,  having  four  golden  birds  on  it,  and  little 
bright  purple  stones  set  in  the  rim  of  the  basin.  A 
beautiful  purple  cloak  she  had,  and  silver  fringes  to  it, 
and  a  gold  brooch  ;  and  she  had  on  her  a  dress  of  green 
silk  with  a  long  hood  embroidered  in  red  gold,  and 
wonderful  clasps  of  gold  and  silver  on  her  breasts  and 
on  her  shoulders.  The  sunlight  was  falling  on  her,  so 
that  the  gold  and  the  green  silk  were  shining  out.  Two 
plaits  of  hair  she  had,  four  locks  in  each  plait,  and  a 
bead  at  the  point  of  every  lock,  and  the  colour  of  her 
hair  was  like  yellow  flags  in  summer,  or  like  red  gold 
after  it  is  rubbed. 

There  she  was,  letting  down  her  hair  to  wash  it,  and 
her  arms  out  through  the  sleeve-holes  of  her  shift.  Her 
soft  hands  were  as  white  as  the  snow  of  a  single  night, 
and  her  eyes  as  blue  as  any  blue  flower,  and  her  lips  as 
red  as  the  berries  of  the  rowan-tree,  and  her  body  as 
white  as  the  foam  of  a  wave.  The  bright  light  of  the 
moon   was   in  her  face,  the   highness  of  pride  in    her 

82 


ETA  IN  83 

eyebrows,  a  dimple  of  delight  in  each  of  her  cheeks, 
the  light  of  wooing  in  her  eyes,  and  when  she  walked 
she  had  a  step  that  was  steady  and  even,  like  the  walk 
of  a  queen. 

Of  all  the  women  of  the  world  she  was  the  best  and 
the  nicest  and  the  most  beautiful  that  had  ever  been 
seen,  and  it  is  what  King  Eochaid  and  his  people 
thought,  that  she  was  from  the  hills  of  the  Sidhe.  It  is 
of  her  it  was  said,  "  All  are  dear  and  all  are  shapely  till 
they  are  put  beside  Etain." 

Then  Eochaid  sent  his  people  to  bring  her  to  him, 
and  when  she  came,  he  said,  "  Who  are  you  yourself, 
and  where  do  you  come  from  ? "  "  It  is  easy  to  say 
that,"  she  said  ;  "  I  am  Etain,  daughter  of  Etar,  king  of 
the  Riders  of  the  Sidhe.  And  I  have  been  in  this  place 
ever  since  I  was  born,  twenty  years  ago,  in  a  hill  of  the 
Sidhe,  and  kings  and  great  men  among  them  have  been 
asking  my  love,  but  they  got  nothing  from  me,  for  since 
the  time  I  could  first  speak  I  have  loved  yourself,  and 
given  you  a  child's  love,  because  of  the  great  talk  I 
heard  of  your  grandeur.  And  when  I  saw  you  now 
I  knew  you  by  all  I  had  heard  of  you  ;  and  so  I  have 
reached  to  you  at  last." 

"  It  is  no  bad  friend  you  have  been  looking  for,"  said 
Eochaid,  "  but  there  will  be  a  welcome  before  you,  and 
I  will  leave  every  other  woman  for  you,  and  it  is  with 
yourself  I  will  live  from  this  out,  so  long  as  you  keep 
good  behaviour." 

Then  he  gave  her  the  bride  price,  and  she  lived  with 
him  till  he  died.  But  one  time  she  was  brought  away 
from  him  by  Midhir,  and  Eochaid  brought  her  back 
by  force,  and  the  Sidhe  had  no  good  will  towards  him 
after  that,  but  brought  a  revenge  on  his  house,  and  on 
his  grandson,  Conaire. 

They  had  one  daughter,  that  was  called  by  the  same 
name  as  her  mother,  Etain,  and  that  was  married  to 


84  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

Cormac,  king  of  Ulster.  And,  like  her  mother,  she  had 
but  the  one  daughter,  and  there  was  vexation  on 
Cormac  when  she  had  no  son,  and  he  bade  two  of  his 
serving-men  to  bring  the  child  away  out  of  his  sight, 
and  to  do  away  with  her.  So  they  brought  her  to  a 
pit,  but  when  they  were  putting  her  in,  she  smiled  a 
laughing  smile  at  them,  and  they  had  not  the  heart  to 
harm  her.  So  they  brought  her  to  a  calf-shed  belong- 
ing to  the  herds  that  minded  the  cattle  of  Eterscel, 
great-grandson  of  lar,  king  of  Teamhair ;  and  they 
cared  her  well  there,  and  there  was  not  a  king's 
daughter  in  Ireland  was  nicer  than  herself.  And  they 
made  a  little  house  of  wicker-work  for  her,  with  no  door, 
but  only  a  window  high  up  in  it. 

King  Eterscel's  people  thought  it  was  provisions  the 
herds  used  to  keep  in  that  house.  But  one  day  a  man 
of  them  got  up  and  looked  in  through  the  window,  and 
what  he  saw  was  the  nicest  and  the  most  beautiful 
young  girl  of  the  whole  world. 

When  King  Eterscel  heard  that,  he  sent  his  people 
to  break  into  the  house  and  to  bring  her  away,  and  ask 
no  leave  of  the  cowherds.  For  he  had  no  child,  and 
it  is  what  his  Druids  had  foretold,  that  it  was  a  woman 
of  unknown  race  would  bear  him  a  son  ;  and  he  was 
sure  this  was  the  woman  that  had  been  foretold  for 
him. 

But  before  the  king's  messengers  reached  the  house 
in  the  morning,  Etain  saw  a  bird  coming  in  at  the 
window.  And  when  it  came  in,  it  left  its  birdskin  on 
the  floor,  and  what  she  saw  was  a  man  before  her.  And 
he  said,  "  The  king  is  sending  messengers  to  bring  you 
to  him,  that  he  may  have  a  son.  But  it  is  to  me  you 
will  bear  a  son,  and  no  bird  must  ever  be  killed  by  him. 
And  his  name  will  be  Conaire,  son  of  Mess  Buachall, 
that  is,  son  of  the  cowherd's  foster-child." 

Then  she  was  brought  away  to  the  king,  and  the  herds 


THEBULLFEAST  85 

that  had  fostered  her  went  with  her,  and  they  all  got  good 
treatment.  And  it  is  what  she  asked,  when  her  son 
Conaire  was  born,  that  he  might  be  brought  up  between 
three  households,  the  household  of  her  own  fosterers, 
and  of  the  two  honey-worded  Maines,  and  her  own. 
And  she  said  that  if  any  of  the  men  of  Ireland  had  a 
mind  to  give  help  in  his  bringing  up,  they  should  give 
it  to  those  three  households. 

So  it  was  like  that  the  boy  was  reared,  and  there  were 
five  other  boys  reared  along  with  him,  Ferger,  Fergel, 
Ferogain,  Ferobain,  and  Lomna  Druth  the  Fool,  of  the 
house  of  Dond  Dessa,  the  champion  of  the  army  from 
Muclesi.  And  they  all  used  the  same  food,  and  their 
clothing  and  their  armour  and  the  colour  of  their  horses 
were  the  same. 

And  after  a  while  King  Eterscel  died,  and  there  was 
a  bull  feast  made  ready  at  Teamhair,  as  the  custom 
was,  to  find  out  by  it  the  best  man  for  the  kingship. 

It  is  this  way  the  bull  feast  was  made.  A  white  bull 
was  killed,  and  one  man  would  eat  his  fill  of  the  meat 
and  of  the  broth,  and  in  his  sleep  after  that  meal,  a 
charm  of  truth  would  be  said  over  him  by  four  Druids. 
And  whoever  he  would  see  in  his  sleep  would  be  king, 
and  he  would  tell  them  his  appearance  ;  and  if  he  told 
what  was  not  true,  his  lips  would  perish.  And  what 
the  dreamer  saw  in  his  sleep  this  time  was  a  young  man, 
and  he  naked,  and  having  a  stone  in  his  sling,  passing 
the  road  to  Teamhair. 

Now  just  at  that  time  Conaire  was  out  playing  games 
near  the  Life  River  with  his  foster-brothers,  and  the 
cowherds  that  had  reared  him  came  and  bid  him  go  up 
to  Teamhair  to  attend  the  bull  feast  that  was  going  on 
there. 

So  he  left  his  foster-brothers  at  their  games,  and 
turned  his  chariot  and  went  on  till  he  came  to  Ath 
Cliath.     And  there  he  saw  great  white  speckled  birds, 


86  HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

the  best  in  size  and  appearance  he  had  ever  seen,  and 
he  followed  after  them  till  his  horses  were  tired,  but  he 
could  not  come  up  with  them,  for  they  always  kept  just 
out  of  his  reach.  Then  he  got  down  from  his  chariot  and 
took  his  sling  and  followed  them  to  the  strand,  and  they 
went  into  the  sea  and  were  swimming  on  the  waves, 
and  he  went  after  them  to  take  hold  of  them.  Then 
they  left  their  birdskins,  and  it  was  men  he  saw 
before  him,  and  they  turning  to  face  him  with  spears 
and  swords. 

But  one  of  them  took  him  under  his  protection  and 
said,  "  I  am  Nemglan,  king  of  your  father's  birds,  and 
there  was  a  command  put  on  you  never  to  make  a  cast 
at  birds,  for  there  is  not  one  here  but  should  be  dear 
to  you."  "  I  never  knew  of  that  command  till  this  day," 
said  Conaire.  Then  Nemglan  said,  "  What  you  have 
to  do  is  to  go  to  Teamhair  to-night,  to  the  bull  feast, 
and  it  is  through  it  you  will  be  made  king,  for  it  is  a 
man  that  will  go  naked,  and  having  a  sling  and  a  stone 
in  his  hand,  along  one  of  the  roads  to  Teamhair,  towards 
the  end  of  the  night,  that  will  be  king. 

"  And  your  bird  reign  will  be  great,"  he  said.  "  But 
there  is  geasa^  that  is  a  bond,  on  you  not  to  do  these 
things  : 

"  Do  not  go  righthandwise  round  Teamhair,  and 
lefthandwise  round  Bregia ;  do  not  hunt  the  evil 
beasts  of  Cerna ;  do  not  go  out  beyond  Teamhair 
every  ninth  night ;  do  not  settle  the  quarrel  of  two 
of  your  own  people  ;  let  no  robbery  be  done  in  your 
reign  ;  do  not  sleep  in  a  house  you  can  see  the  firelight 
shining  from  after  sunset ;  do  not  let  one  woman  or 
one  man  come  into  the  house  where  you  are  after 
sunset ;  do  not  let  three  Reds  go  before  you  to  the 
House  of  Red." 

Then  Conaire  set  out  for  Teamhair,  naked,  and 
having  a    stone    in    his   sling.     And    on   every   one   of 


CONA  I  RE'S   REIGN  87 

the  four  roads  to  Teamhair  there  were  three  kings 
waiting,  and  having  clothing  with  them,  for  the  king 
that  was  foretold.  And  when  the  three  kings  on 
Conaire's  road  saw  him  coming,  they  met  him,  and 
put  royal  clothes  on  him,  and  brought  him  in  a 
chariot  to  Teamhair.  But  the  people  of  Teamhair 
said  when  they  saw  him :  "  Our  bull  feast  and  our 
charm  of  truth  were  not  worth  much,  when  it  is  only 
a  young,  beardless  lad  they  have  brought  us ! " 

"  That  is  no  matter,"  said  Conaire,  "  for  it  is  no  dis- 
grace for  you  to  have  a  young  king,  when  my  father 
and  my  grandfather  held  the  same  place."  "That  is 
true,"  they  all  said  then,  and  they  gave  him  the  king- 
ship, and  he  said,  "  I  will  learn  of  wise  men,  that  I 
myself  may  be  wise." 

Now  there  was  great  plenty  in  Ireland  through  his 
reign  ;  seven  ships  coming  at  the  one  time  to  Inver 
Colptha,  and  corn  and  nuts  up  to  the  knees  in  every 
harvest,  and  the  trees  bending  from  the  weight  of  fruit, 
and  the  Buais  and  the  Boinne  full  of  fish  every  summer, 
and  that  much  law  and  peace  and  good-will  among  the 
people,  that  each  one  thought  the  other's  voice  as  sweet 
as  the  strings  of  harps.  And  the  wolves  themselves  were 
held  by  hostages  not  to  kill  more  than  one  calf  in  every  pen. 
There  was  no  thunder  or  storm  in  his  reign,  and  from 
spring  to  harvest  there  was  not  as  much  wind  as  would 
stir  a  cow's  tail,  and  the  cattle  were  without  keepers 
because  of  the  greatness  of  peace.  And  in  his  reign 
there  were  the  three  crowns  in  Ireland,  the  crown  of 
flowers,  the  crown  of  acorns,  and  the  crown  of 
wheatears. 

But  after  a  while  there  began  to  be  discontent  on  the 
sons  of  Donn  Dessa,  because  they  were  hindered  from 
the  robbery  and  killing  there  used  to  be  in  the  old 
time.  And  to'  vex  the  king,  and  to  see  what  would  he 
do,  they  stole  three  things,  a  pig  and  a  bullock  and  a 


88  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

cow,  from  the  same  man  every  year  for  three  years. 
And  every  year  the  countryman  would  come  to  the 
king  to  make  his  complaint,  and  every  year  the  king 
would  say,  "  It  is  to  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  you 
should  go,  for  it  is  they  took  the  beasts."  But  when- 
ever he  would  go  and  speak  to  them,  they  would  go 
near  to  kill  him,  and  he  would  not  go  back  to  the  king 
for  fear  he  might  be  vexed. 

So  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  went  on  with  their 
robbery,  and  three  times  fifty  other  young  men  joined 
with  them,  sons  of  the  great  men  of  Ireland. 

But  one  time  they  went  doing  their  bad  work  in 
Connaught,  and  they  followed  a  swineherd  that  ran 
from  them,  and  he  called  out  for  help,  and  the  people 
gathered  to  him,  and  the  robbers  were  taken  and 
brought  back  to  Teamhair. 

King  Conaire  was  asked  to  give  judgment  then,  and 
it  is  what  he  said,  "  Let  every  father  of  a  robber  put  his 
own  son  to  death,  but  let  my  foster-brothers  be  spared." 
"  Give  us  leave,"  said  all  the  people,  "  and  we  will  put 
them  to  death  for  you."  "  I  will  not  consent  to  that, 
indeed,"  said  Conaire.  ''  Their  life  must  be  spared. 
But  if  they  must  do  robbery,"  he  said,  "  let  them  go 
across  the  sea,  and  do  it  on  the  men  of  Alban." 

So  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa  and  their  men  were 
driven  out  of  the  country,  and  some  of  the  Maines  went 
with  them,  the  sons  of  Ailell  and  Maeve,  and  three 
great  fighting  men  of  Leinster,  that  were  called  the 
Three  Red  Hounds  of  Cualu,  and  they  brought  a  troop 
of  wild  restless  men  with  them. 

They  set  out  then  in  their  ships,  and  when  they  were 
out  on  the  rough  sea,  they  met  with  the  ship  of  Ingcel, 
the  One-Eyed,  grandson  of  Cormac  of  Britain.  They 
were  going  to  make  an  attack  on  him,  but  Ingcel  said, 
"  It  would  be  best  for  us  to  come  to  an  agreement 
together,  for  you  have  been  driven  out  of  Ireland,  and  I 


CONAIRE   BREAKS    HIS   BONDS    89 

myself  have  been  driven  out  from  Britain.  Let  us  make 
this  agreement,"  he  said.  "  Let  you  come  and  spoil  the 
people  of  my  country,  and  then  I  will  go  back  with 
you  and  spoil  the  people  of  your  country." 

So  they  agreed  to  that,  and  they  cast  lots  as  to  where 
they  would  go  first,  and  it  is  how  the  lot  fell,  that  they 
should  go  first  to  Britain  with  Ingcel.  And  when  they 
got  there  it  chanced  that  the  father  and  mother  and  the 
seven  brothers  of  Ingcel  had  been  sent  for  to  the  house 
of  the  king  of  the  district,  and  Ingcel  and  his  comrades 
made  an  attack  on  them,  and  killed  them  all  in  the  one 
night. 

Then  they  made  for  Alban,  and  there  they  did  every 
sort  of  destruction  and  robbery.  And  at  last  they 
turned  back  again  to  Ireland,  that  Ingcel  might  spoil 
their  people  the  same  way  as  they  had  spoiled  his. 

Now  just  at  that  time  peace  was  after  being  broken 
in  Ireland  by  the  two  Carbres  that  were  at  war  with 
one  another  in  Tuathmumain  of  Munster,  and  no  one 
was  able  to  put  an  end  to  their  quarrel  till  Conaire 
himself  went  there  to  make  peace.  And  he  did  that, 
although  by  doing  it  he  broke  two  of  the  bonds  put  on 
him  by  the  Man  of  the  Waves.  And  on  his  way  back 
to  Teamhair,  when  he  was  passing  Usnach  in  Meath, 
he  and  his  people  thought  they  saw  fighting  from  east 
to  west,  and  from  north  to  south,  and  armies  of  naked 
men,  and  the  country  of  the  Ua  Neills  like  a  cloud  of 
fire  around  them. 

"  What  is  that  ?  "  said  Conaire.  "  It  is  easy  to  know 
that,"  said  his  people.  "  The  king's  law  has  broken 
down,  and  the  country  is  on  fire."  "  What  way  had  we 
best  go  ?  "  said  Conaire.  "  To  the  north-west,"  said  his 
people. 

So  then  they  went  righthandways  round  Teamhair, 
and  lefthandways  round  Bregia,  and  that  was  another 
breaking  of  his  bonds,  and  they  met  with  beasts  and 


90  HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

hunted  them,  and  he  did  not  know  till  afterwards  that 
they  were  the  evil  beasts  of  Cerna. 

And  it  was  the  Sidhe  had  made  that  Druid  mist  of 
smoke  about  him,  because  he  had  begun  to  break  his 
bonds. 

Great  fear  came  on  Conaire  then,  and  he  did  not 
know  what  way  would  be  best  to  go,  and  they  went 
on  by  the  sea-coast,  towards  the  south  by  the  road  of 
Cualu.  And  then  Conaire  said,  "  Where  shall  we  go  to 
spend  the  night  ?  " 

"  I  can  say  this  truly,"  said  Mac  Cecht,  one  of  his 
fighting  men,  he  that  kept  three  of  the  Fomor  as  hostages 
at  the  king's  court,  the  way  their  people  would  not  spoil 
corn  or  milk  in  Ireland  through  his  reign  ;  "  it  is  oftener 
the  men  of  Ireland  have  been  quarrelling  to  have  you 
in  the  house,  than  you  have  been  straying  about,  look- 
ing for  a  lodging."  "  I  have  a  friend  not  far  from  this," 
said  Conaire,  "  if  we  but  knew  the  way  to  his  house." 
"  What  is  his  name  ?  "  said  Mac  Cecht.  "  Da  Derga  of 
Leinster,  that  keeps  the  great  Inn,"  said  Conaire.  "  He 
came  to  ask  a  gift  of  me,  and  it  is  not  a  refusal  he  met 
with.  I  gave  him  a  hundred  head  of  cattle,  I  gave  him 
a  hundred  fat  swine,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  cloaks  of 
fine  cloth,  I  gave  him  a  hundred  swords  and  spears,  I 
gave  him  a  hundred  red-gilded  brooches,  I  gave  him 
ten  vats  of  good  brown  ale,  I  gave  him  three  times 
nine  white  hounds  in  silver  chains,  I  gave  him  a 
hundred  swift  horses.  I  would  give  him  the  same  if 
he  would  come  again.  He  will  make  a  return  to  me 
to-night,  for  it  would  be  a  strange  thing,  he  to  begrudge 
me  anything  when  I  come  to  his  house." 

"  When  I  knew  his  house,"  said  Mac  Cecht,  "  the 
road  we  are  in  now  led  straight  to  it.  Seven  doorways 
there  are  in  it,  and  seven  sleeping-rooms  between  every 
two  doorways."  "  We  will  go  to  the  house  with  all  our 
people,"  said  Conaire.     "If  that  is  so,"  said  Mac  Cecht, 


THETHREEREDMEN  91 

"  I  will  go  on  first  till  I  light  a  fire  in  the  house  before 
you." 

They  went  on  then  towards  Ath  Cliath,  and  pre- 
sently a  man  with  hair  cut  short,  with  a  dreadful 
appearance,  with  but  one  hand  and  one  foot  and  one 
eye,  overtook  them.  A  forked  pole  of  black  iron  he  had 
in  his  hand,  and  on  his  back  a  black-bristled  singed 
pig,  and  it  squealing ;  and  there  was  a  woman  coming 
after  him,  ugly  and  big-mouthed.  "  Welcome  to  you, 
my  master,  Conaire,"  he  said.  "  It  is  long  we  have 
known  of  your  coming."  "  Who  gives  that  welcome  ?  " 
said  Conaire.  "  Fer  Coille,  the  Man  of  the  Wood,"  he 
said,  "  and  his  black  pig  with  him,  that  you  may  not  be 
fasting  to-night,  for  you  are  the  best  king  that  ever  came 
into  the  world."  "  Leave  me  for  to-night,"  said  Conaire, 
"and  I  will  go  to  you  any  other  night  that  pleases 
you."  "  We  will  not,"  said  he  ;  "  but  we  will  go  to  the 
place  you  will  be  in  to-night,  O  fair  little  master, 
Conaire." 

So  he  went  on  towards  the  Inn,  and  his  wife  behind 
him,  and  his  black  pig  squealing  on  his  back. 

After  that  Conaire  saw  before  him  three  horsemen 
going  towards  the  Inn.  Red  cloaks  they  had,  and  red 
shields,  and  red  spears  in  their  hands,  and  they  riding 
on  red  horses. 

"What  men  are  these  before  me?"  said  Conaire.  "It 
is  in  my  bonds  not  to  let  them  go  before  me  ;  three 
Reds  to  the  House  of  Red,  that  is,  of  Derga.  Who  will 
follow  them  and  bid  them  to  come  back  and  to  follow 
after  me  ? "  "I  will  follow  them,"  said  Lefriflaith, 
Conaire's  son. 

So  he  struck  his  horse  and  went  after  them,  but  he 
could  not  come  up  with  them.  So  he  called  to  them 
to  turn  back,  and  not  to  go  on  before  the  king.  And 
he  did  this  three  times,  and  the  third  time  one  of  the 
three  men  turned  his  head  and  said,  "  There  is  great 


92  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

news  before  us,  my  son ;  wetting  of  swords,  destroying 
of  life,  shields  with  broken  bosses,  after  the  fall  of  night. 
Our  horses  are  tired  ;  we  are  riding  the  horses  of  the 
Sidhe  ;  although  we  are  alive  we  are  dead."  And  with 
that  they  went  from  him,  and  he  went  back  to  his 
father. 

"  You  did  not  keep  back  the  men,"  said  Conaire.  "  It 
was  not  my  fault,  indeed,"  said  Lefriflaith.  Then  he 
told  the  answer  they  had  given  him,  and  Conaire  and 
his  people  were  not  well  pleased  to  hear  that,  and 
uneasiness  came  on  them.  "  All  my  bonds  are  ended 
to-night,"  said  Conaire,  "  and  those  three  Reds  before 
me  are  sent  by  the  Sidhe." 

Now  while  he  and  his  people  were  in  the  road  of 
Cualu  going  towards  the  Inn,  Ingcel  and  the  outlaws 
of  Ireland  were  come  in  their  ships  to  the  coast  of 
Bregia  against  Etair.  And  the  sons  of  Donn  Dessa 
said,  "  Strike  the  sails  now,  and  let  some  light-footed 
messenger  go  on  shore  and  see  can  we  keep  our 
bargain  with  Ingcel,  and  give  him  a  spoil  for  the  spoil 
he  gave  us."  "  Let  some  man  go,"  said  Ingcel,  "  that 
has  the  gift  of  hearing  and  of  far  sight  and  of 
judgment." 

"  I  have  the  gift  of  hearing,"  said  Maine  Milscothach. 
"  I  have  the  gift  of  far  sight  and  of  judgment,"  said 
Maine  Andoe.  "  It  is  as  well  for  you  to  go,  so,"  said 
the  others. 

So  they  landed  and  went  on  till  they  came  to  Beinn 
Etair,  and  they  stopped  there  to  try  what  they  might 
see  and  hear.  "  Be  quiet  now,"  said  Maine  Milscothach, 
"  and  listen."  "  What  do  you  hear  ? "  said  Maine 
Andoe.  "  I  hear  the  coming  of  a  king,"  he  said, 
"  and  look  now  and  tell  me  what  you  see."  "  I  see," 
he  said,  "  a  great  company  of  men,  travelling  over 
hills  and  rivers.  Clothes  of  every  colour  they  have, 
and  grey  spears  over  their  chariots,  and  swords  with 


THELONEWOMAN  93 

ivory  hilts  beside  them,  and  silver  shields  ;  and  I  swear 
by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,"  he  said,  "the  horses 
they  have  with  them  are  the  horses  of  some  good  lord. 
And  it  is  my  opinion  that  it  is  Conaire,  son  of  Eterscel, 
and  a  good  share  of  the  men  of  Ireland  with  him,  that 
is  travelling  the  road." 

With  that  they  went  back  and  told  their  comrades 
what  they  had  heard  and  seen.  And  when  they 
heard  it  they  brought  the  boats  to  shore  and  landed 
on  the  strand  of  Furbuithe.  And  it  was  just  at  the 
same  moment  Mac  Cecht  was  striking  a  spark  to  kindle 
a  fire  at  the  Inn  before  the  High  King. 

Then  Conaire  came  to  the  lawn  of  the  Inn,  and  he 
went  in,  and  his  people,  and  they  took  their  seats, 
and  the  three  Red  Men  sat  down  along  with  them,  and 
the  Man  of  the  Wood  that  was  a  swineherd  of  the  Sidhe 
with  his  squealing  pig. 

And  Da  Derga  came  to  them  with  three  times  fifty 
fighting  men,  every  one  of  them  having  a  long  head 
of  hair  and  a  short  cloak  and  a  great  blackthorn  stick 
with  bands  of  iron  in  his  hand.  "  Welcome,  my  master, 
Conaire,"  said  Da  Derga,  "  and  if  you  were  to  bring 
the  whole  of  the  men  of  Ireland  with  you,  there  would 
be  a  welcome  before  them  all." 

After  the  fall  of  evening  they  saw  a  lone  woman 
coming  to  the  door  of  the  Inn  ;  long  hair  she  had,  and 
a  grey  woollen  cloak,  and  her  mouth  was  drawn  to 
one  side  of  her  head.  She  came  and  leaned  up  against 
the  doorpost,  and  she  threw  an  evil  eye  on  the  king 
and  the  young  men  about  him.  "Well,  woman,"  said 
Conaire,  "  if  you  have  the  Druid  sight,  what  is  it  you 
see  for  us  ? "  "  It  is  what  I  see  for  you,"  she  said, 
"  that  nothing  of  your  skin  or  of  your  flesh  will  escape 
from  the  place  you  are  in,  except  what  the  birds  will 
bring  away  in  their  claws.  And  let  me  come  into  the 
house  now,"  she  said.     "  There  are  bonds  on  me,"  said 


94  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

Conaire,  "  not  to  let  one  woman  come  by  herself  into 
the  house  after  the  setting  of  the  sun.  And  bring  her 
out,"  he  said,  "  a  good  share  of  food  from  my  own 
table,  but  let  her  stop  for  the  night  in  some  other  place." 

"If  the  king's  hospitality  is  gone  from  him,"  she 
said,  "  and  if  it  is  the  way  with  him  not  to  have  room  in 
his  house  for  one  lone  woman  to  be  fed  and  lodged, 
I  will  go  and  get  food  and  lodging  from  some  better 
man."  "  Let  her  in,  in  spite  of  my  bonds,"  said  Conaire, 
when  he  heard  that.  So  they  let  her  in,  but  none  of 
them  felt  easy  in  their  minds  after  what  she  had  said. 

Now  all  this  time  the  outlaws  were  on  their  way 
to  the  Inn,  and  they  stopped  at  Leccaibcend  Slebe. 
And  when  they  saw  the  great  light  that  was  shining 
from  the  Inn  through  the  wheels  of  the  chariots  that 
were  outside  the  doors,  Ingcel  said  to  Ferogain,  "  What 
is  that  great  light  beyond?"  "It  is  what  I  think," 
said  Ferogain,  "  that  it  is  the  fire  of  Conaire,  the  High 
King.  And  I  would  be  glad  he  not  to  be  there  to- 
night, for  it  would  be  a  pity  if  harm  would  come  on 
him,  or  his  life  be  shortened,  for  he  is  a  branch  in  its 
blossom." 

"  It  is  good  luck  for  me,"  said  Ingcel,  "if  he  is  there. 
Spoil  for  spoil.  It  is  no  worse  for  you  than  it  was  for 
me  when  I  gave  up  my  father  and  mother  and  my 
seven  brothers  and  the  king  of  my  country  into  your 
hands."      "  That  is  true,  that  is  true,"  said  all  the  others. 

Then  every  man  of  them  brought  up  a  stone  from 
the  strand  to  make  a  cairn,  as  they  were  used  to  do 
before  they  would  make  an  attack  on  any  place,  to 
know  by  it  afterwards  how  many  men  they  had  lost. 
For  every  man  that  would  come  from  the  fight  would 
take  his  stone  from  the  cairn,  and  the  stones  of  all 
that  would  be  killed  would  be  left  there. 

After  that  they  held  a  council,  and  it  is  what  they 
agreed,  that  one  man  should  go  and  spy  out  what  way 


INGCEL'S   REPORT  95 

things  were  at  the  Inn.  And  it  was  Ingcel  himself 
went  to  do  that,  and  he  was  a  good  while  looking  in 
by  the  seven  doors  of  the  house,  but  at  last  some  one 
of  the  men  inside  caught  sight  of  him,  and  he  made 
his  way  back  to  his  comrades,  where  they  were  all 
sitting  down,  and  their  leaders  in  the  middle,  waiting 
to  hear  his  news. 

"  Did  you  see  the  house,  Ingcel  ?  "  said  Ferogain.  "  I 
did  see  it,"  said  Ingcel ;  "  and  whether  or  not  there  is  a 
king  in  it,  it  is  a  royal  house,  and  I  will  take  it  as  my 
share  when  the  time  comes."  "  You  may  do  that,"  said 
Conaire's  foster-brothers.  "  But  we  will  not  go  against 
it  before  we  know  who  is  in  it." 

"The  first  I  saw,"  said  Ingcel,  "was  a  large  man,  of 
good  race,  with  bright  eyes,  with  hair  like  flax  ;  his  face 
open,  wide  above  and  narrow  below  ;  with  modest  looks, 
and  having  no  beard.  A  five-barbed  spear  in  his  hand, 
and  a  shield  with  five  gold  circles  on  it.  Nine  men  he 
had  about  him,  all  beautiful  and  all  alike,  so  that  you 
would  think  they  had  the  one  father  and  mother.  Who 
were  those  men,  Ferogain  ? "  he  said. 

"  It  is  easy  to  say  that,"  said  Ferogain.  "  That  was 
Cormac  Conloingeas,  son  of  Conchubar,  the  best  fighter 
behind  a  shield  in  all  Ireland,  but  he  is  modest  with  all 
that.  And  those  were  his  nine  comrades  about  him  ; 
they  have  never  put  men  to  death  because  of  their 
poverty,  or  spared  them  because  of  their  riches.  He  is 
a  good  leader  they  have  with  them.  I  swear  by  the 
gods  my  people  swear  by,  it  is  no  small  slaughter  they 
will  make  before  the  Inn  to-night." 

"  It  is  a  pity  for  him  that  will  make  the  attack,"  said 
Lomna  Druth,  the  Fool,  "because  of  that  man  only, 
Cormac  Conloingeas.  And  if  I  had  my  way,"  he  said, 
"  the  attack  would  not  be  made,  for  the  sake  of  that  man 
alone  and  his  beauty  and  his  goodness." 

"You   will   not   be  able  to  hinder  it,  Lomna,"  said 


96  HIGH    KING   OF    IRELAND 

Ingcel.  '•  You  are  no  go-^a.  of  a  fighter ;  I  know  you 
weii,  there  are  clouds  of  weakness  coming  on  yoiL  Xo 
one,  whether  old  man  or  stoiy-teiler,  vi-ill  be  able  to  say 
I  drew  back  from  this  fight  before  I  had  gone  through 
with  it" 

"  It  is  well  enough  for  you,  Ingcel,"  said  Lomna  ; 
"  you  will  escape  after  the  fight,  and  you  will  bring  away 
the  head  of  a  strange  king  v^-ith  you,  but  as  for  myself,** 
he  said,  "  it  is  my  head  will  be  the  first  to  be  tossed  to 
and  fro  to-night" 

"  What  did  you  see  after  that  ?  "  said  Ferogain. 

"  I  saw  a  room  with  three  soft  young  boys  in  it 
and  they  wearing  cloaks  of  silk  with  gold  brooches. 
Long  jellow  hair  they  had,  as  curly  as  a  ram's  head  ;  a 
golden  shield  and  a  candle  of  a  king's  house  over  each 
of  them,  and  ever\-  one  in  the  house  humours  them- 
Who  were  those,  Ferogain  ?  "  he  said 

But  Ferogain  was  cr>'ing  tears  down,  so  that  the  front 
of  his  cloak  ^-as  wet,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  he 
could  bring  out  his  voice,  '*  O  little  ones,*'  he  said  then, 
"  I  have  good  reason  for  crying.  Those  are  the  three 
sons  of  the  king,  Oball  and  Obline  and  Corpre 
Findmor." 

"  There  is  grief  on  us  if  that  story  is  true,"  said  the 
other  sons  of  Donn  Dessa ;  "  for  it  is  good  those  three 
are.  They  are  as  mannerl}-  as  young  girls,  and  they  have 
the  hearts  of  brothers,  and  the  courage  of  lions.  Who- 
ever has  been  \^-ith  them  and  parts  from  them,  it  is  little 
he  sleeps  or  eats  till  the  end  of  nine  days,  fretting  after 
their  company.  It  is  a  pit>'  for  him  that  will  destroy 
them." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  a  very  fair  man, 
ha\-ing  a  golden  bush  of  hair,  the  size  of  a  reaping 
basket  A  long,  hea\y  three-edged  sword  in  his  hand, 
a  red  shield  speckled  with  rivets  of  white  bronze  between 
plates  of  gold." 


CELTHAIR'S    SPEAR  97 

"  That  man  is  known  to  all  the  men  of  Ireland,"  said 
Ferogain.  "  It  is  Conall  Cearnach,  son  of  Amergin,  and 
he  is  the  man  Conaire  thinks  most  of  in  the  world ;  and 
that  shield  in  his  hand  is  the  Lam-tapaid.  There  are 
seven  doorways  in  that  inn,  and  when  the  attack  is 
made,  Conall  Cearnach  will  be  at  every  one  of  them. 
What  did  you  see  after  that,  Ingcel  ?  "  he  said. 

"  I  saw,"  he  said,  "  a  brown  big  man,  with  short  brown 
hair  and  a  red  speckled  cloak,  and  a  black  shield  with 
clasps  of  gold  ;  and  with  him  two  chief  men,  in  their 
first  greyness,  and  black  swords  at  their  sides.  And  one 
of  them  had  in  his  hand  a  great  spear,  with  fifty  rivets 
through  it,  and  he  shook  it  over  his  head,  and  struck  the 
haft  against  the  palm  of  his  hand  three  times,  and  then  he 
plunged  it  into  a  great  pot  that  stood  before  them,  with 
some  black  thing  in  it,  and  when  he  was  putting  it  in 
there  were  flames  on  the  shaft.  Who  were  those  men, 
Ferogain  ?  " 

"  That  brown  man  is  Muinremar,  son  of  Geirgind, 
one  of  the  champions  of  the  Red  Branch.  And  another 
is  Sencha,  the  beautiful  son  of  Ailell ;  and  the  man  with 
the  spear  is  Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  and  the 
spear  in  his  hand  is  Celthair's  Luin,  that  was  in  the 
battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  and  that  was  brought  from 
the  east  by  the  three  children  of  Tuireann,  and  when  a 
battle  is  coming  near,  it  flames  up  of  itself,  and  it  must 
be  kept  quenched  in  a  vessel,  or  it  will  go  through  who- 
ever has  it  in  his  hand." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  a  room  with  nine 
men  in  it,  fair-haired  and  beautiful,  with  speckled  cloaks, 
and  above  them  were  nine  bagpipes,  and  light  was 
shining  from  the  ornaments  that  were  on  them." 

"  Those  are  the  nine  pipers  that  came  to  Conaire  out 
of  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe  at  Bregia,"  said  Ferogain,  "  because 
of  the  great  stories  about  him.  The  best  pipers  they  are 
in  the  whole  world.     And  they  are  good  fighters,  but  to 

G 


98  HIGH   KING   OF   IRELAND 

fight  with  them  is  to  fight  with  a  shadow,  for  they  kill 
but  cannot  be  killed,  because  they  are  from  the  Sidhe." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  three  very  big  men, 
with  terrible  looks.  A  dress  of  rough  hair  they  had, 
and  a  club  of  iron  with  chains  on  it  in  every  man's 
hand.  There  was  sadness  on  them,  and  they  standing 
alone,  and  every  one  in  the  house  avoiding  them.  Who 
were  those,  Ferogain  ?  " 

Ferogain  was  silent  for  a  while,  and  he  said  then, 
"  I  do  not  know  of  any  such  men  in  the  world,  unless 
they  might  be  the  three  giants  Cuchulain  spared,  the 
time  he  took  them  from  the  men  of  Falga,  he  would 
not  let  them  be  killed  because  of  their  strangeness  ; 
Conaire  bought  them  from  Cuchulain  after  that,  so  it  is 
along  with  him  they  are." 

"  I  saw  nine  men  in  the  north  side  of  the  house,"  said 
Ingcel,  "  having  very  yellow  manes  of  hair,  and  short 
linen  dresses,  and  purple  cloaks  without  brooches ; 
broad  spears,  and  red  curved  shields." 

"  I  know  those  men,"  said  Ferogain ;  "  three  royal 
princes  of  Britain  that  are  with  the  king,  Oswald  and 
his  two  foster-brothers,  Osbrit  of  the  Long  Hand  and 
his  two  foster-brothers,  Lindas  and  his  two  foster- 
brothers." 

"Three  red  men  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel;  "red 
shields  above  them,  red  spears  in  their  hands,  their 
three  red  horses  in  their  bridles  in  front  of  the  Inn." 

"  Those  are  the  three  champions  that  did  deceit  and 
falsehood  among  the  Sidhe,"  said  Ferogain,  "  and  it  is*  the 
punishment  was  put  on  them  by  the  king  of  the  Sidhe, 
to  be  three  times  destroyed  by  the  King  of  Teamhair ; 
and  Conaire  is  the  last  king  through  whom  they  will 
be  destroyed  ;  yet  they  will  not  be  killed,  nor  will  they 
kill  any  one.  It  is  to  work  out  their  own  destruction 
they  are  come." 

"  I  saw  after  that,"  said  Ingcel,  "  a  big  man,  and  his 


CONAIRE   THE   KING  99 

hair  white,  and  the  shame  of  baldness  on  him,  and  gold 
earrings  in  his  ears.  Nine  swords  he  had  in  his  hand, 
and  nine  silver  shields,  and  nine  golden  apples.  He 
was  throwing  each  of  them  upwards,  and  not  one  would 
fall  on  the  ground,  but  each  of  them  rising  and  falling 
past  each  other  like  bees  on  a  sunny  day.  But  as  I 
looked  at  him,  he  let  all  fall  to  the  ground,  and  the 
people  about  him  cried  out,  and  the  king  that  was 
sitting  there  said  to  him,  'We  have  been  together 
since  I  was  a  little  boy,  and  your  tricks  never  failed 
till  to-night' 

"<  My  grief!'  he  said.  'Fair  master,  Conaire,  I  have 
good  cause  for  it ;  an  unfriendly  eye  looked  at  me ; 
there  is  some  bad  thing  in  front  of  the  Inn.' 

"  And  when  the  king  heard  that,  it  is  what  he  said  : 
*  I  had  a  dream  in  my  sleep  a  while  ago,  of  the  howl- 
ing of  my  dog  Ossar,  of  wounded  men,  of  a  wind  of 
terror,  of  keening  that  overcame  laughter.' " 

"  That  was  Taulchinne,  Conaire's  juggler,"  said 
Ferogain.  "  And  tell  me  now,"  he  said,  "  what  was 
the  appearance  of  the  king?" 

"  Of  all  the  men  I  ever  saw  in  the  world,"  said  Ingcel, 
"  he  is  the  best  in  shape,  and  the  most  beautiful ;  young 
he  is,  and  wise  and  kinglike.  The  colour  of  his  hair 
was  like  the  shining  of  purified  gold  ;  the  cloak  about 
him  was  like  the  mist  of  a  May  morning,  changing  from 
colour  to  colour,  every  colour  more  beautiful  than 
another ;  a  wheel  brooch  of  gold  reaching  from  his 
chin  to  his  waist ;  his  golden-hilted  sword  within  his 
reach." 

"That  was  Conaire,  the  High  King,  indeed,"  said 
Ferogain ;  "  and  it  is  he  is  the  greatest  and  the  best 
and  the  comeliest  of  the  kings  of  the  whole  world, 
and  there  is  no  fault  in  him,  either  as  to  wisdom  or 
bravery  or  knowledge  or  words  or  worthiness.  Tender 
he  is,  a  sleepy,  simple  man,  till  he  chances  on   some 


loo         HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

brave  thing  to  do,  but  when  his  anger  is  awaked,  the 
champions  of  Ireland  and  of  Scotland  will  not  win 
their  battle  so  long  as  he  is  against  them.  And  I 
swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,  unless  drink 
should  fail  him,  or  the  like,  that  man  alone  would  hold 
the  Inn  till  help  would  gather  to  him  from  the  Wave  of 
Cliodna  in  the  south,  to  the  Wave  of  Essruadh  in  the 
north." 

"It  is  time  for  us  to  rise  up,"  said  Ingcel  then,  "and 
to  get  on  to  the  house." 

So  with  that  the  outlaws  rose  up  and  went  on  to 
the  Inn,  and  the  noise  of  their  voices  was  heard  about  it. 

"  Be  quiet  now  and  listen,"  said  Conaire.  "  What  is 
that  we  hear  ?  " 

"  Fighting  men  about  the  house,"  said  Conall  Cearnach. 
"  There  are  fighting  men  to  meet  them  here,"  said 
Conaire.     "  They  will  be  wanted  to-night,"  said  Conall. 

Then  Lomna  Druth,  the  Fool,  broke  in  first  to  the 
house,  and  the  doorkeepers  struck  off  his  head,  and  it 
was  tossed  three  times  in  and  out  of  the  Inn,  just  as 
he  himself  had  foretold. 

Then  they  all  attacked  one  another,and  Conaire  himself 
went  out  with  his  people  and  killed  a  great  many  of  the 
outlaws  outside.  And  three  times  the  Inn  was  set  on 
fire,  and  three  times  it  was  put  out  again.  And  Conaire 
got  to  his  arms  then,  for  he  had  not  got  them  in  the 
first  attack,  and  he  went  out  again  and  made  a  great 
slaughter,  so  that  the  outlaws  were  driven  back.  "  I 
told  you,"  said  Ferogain,  "that  all  the  men  of  Ireland 
and  of  Alban  could  not  take  the  house  till  Conaire's  rage 
would  be  quenched."  "  It  is  short  his  time  will  be,"  said 
the  Druids  that  were  along  with  the  outlaws.  And  what 
they  put  on  him  by  their  enchantments  was  a  great 
thirst,  so  that  he  went  back  to  the  house  and  called 
for  a  drink.  ''  A  drink  to  me,  Mac  Cecht,"  he  said. 
"  That  is  not  the  order  you  are  used  to  give  me,"  said 


CONAIRE'S   DEATH  loi 

Mac  Cecht.  "  What  I  have  to  do  is  to  keep  you  from 
the  men  that  are  attacking  you  all  round  the  house  ; 
ask  a  drink  of  your  steward  and  of  your  cup-bearers,"  he 
said. 

Then  Conaire  called  to  his  cup-bearers  for  a  drink. 
"  There  is  none,"  they  said,  "  for  every  drop  in  the  house 
was  thrown  on  the  fire  to  put  it  out."  "  Get  me  a  drink, 
Mac  Cecht,"  he  said  again  then  ;  "  for  if  I  am  to  die, 
it  is  all  the  same  to  me  by  what  death  I  die." 

Then  Mac  Cecht  gave  a  choice  to  the  champions  of 
Ireland  that  were  in  the  house,  would  they  go  out  and 
look  for  a  drink  for  Conaire,  or  would  they  stop  in  the 
house  and  defend  him.  And  Conall  Cearnach  called 
out :  "  Leave  the  defence  of  the  king  to  us,  and  go 
you  and  look  for  the  drink,  for  it  was  of  you  it  was 
asked."  And  he  was  vexed  with  Mac  Cecht  for  putting 
the  choice  to  them,  and  there  was  never  a  very  friendly 
feeling  between  them  afterwards. 

Then  Mac  Cecht  went  to  look  for  a  drink,  and  he 
brought  Conaire's  great  golden  cup  with  him,  and  an 
iron  spit,  the  cauldron  spit,  in  his  other  hand. 

He  burst  out  on  the  outlaws,  and  attacked  them  with 
blows  of  the  spit,  so  that  many  got  their  death ;  and 
then  he  took  his  shield  and  made  a  round  with  his  sword 
above  his  head,  and  cut  down  all  before  him,  and  got 
through  the  whole  band. 

And  it  would  be  too  long  to  tell,  and  it  would  tire  the 
hearers,  all  that  happened  after  that ;  the  people  of  the 
Inn  coming  out  and  making  attacks,  and  some  of  them 
getting  their  death,  and  the  most  part  making  their 
escape.  And  at  last  there  were  none  left  in  the  Inn 
with  Conaire  but  Conall,  and  Sencha,  and  Dubthach. 

Now  from  the  rage  that  was  on  Conaire,  and  the 
greatness  of  the  fight  he  had  fought,  a  great  drouth 
came  on  him  again,  and  such  a  fever  of  thirst,  and  no 
drink  to  get,  that  he  died  of  it  in  the  end. 


102         HIGH    KING   OF   IRELAND 

Then  the  other  three,  when  they  saw  the  High  King 
was  dead,  went  out  and  cut  their  way  through  their 
enemies,  and  got  away  with  their  lives,  but  if  they  did, 
they  were  wounded,  and  hurt,  and  broken. 

And  Conall  Cearnach,  after  he  got  away,  went  on  to 
his  father's  house,  and  but  half  his  shield  left  in  his 
hand,  and  a  few  bits  left  of  his  two  spears.  And  he 
found  Amergin,  his  father,  out  before  his  dun  in 
Tailltin. 

"Those  are  fierce  wolves  that  have  hunted  you,  my 
son,"  said  he.  "It  was  not  wolves  that  wounded  me, 
but  a  sharp  fight  with  fighting-men,"  said  Conall. 
"  Have  you  news  from  Da  Derga's  Inn  ? "  said  Amergin. 
"  Is  your  lord  living  ?  "  "  He  is  not  living,"  said  Conall. 
"  I  swear  b}'  the  gods  the  great  tribes  of  Ulster  swear 
by,  the  man  is  a  coward  that  came  out  alive,  leaving 
his  lord  dead  among  his  enemies,"  said  Amergin.  "  My 
own  wounds  are  not  white,  old  hero,"  said  Conall.  And 
with  that  he  showed  him  his  right  arm,  that  was  full 
of  wounds.  "  That  arm  fought  there,  my  son,"  said 
Amergin.  "That  is  true,"  said  Conall.  "There  are 
many  in  front  of  the  Inn  now  it  gave  drinks  of  death 
to  last  night" 

Now,  as  to  Mac  Cecht,  after  he  got  away  from  the 
Inn,  he  went  on  to  the  well  of  Casair,  that  was  near 
him  in  Crith  Cualann,  but  he  could  not  find  so  much 
as  the  full  of  the  cup  of  water  in  it.  Then  he  went  on 
through  the  night,  from  lake  to  lake,  and  from  river  to 
river,  but  he  could  not  find  the  full  of  the  cup  of  water  in 
any  one  of  them.  But  at  last  he  came  to  Uaran  Garad 
on  Magh  Ai,  and  it  could  not  hide  itself  from  him,  and 
he  filled  the  cup,  and  went  back  again,  and  reached 
Da  Dergas  Inn  before  morning.  And  when  he  got 
there,  he  saw  two  men,  and  they  striking  oflf  Conaire's 
head  ;  and  Mac  Cecht  struck  oflf  the  head  of  one  of 
them,  and  then  the  other   man  was   going   away  with 


THE    END   OF   CONAIRE  103 

the  king's  head,  and  he  took  up  a  stone  and  threw  it  at 
him,  that  it  broke  his  back. 

Then  Mac  Cecht  stooped  down  and  poured  the  water 
into  Conaire's  mouth  and  his  throat.  And  when  the 
water  was  poured  in,  the  head  spoke  and  it  said  :  "  A 
good  man  Mac  Cecht  is,  a  good  man,  a  good  champion 
without  and  within.  He  gives  drink,  he  saves  a  king, 
he  does  a  deed  ;  it  is  well  he  fought  at  the  door,  it  is 
well  he  made  an  end  of  fighting  men.  It  is  good  I 
would  be,  and  I  alive,  to  Mac  Cecht  of  the  great  name." 

And  it  was  after  that,  Mac  Cecht  brought  the  body  of 
the  High  King  on  his  back  to  Teamhair,  and  buried 
him  there  as  some  say.  And  he  himself  went  to  his 
own  country,  into  Connaught.  And  the  place  he 
stopped  in  was  called,  from  his  sharp  grief,  Magh 
Bron-gear. 

And  there  was  no  High  King  chosen  to  rule  over 
Ireland  for  a  good  many  years  after  that. 


VII 
FATE    OF   THE   SONS   OF    USNACH 

"\TO\V  it  was  one  Fcdlimid,  son  of  Doll,  was  harper 
'^  to  King  Conchubar,  and  he  had  but   one   child, 

and  this  is  the  story  of  her  birth. 

Cathbad,  the  Druid,  was  at  Fedlimid's  house  one  day. 
"  Have  you  got  knowledge  of  the  future  ? "  said 
Fedlimid.  "  I  have  a  little,"  said  Cathbad.  "  What  is 
it  you  are  wanting  to  know?"  "I  was  not  asking  to 
know  anything,"  said  Fedlimid,  "  but  if  you  know  of 
anything  that  may  be  going  to  happen  me,  it  is  as 
well  for  you  to  tell  me." 

Cathbad  went  out  of  the  house  for  a  while,  and 
when  he  came  back  he  said  :  "  Had  you  ever  any 
children?"  "I  never  had,"  said  Fedlimid,  "and  the 
wife  I  have  had  none,  and  we  have  no  hope  ever  to 
have  any ;  there  is  no  one  with  us  but  only  myself 
and  my  wife."  "  That  puts  wonder  on  me,"  said 
Cathbad,  "  for  I  see  by  Druid  signs  that  it  is  on  account 
of  a  daughter  belonging  to  you,  that  more  blood  will 
be  shed  than  ever  was  shed  in  Ireland  since  time  and 
race  began.  And  great  heroes  and  bright  candles  of 
the  Gael  will  lose  their  lives  because  of  her."  "  Is  that 
the  foretelling  you  have  made  for  me  ?  "  said  Fedlimid, 
and  there  was  anger  on  him,  for  he  thought  the  Druid 
was  mocking  him  ;  "  if  that  is  all  you  can  say,  you  can 
keep    it  for  yourself;    it  is  little  I  think  of  your  share 

104 


BIRTH   OF   DEIRDRE  105 

of  knowledge."  "  For  all  that/'  said  Cathbad,  "  I  am 
certain  of  its  truth,  for  I  can  see  it  all  clearly  in  my 
own  mind." 

The  Druid  went  away,  but  he  was  not  long  gone 
when  Fedlimid's  wife  was  found  to  be  with  child.  And 
as  her  time  went  on,  his  vexation  went  on  growing,  that 
he  had  not  asked  more  questions  of  Cathbad,  at  the  time 
he  was  talking  to  him,  and  he  was  under  a  smoulder- 
ing care  by  day  and  by  night,  for  it  is  what  he  was 
thinking,  that  neither  his  own  sense  and  understanding, 
or  the  share  of  friends  he  had,  would  be  able  to  save 
him,  or  to  make  a  back  against  the  world,  if  this  mis- 
fortune should  come  upon  him,  that  would  bring  such 
great  shedding  of  blood  upon  the  earth  ;  and  it  is  the 
thought  that  came,  that  if  this  child  should  be  born, 
what  he  had  to  do  was  to  put  her  far  away,  where  no 
eye  would  see  her,  and  no  ear  hear  word  of  her. 

The  time  of  the  delivery  of  Fedlimid's  wife  came  on, 
and  it  was  a  girl-child  she  gave  birth  to.  Fedlimid  did 
not  allow  any  living  person  to  come  to  the  house  or  to 
see  his  wife,  but  himself  alone. 

But  just  after  the  child  was  born,  Cathbad,  the  Druid, 
came  in  again,  and  there  was  shame  on  Fedlimid  when 
he  saw  him,  and  when  he  remembered  how  he  would 
not  believe  his  words.  But  the  Druid  looked  at  the 
child  and  he  said :  "  Let  Deirdre  be  her  name  ;  harm  will 
come  through  her. 

"  She  will  be  fair,  comely,  bright-haired  ;  heroes  will 
fight  for  her,  and  kings  go  seeking  for  her." 

And  then  he  took  the  child  in  his  arms,  and  it  is  what 
he  said  :  "  O  Deirdre,  on  whose  account  many  shall  weep, 
on  whose  account  many  women  shall  be  envious,  there 
will  be  trouble  on  Ulster  for  your  sake,  O  fair  daughter 
of  Fedlimid. 

"Many  will  be  jealous  of  your  face,  O  flame  of 
beauty  ;  for  your  sake  heroes  shall  go  to  exile.     For 


io6  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

your  sake  deeds  of  anger  shall  be  done  in  Emain ; 
there  is  harm  in  your  face,  for  it  will  bring  banishment 
and  death  on  the  sons  of  kings. 

"  In  your  fate,  O  beautiful  child,  are  wounds,  and  ill- 
doings,  and  shedding  of  blood. 

"You  will  have  a  little  grave  apart  to  yourself;  you 
will  be  a  tale  of  wonder  for  ever,  Deirdre." 

Cathbad  went  away  then,  and  he  sent  Levarcham, 
daughter  of  Aedh,  to  the  house ;  and  Fedlimid  asked 
her  would  she  take  the  venture  of  bringing  up  the 
child,  far  away  where  no  eye  would  see  her,  and  no 
ear  hear  of  her.  Levarcham  said  she  would  do  that, 
and  that  she  would  do  her  best  to  keep  her  the  way  he 
wished. 

So  Fedlimid  got  his  men,  and  brought  them  away 
with  him  to  a  mountain,  wide  and  waste,  and  there  he 
bade  them  to  make  a  little  house,  by  the  side  of  a  round 
green  hillock,  and  to  make  a  garden  of  apple-trees 
behind  it,  with  a  wall  about  it.  And  he  bade  them  put 
a  roof  of  green  sods  over  the  house,  the  way  a  little 
company  might  live  in  it,  without  notice  being  taken  of 
them. 

Then  he  sent  Levarcham  and  the  child  there,  that  no 
eye  might  see,  and  no  ear  hear  of  Deirdre.  He  put 
all  in  good  order  before  them,  and  he  gave  them  pro- 
visions, and  he  told  Levarcham  that  food  and  all  she 
wanted  would  be  sent  from  year  to  year  as  long  as  she 
lived. 

And  so  Deirdre  and  her  foster-mother  lived  in  the 
lonely  place  among  the  hills  without  the  knowledge 
or  the  notice  of  any  strange  person,  until  Deirdre  was 
fourteen  years  of  age.  And  Deirdre  grew  straight  and 
clean  like  a  rush  on  the  bog,  and  she  was  comely 
beyond  comparison  of  all  the  women  of  the  world,  and 
her  movements  were  like  the  swan  on  the  wave,  or  the 
deer   on   the   hill.      She   was    the   young    girl   of   the 


THE   HUNTER'S   DREAM  107 

greatest  beauty  and  of  the  gentlest  nature  of  all  the 
women  of  Ireland. 

Levarcham,  that  had  charge  of  her,  used  to  be  giving 
Deirdre  every  knowledge  and  skill  that  she  had  herself 
There  was  not  a  blade  of  grass  growing  from  root,  or  a 
bird  singing  in  the  wood,  or  a  star  shining  from  heaven, 
but  Deirdre  had  the  name  of  it.  But  there  was  one 
thing  she  would  not  have  her  know,  she  would  not  let 
her  have  friendship  with  any  living  person  of  the  rest  of 
the  world  outside  their  own  house. 

But  one  dark  night  of  winter,  with  black  clouds  over- 
head, a  hunter  came  walking  the  hills,  and  it  is  what 
happened,  he  missed  the  track  of  the  hunt,  and  lost  his 
way  and  his  comrades. 

And  a  heaviness  came  upon  him,  and  he  lay  down  on 
the  side  of  the  green  hillock  by  Deirdre's  house.  He 
was  weak  with  hunger  and  going,  and  perished  with  cold, 
and  a  deep  sleep  came  upon  him.  While  he  was  lying 
there  a  dream  came  to  the  hunter,  and  he  thought  that 
he  was  near  the  warmth  of  a  house  of  the  Sidhe,  and 
the  Sidhe  inside  making  music,  and  he  called  out  in  his 
dream,  "  If  there  is  any  one  inside,  let  them  bring  me  in, 
in  the  name  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon."  Deirdre  heard 
the  voice,  and  she  said  to  Levarcham,  "  Mother,  mother, 
what  is  that  ? "  But  Levarcham  said,  "  It  is  nothing 
that  matters ;  it  is  the  birds  of  the  air  gone  astray,  and 
trying  to  find  one  another.  But  let  them  go  back  to  the 
branches  of  the  wood."  Another  troubled  dream  came 
on  the  hunter,  and  he  cried  out  a  second  time.  "  What  is 
that  ?  "  asked  Deirdre  again.  "  It  is  nothing  that  matters," 
said  Levarcham.  "  The  birds  of  the  air  are  looking  for 
one  another  ;  let  them  go  past  to  the  branches  of  the 
wood."  Then  a  third  dream  came  to  the  hunter,  and 
he  cried  out  a  third  time,  if  there  was  any  one  in  the  hill 
to  let  him  in  for  the  sake  of  the  Elements,  for  he  was 
perished  with  cold  and  overcome  with   hunger.     "  Oh ! 


io8    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

what  is  that,  Levarcham  ? "  said  Deirdre.  "  There  is 
nothing  there  for  you  to  see,  my  child,  but  only  the  birds 
of  the  air,  and  they  lost  to  one  another,  but  let  them  go 
past  us  to  the  branches  of  the  wood.  There  is  no  place 
or  shelter  for  them  here  to-night."  "  Oh,  mother,"  said 
Deirdre,  "  the  bird  asked  to  come  in  for  the  sake  of  the 
Sun  and  the  Moon,  and  it  is  what  you  yourself  told  me, 
that  anything  that  is  asked  like  that,  it  is  right  for  us  to 
give  it.  If  you  will  not  let  in  the  bird  that  is  perished 
with  cold  and  overcome  with  hunger,  I  myself  will  let  it 
in."  So  Deirdre  rose  up  and  drew  the  bolt  from  the 
leaf  of  the  door,  and  let  in  the  hunter.  She  put  a  seat 
in  the  place  for  sitting,  food  in  the  place  for  eating,  and 
drink  in  the  place  for  drinking,  for  the  man  who  had 
come  into  the  house.  "  Come  now  and  eat  food,  for  you 
are  in  want  of  it,"  said  Deirdre.  "  Indeed  it  is  I  was  in 
want  of  food  and  drink  and  warmth  when  I  came  into 
this  house  ;  but  by  my  word,  I  have  forgotten  that  since 
I  saw  yourself,"  said  the  hunter.  "  How  little  you  are 
able  to  curb  your  tongue,"  said  Levarcham.  "  It  is  not 
a  great  thing  for  you  to  keep  your  tongue  quiet  when 
you  get  the  shelter  of  a  house  and  the  warmth  of  a 
hearth  on  a  dark  winter  night."  "  That  is  so,"  said  the 
hunter,  "  I  may  do  that  much,  to  keep  my  mouth  shut ; 
but  I  swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,  if  some 
others  of  the  people  of  the  world  saw  this  great  beauty 
that  is  hidden  away  here,  they  would  not  leave  her  long 
with  you."  "  What  people  are  those  ?  "  said  Deirdre.  "  I 
will  tell  you  that,"  said  the  hunter ;  "  they  are  Naoise, 
son  of  Usnach,  and  Ainnle  and  Ardan,  his  two  brothers." 
"  What  is  the  appearance  of  these  men,  if  we  should  ever 
see  them  ?  "  said  Deirdre.  "  This  is  the  appearance  that 
is  on  those  three  men,"  said  the  hunter  :  *'  the  colour  of 
the  raven  is  on  their  hair,  their  skin  is  like  the  swan  on 
the  wave,  their  cheeks  like  the  blood  of  the  speckled 
red  calf,  and  their  swiftness  and  their  leap  are  like  the 


CONCHUBAR   HEARS   OF   DEIRDRE  109 

salmon  of  the  stream  and  like  the  deer  of  the  grey 
mountain  ;  and  the  head  and  shoulders  of  Naoise  are 
above  all  the  other  men  of  Ireland."  "  However  they 
may  be,"  said  Levarcham,  "  get  you  out  from  here,  and 
take  another  road  ;  and  by  my  word,  Httle  is  my  thank- 
fulness to  yourself,  or  to  her  that  let  you  in."  "  You  need 
not  send  him  out  for  telling  me  that,"  said  Deirdre, 
"  for  as  to  those  three  men,  I  myself  saw  them  last  night 
in  a  dream,  and  they  hunting  upon  a  hill." 

The  hunter  went  away,  but  in  a  little  time  after  he 
began  to  think  to  himself  how  Conchubar,  High  King  of 
Ulster,  was  used  to  lie  down  at  night  and  to  rise  up  in 
the  morning  by  himself,  without  a  wife  or  any  one  to 
speak  to  ;  and  that  if  he  could  see  this  great  beauty  it 
was  likely  he  would  bring  her  home  to  Emain,  and  that 
he  himself  would  get  the  good-will  of  the  king  for 
telling  him  there  was  such  a  queen  to  be  found  on  the 
face  of  the  world. 

So  he  went  straight  to  King  Conchubar  at  Emain 
Macha,  and  he  sent  word  in  to  the  king  that  he  had 
news  for  him,  if  he  would  hear  it.  The  king  sent  for 
him  to  come  in.  "  What  is  the  reason  of  your  journey  ?  " 
he  said.  "  It  is  what  I  have  to  tell  you,  King,"  said  the 
hunter,  "  that  I  have  seen  the  greatest  beauty  that  ever 
was  born  in  Ireland,  and  I  am  come  to  tell  you  of  it." 

"  Who  is  this  great  beauty,  and  in  what  place  is  she  to 
be  seen,  when  she  was  never  seen  before  you  saw  her, 
if  you  did  see  her  ?  "  "I  did  see  her,  indeed,"  said  the 
hunter,  "  but  no  other  man  can  see  her,  unless  he  knows 
from  me  the  place  where  she  is  living."  "Will  you 
bring  me  to  the  place  where  she  is,  and  you  will  have 
a  good  reward  ? "  said  the  king.  "  I  will  bring  you 
there,"  said  the  hunter.  "  Let  you  stay  with  my  house- 
hold to-night,"  said  Conchubar,  "and  I  myself  and  my 
people  will  go  with  you  early  on  the  morning  of  to- 
morrow/'    "  I    will    stay,"    said    the    hunter,    and    he 


no  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

stayed   that   night   in    the    household    of    King    Con- 
chubar. 

Then  Conchubar  sent  to  Fergus  and  to  the  other 
chief  men  of  Ulster,  and  he  told  them  of  what  he  was 
about  to  do.  Though  it  was  early  when  the  songs  and 
the  music  of  the  birds  began  in  the  woods,  it  was  earlier 
yet  when  Conchubar,  king  of  Ulster,  rose  up  with  his 
little  company  of  near  friends,  in  the  fresh  spring  morn- 
ing of  the  fresh  and  pleasant  month  of  May,  and  the 
dew  was  heavy  on  every  bush  and  flower  as  they  went 
out  towards  the  green  hill  where  Deirdre  was  living 

But  many  a  young  man  of  them  that  had  a  light 
glad,  leaping  step  when  they  set  out,  had  but  a  tired, 
slow,  failing  step  before  the  end,  because  of  the  length 
and  the  roughness  of  the  way.  "  It  is  down  there 
below,"  said  the  hunter,  "  in  the  house  in  that  valley, 
the  woman  is  living,  but  I  myself  will  not  go  nearer  it 
than  this. 

Conchubar  and  his  troop  went  down  then  to  the 
green  hillock  where  Deirdre  was,  and  they  knocked 
at  the  door  of  the  house.  Levarcham  called  out  that 
neither  answer  nor  opening  would  be  given  to  any  one 
at  all,  and  that  she  did  not  want  disturbance  put  on 
herself  or  her  house.  "  Open,"  said  Conchubar,  "  in 
the  name  of  the  High  King  of  Ulster."  When  Levar- 
cham heard  Conchubar's  voice,  she  knew  there  was  no 
use  trying  to  keep  Deirdre  out  of  sight  any  longer,  and 
she  rose  up  in  haste  and  let  in  the  king,  and  as  many 
of  his  people  as  could  follow  him. 

When  the  king  saw  Deirdre  before  him,  he  thought 
in  himself  that  he  never  saw  in  the  course  of  the  day, 
or  in  the  dreams  of  the  night,  a  creature  so  beautiful, 
and  he  gave  her  his  full  heart's  weight  of  love  there  and 
then.  It  is  what  he  did  ;  he  put  Deirdre  up  on  the 
shoulders  of  his  men,  and  she  herself  and  Levarcham 
were  brought  away  to  Emain  Macha. 


DEIRDRE   SEES   NAOISE  in 

With  the  love  that  Conchubar  had  for  Deirdre,  he 
wanted  to  marry  her  with  no  delay,  but  when  her 
leave  was  asked,  she  would  not  give  it,  for  she  was 
young  yet,  and  she  had  no  knowledge  of  the  duties  of 
a  wife,  or  the  ways  of  a  king's  house.  And  when 
Conchubar  was  pressing  her  hard,  she  asked  him  to 
give  her  a  delay  of  a  year  and  a  day.  He  said  he 
would  give  her  that,  though  it  was  hard  for  him,  if  she 
would  give  him  her  certain  promise  to  marry  him  at 
the  year's  end.  She  did  that,  and  Conchubar  got  a 
woman  teacher  for  her,  and  nice,  fine,  pleasant,  modest 
maidens  to  be  with  her  at  her  lying  down  and  at  her 
rising  up,  to  be  companions  to  her.  And  Deirdre  grew 
wise  in  the  works  of  a  young  girl,  and  in  the  understand- 
ing of  a  woman  ;  and  if  any  one  at  all  looked  at  her 
face,  whatever  colour  she  was  before  that,  she  would 
blush  crimson  red.  And  it  is  what  Conchubar  thought, 
that  he  never  saw  with  the  eyes  of  his  body  a  creature 
that  pleased  him  so  well. 

One  day  Deirdre  and  her  companions  were  out  on  a 
hill  near  Emain  Macha,  looking  around  them  in  the 
pleasant  sunshine,  and  they  saw  three  men  walking 
together.  Deirdre  was  looking  at  the  men  and  wonder- 
ing at  them,  and  when  they  came  near,  she  remembered 
the  talk  of  the  hunter,  and  the  three  men  she  saw  in 
her  dream,  and  she  thought  to  herself  that  these  were 
the  three  sons  of  Usnach,  and  that  this  was  Naoise, 
that  had  his  head  and  shoulders  above  all  the  men  of 
Ireland.  The  three  brothers  went  by  without  turning 
their  eyes  at  all  upon  the  young  girls  on  the  hillside,  and 
they  were  singing  as  they  went,  and  whoever  heard  the 
low  singing  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  it  was  enchantment 
and  music  to  them,  and  every  cow  that  was  being 
milked  and  heard  it,  gave  two-thirds  more  of  milk. 
And  it  is  what  happened,  that  love  for  Naoise  came 
into  the  heart  of  Deirdre,  so  that  she   could   not  but 


112  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

follow  him.  She  gathered  up  her  skirt  and  went  after 
the  three  men  that  had  gone  past  the  foot  of  the  hill, 
leaving  her  companions  there  after  her. 

But  Ainnle  and  Ardan  had  heard  talk  of  the  young 
girl  that  was  at  Conchubar's  Court,  and  it  is  what  they 
thought,  that  if  Naoise  their  brother  would  see  her,  it 
is  for  himself  he  would  have  her,  for  she  was  not  yet 
married  to  the  king.  So  when  they  saw  Deirdre  coming 
after  them,  they  said  to  one  another  to  hasten  their  steps, 
for  they  had  a  long  road  to  travel,  and  the  dusk  of  night 
coming  on.  They  did  so,  and  Deirdre  saw  it,  and  she 
cried  out  after  them,  "  Naoise,  son  of  Usnach,  are  you 
going  to  leave  me  ?  "  "  What  cry  was  that  came  to  my 
ears,  that  it  is  not  well  for  me  to  answer,  and  not  easy  for 
me  to  refuse?"  said  Naoise.  "  It  was  nothing  but  the 
cry  of  Conchubar's  wild  ducks,"  said  his  brothers  ;  "  but 
let  us  quicken  our  steps  and  hasten  our  feet,  for  we 
have  a  long  road  to  travel,  and  the  dusk  of  the  evening 
coming  on."  They  did  so,  and  they  were  widening  the 
distance  between  themselves  and  her.  Then  Deirdre 
cried,  "  Naoise !  Naoise !  son  of  Usnach,  are  you  going 
to  leave  me?"  "What  cry  was  it  that  came  to  my 
ears  and  struck  my  heart,  that  it  is  not  well  for  me  to 
answer,  or  easy  for  me  to  refuse  ? "  said  Naoise- 
"  Nothing  but  the  cry  of  Conchubar's  wild  geese,"  said 
his  brothers  ;  "  but  let  us  quicken  our  steps  and  hasten 
our  feet,  the  darkness  of  night  is  coming  on."  They 
did  so,  and  were  widening  the  distance  between  them- 
selves and  her.  Then  Deirdre  cried  the  third  time, 
"  Naoise !  Naoise  !  Naoise  !  son  of  Usnach,  are  you  going 
to  leave  me  ?  "  "  What  sharp,  clear  cry  was  that,  the 
sweetest  that  ever  came  to  my  ears,  and  the  sharpest 
that  ever  struck  my  heart,  of  all  the  cries  I  ever  heard," 
said  Naoise.  "  What  is  it  but  the  scream  of  Conchubar's 
lake  swans,"  said  his  brothers.  "  That  was  the  third 
cry  of  some  person  beyond  there,"  said  Naoise,  "  and  I 


FLIGHT   OF   DEIRDRE  113 

swear  by  my  hand  of  valour,"  he  said,  "  I  will  go  no 
further  until  I  see  where  the  cry  comes  from."  So 
Naoise  turned  back  and  met  Deirdre,  and  Deirdre  and 
Naoise  kissed  one  another  three  times,  and  she  gave 
a  kiss  to  each  of  his  brothers.  And  with  the  confusion 
that  was  on  her,  a  blaze  of  red  fire  came  upon  her,  and 
her  colour  came  and  went  as  quickly  as  the  aspen  by 
the  stream.  And  it  is  what  Naoise  thought  to  himself, 
that  he  never  saw  a  woman  so  beautiful  in  his  life ;  and 
he  gave  Deirdre,  there  and  then,  the  love  that  he  never 
gave  to  living  thing,  to  vision,  or  to  creature,  but  to 
herself  alone. 

Then  he  lifted  her  high  on  his  shoulder,  and  he  said 
to  his  brothers  to  hasten  their  steps  ;  and  they  hastened 
them. 

"  Harm  will  come  of  this,"  said  the  young  men. 
"  Although  there  should  harm  come,"  said  Naoise,  "  I 
am  willing  to  be  in  disgrace  while  I  live.  We  will 
go  with  her  to  another  province,  and  there  is  not 
in  Ireland  a  king  who  will  not  give  us  a  welcome." 
So  they  called  their  people,  and  that  night  they  set 
out  with  three  times  fifty  men,  and  three  times  fifty 
women,  and  three  times  fifty  greyhounds,  and  Deirdre 
in  their  midst. 

They  were  a  long  time  after  that  shifting  from  one 
place  to  another  all  around  Ireland,  from  Essruadh  in  the 
south,  to  Beinn  Etair  in  the  east  again,  and  it  is  often 
they  were  in  danger  of  being  destroyed  by  Conchubar's 
devices.  And  one  time  the  Druids  raised  a  wood 
before  them,  but  Naoise  and  his  brothers  cut  their  way 
through  it.  But  at  last  they  got  out  of  Ulster  and 
sailed  to  the  country  of  Alban,  and  settled  in  a  lonely 
place ;  and  when  hunting  on  the  mountains  failed  them, 
they  fell  upon  the  cattle  of  the  men  of  Alban,  so  that 
these  gathered  together  to  make  an  end  of  them.  But 
the  sons  of  Usnach  called  to  the  king  of  Scotland,  and 

H 


114    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

he  took  them   into  his  friendship,  and   they  gave  him 
their  help  when  he  went  out  into  battles  or  to  war. 

But  all  this  time  they  had  never  spoken  to  the  king 
of  Deirdre,  and  they  kept  her  with  themselves,  not  to 
let  any  one  see  her,  for  they  were  afraid  they  might  get 
their  death  on  account  of  her,  she  being  so  beautiful. 

But  it  chanced  very  early  one  morning,  the  king's 
steward  came  to  visit  them,  and  he  found  his  way  into 
the  house  where  Naoise  and  Deirdre  were,  and  there 
he  saw  them  asleep  beside  one  another.  He  went 
back  then  to  the  king,  and  he  said  :  "  Up  to  this  time 
there  has  never  been  found  a  woman  that  would  be  a 
fitting  wife  for  you  ;  but  there  is  a  woman  on  the  shore 
of  Loch  Ness  now,  is  well  worthy  of  you,  king  of  the 
East.  And  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  make  an  end 
of  Naoise,  for  it  is  of  his  wife  I  am  speaking."  "  I  will 
not  do  that,"  said  the  king ;  "  but  go  to  her,"  he  said, 
"and  bid  her  to  come  and  see  me  secretly."  The 
steward  brought  her  that  message,  but  Deirdre  sent 
him  away,  and  all  that  he  had  said  to  her,  she  told  it  to 
Naoise  afterwards.  Then  when  she  would  not  come  to 
him,  the  king  sent  the  sons  of  Usnach  into  every  hard 
fight,  hoping  they  would  get  their  death,  but  they  won 
every  battle,  and  came  back  safe  again.  And  after  a 
while  they  went  to  Loch  Eitche,  near  the  sea,  and  they 
were  left  to  themselves  there  for  a  while  in  peace  and 
quietness.  And  they  settled  and  made  a  dwelling 
house  for  themselves  by  the  side  of  Loch  Ness,  and 
they  could  kill  the  salmon  of  the  stream  from  out  their 
own  door,  and  the  deer  of  the  grey  hills  from  out  their 
window.  But  when  Naoise  went  to  the  court  of  the 
king,  his  clothes  were  splendid  among  the  great  men 
of  the  army  of  Scotland,  a  cloak  of  bright  purple, 
rightly  shaped,  with  a  fringe  of  bright  gold  ;  a  coat  of 
satin  with  fifty  hooks  of  silver ;  a  brooch  on  which 
were  a  hundred  polished  gems  ;  a  gold-hilted  sword  in 


CONCHUBAR'S   FEAST  115 

his  hand,  two  blue-green  spears  of  bright  points,  a 
dagger  with  the  colour  of  yellow  gold  on  it,  and  a  hilt 
of  silver.  But  the  two  children  they  had,  Gaiar  and 
Aebgreine,  they  gave  into  the  care  of  Manannan,  Son  of 
the  Sea.  And  he  cared  them  well  in  Emhain  of  the 
Apple  Trees,  and  he  brought  Bobaras  the  poet  to  give 
learning  to  Gaiar.  And  Aebgreine  of  the  Sunny  Face 
he  gave  in  marriage  afterwards  to  Rinn,  son  of  Eochaidh 
Juil  of  the  Land  of  Promise. 

Now  it  happened  after  a  time  that  a  very  great 
feast  was  made  by  Conchubar,  in  Emain  Macha,  for 
all  the  great  among  his  nobles,  so  that  the  whole 
company  were  easy  and  pleasant  together.  The 
musicians  stood  up  to  play  their  songs  and  to  give 
poems,  and  they  gave  out  the  branches  of  relationship 
and  of  kindred.  These  are  the  names  of  the  poets 
that  were  in  Emain  at  the  time,  Cathbad,  the  Druid, 
son  of  Conall,  son  of  Rudraige ;  Geanann  of  the 
Bright  Face,  son  of  Cathbad  ;  Ferceirtne,  and  Geanann 
Black-Knee,  and  many  others,  and  Sencha,  son  of 
Ailell. 

They  were  all  drinking  and  making  merry  until 
Conchubar,  the  king,  raised  his  voice  and  spoke  aloud, 
and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  I  desire  to  know  from  you,  did 
you  ever  see  a  better  house  than  this  house  of  Emain, 
or  a  hearth  better  than  my  hearth  in  any  place  you 
were  ever  in  ? "  "  We  did  not,"  they  said.  "  If  that  is 
so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  do  you  know  of  anything  at  all 
that  is  wanting  to  you  ?  "  "  We  know  of  nothing,"  said 
they.  "  That  is  not  so  with  me,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I 
know  of  a  great  want  that  is  on  you,  the  want  of  the 
three  best  candles  of  the  Gael,  the  three  noble  sons 
of  Usnach,  that  ought  not  to  be  away  from  us  for  the 
sake  of  any  woman  in  the  world,  Naoise,  Ainnle,  and 
Ardan  ;   for   surely   they  are  the  sons  of  a  king,  and 


ii6    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

they  would  defend  the  High  Kingship  against  the  best 
men  of  Ireland."  "If  we  had  dared,"  said  they,  "it  is 
long  ago  we  would  have  said  it,  and  more  than  that, 
the  province  of  Ulster  would  be  equal  to  any  other 
province  in  Ireland,  if  there  was  no  Ulsterman  in  it 
but  those  three  alone,  for  it  is  lions  they  are  in  hardness 
and  in  bravery."  "  If  that  is  so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  let 
us  send  word  by  a  messenger  to  Alban,  and  to  the 
dwelling-place  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  to  ask  them 
back  again."  "  Who  will  go  there  with  the  message  ?  " 
said  they  all.  "  I  cannot  know  that,"  said  Conchubar, 
"  for  there  is  geasa,  that  is  bonds,  on  Naoise  not  to 
come  back  with  any  man  only  one  of  the  three,  Conall 
Cearnach,  or  Fergus,  or  Cuchulain,  and  I  will  know 
now,"  said  he,  "  which  one  of  those  three  loves  me 
best."  Then  he  called  Conall  to  one  side,  and  he 
asked  him,  "  What  would  you  do  with  me  if  I  should 
send  you  for  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  if  they  were 
destroyed  through  me — a  thing  I  do  not  mean  to  do  ?  " 
"  As  I  am  not  going  to  undertake  it,"  said  Conall,  "  I 
will  say  that  it  is  not  one  alone  I  would  kill,  but  any 
Ulsterman  I  would  lay  hold  of  that  had  harmed  them 
would  get  shortening  of  life  from  me  and  the  sorrow 
of  death."  "I  see  well,"  said  Conchubar,  "you  are  no 
friend  of  mine,"  and  he  put  Conall  away  from  him- 
Then  he  called  Cuchulain  to  him,  and  asked  him  the 
same  as  he  did  the  other.  "  I  give  my  word,  as  I  am 
not  going,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  if  you  want  that  of  me, 
and  that  you  think  to  kill  them  when  they  come,  it  is 
not  one  person  alone  that  would  die  for  it,  but  every 
Ulsterman  I  could  lay  hold  of  would  get  shortening  of 
life  from  me  and  the  sorrow  of  death."  "  I  see  well," 
said  Conchubar,  "  that  you  are  no  friend  of  mine."  And 
he  put  Cuchulain  from  him.  And  then  he  called 
Fergus  to  him,  and  asked  him  the  same  question,  and 
Fergus  said,  "  Whatever  may  happen,  I  promise  your 


THE    MESSENGER  117 

blood  will  be  safe  from  me,  but  besides  yourself  there 
is  no  Ulsterman  that  would  try  to  harm  them,  and  that 
I  would  lay  hold  of,  but  I  would  give  him  shortening  of 
life  and  the  sorrow  of  death."  "  I  see  well,"  said 
Conchubar,  "  it  is  yourself  must  go  for  them,  and  it  is 
to-morrow  you  must  set  out,  for  it  is  with  you  they  will 
come,  and  when  you  are  coming  back  to  us  westward, 
I  put  you  under  bonds  to  go  first  to  the  fort  of  Borach, 
son  of  Cainte,  and  give  me  your  word  now  that  as 
soon  as  you  get  there,  you  will  send  on  the  sons  of 
Usnach  to  Emain,  whether  it  be  day  or  night  at  the 
time."  After  that  the  two  of  them  went  in  together, 
and  Fergus  told  all  the  company  how  it  was  under  his 
charge  they  were  to  be  put. 

Then  Conchubar  went  to  Borach  and  asked  had  he 
a  feast  ready  prepared  for  him.  "  I  have,"  said  Borach, 
"  but  although  I  was  able  to  make  it  ready,  I  was  not 
able  to  bring  it  to  Emain."  "  If  that  is  so,"  said 
Conchubar,  "  give  it  to  Fergus  when  he  comes  back  to 
Ireland,  for  it  is  geasa  on  him  not  to  refuse  your  feast." 
Borach  promised  he  would  do  that,  and  so  they  wore 
away  that  night. 

So  Fergus  set  out  in  the  morning,  and  he  brought  no 
guard  nor  helpers  with  him,  but  himself  and  his  two 
sons,  Fair-Haired  lollan,  and  Rough-Red  Buinne,  and 
Cuillean,  the  shield-bearer,  and  the  shield  itself  They 
went  on  till  they  got  to  the  dwelling-place  of  the  sons 
of  Usnach,  and  to  Loch  Eitche  in  Alba.  It  is  how  the 
sons  of  Usnach  lived;  they  had  three  houses,  and  the 
house  where  they  made  ready  the  food,  it  is  not  there 
they  would  eat  it,  and  the  house  where  they  would  eat 
it,  it  is  not  there  they  would  sleep. 

When  Fergus  came  to  the  harbour  he  let  a  great 
shout  out  of  him.  And  it  is  how  Naoise  and  Deirdre 
were,  they  had  a  chessboard  between  them,  and  they 
playing  on  it.     Naoise  heard  the  shout,  and  he  said, 


ii8    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

"  That  is  the  shout  of  a  man  of  Ireland."  "  It  is  not,  but 
the  cry  of  a  man  of  Alban,"  said  Deirdre.  She  knew  at 
the  first  it  was  Fergus  gave  the  shout,  but  she  denied 
it.  Then  Fergus  let  another  shout  out  of  him.  "  That 
is  an  Irish  shout,"  said  Naoise  again.  "  It  is  not, 
indeed,"  said  Deirdre,  "  let  us  go  on  playing."  Then 
Fergus  gave  the  third  shout,  and  the  sons  of  Usnach 
knew  this  time  it  was  the  shout  of  Fergus,  and 
Naoise  said  to  Ardan  to  go  out  and  meet  him.  Then 
Deirdre  told  him  that  she  herself  knew  at  the  first  shout 
that  it  was  Fergus.  "  Why  did  you  deny  it,  then. 
Queen  ? "  said  Naoise.  "  Because  of  a  vision  I  saw 
last  night,"  said  Deirdre.  "  Three  birds  I  saw  coming 
to  us  from  Emain  Macha,  and  three  drops  of  honey 
in  their  mouths,  and  they  left  them  with  us,  and  three 
drops  of  our  blood  they  brought  away  with  them." 
"What  meaning  do  you  put  on  that.  Queen?"  said 
Naoise.  "  It  is,"  said  Deirdre,  "  Fergus  that  is  coming 
to  us  with  a  message  of  peace  from  Conchubar,  for 
honey  is  not  sweeter  than  a  message  of  peace  sent 
by  a  lying  man."  "  Let  that  pass,"  said  Naoise.  "  Is 
there  anything  in  it  but  troubled  sleep  and  the 
melancholy  of  woman  ?  And  it  is  a  long  time  Fergus 
is  in  the  harbour.  Rise  up,  Ardan,  to  be  before  him,  and 
bring  him  with  you  here."  And  Ardan  went  down  to 
meet  him,  and  gave  a  fond  kiss  to  himself  and  to  his 
two  sons.  And  it  is  what  he  said :  "  My  love  to 
you,  dear  comrades."  After  that  he  asked  news  of 
Ireland,  and  they  gave  it  to  him,  and  then  they  came 
to  where  Naoise  and  Ainnle  and  Deirdre  were,  and 
they  kissed  Fergus  and  his  two  sons,  and  they  asked 
news  of  Ireland  from  them.  "It  is  the  best  news  I 
have  for  you,"  said  Fergus,  "  that  Conchubar,  king  of 
Ulster,  has  sworn  by  the  earth  beneath  him,  by  the 
high  heaven  above  him,  and  by  the  sun  that  travels  to 
the  west,  that  he  will  have  no  rest  by  day  nor  sleep  by 


DEIRDRE'S    DREAMS  119 

night,  if  the  sons  of  Usnach,  his  own  foster-brothers, 
will  not  come  back  to  the  land  of  their  home  and  the 
country  of  their  birth  ;  and  he  has  sent  us  to  ask  you 
there."  "  It  is  better  for  them  to  stop  here,"  said 
Deirdre,  "  for  they  have  a  greater  sway  in  Scotland 
than  Conchubar  himself  has  in  Ireland."  "  One's  own 
country  is  better  than  any  other  thing,"  said  Fergus, 
"  for  no  man  can  have  any  pleasure,  however  great  his 
good  luck  and  his  way  of  living,  if  he  does  not  see  his 
own  country  every  day."  "  That  is  true,"  said  Naoise, 
"  for  Ireland  is  dearer  to  myself  than  Alban,  though  I 
would  get  more  in  Alban  than  in  Ireland."  "  It  will  be 
safe  for  you  to  come  with  me,"  said  Fergus.  "  It  will 
be  safe  indeed,"  said  Naoise,  "  and  we  will  go  with  you 
to  Ireland  ;  and  though  there  were  no  trouble  beneath 
the  sun,  but  a  man  to  be  far  from  his  own  land,  there  is 
little  delight  in  peace  and  a  long  sleep  to  a  man  that 
is  an  exile.  It  is  a  pity  for  the  man  that  is  an  exile ; 
it  is  little  his  honour,  it  is  great  his  grief,  for  it  is  he  will 
have  his  share  of  wandering." 

It  was  not  with  Deirdre's  will  Naoise  said  that,  and 
she  was  greatly  against  going  with  Fergus.  And  she 
said :  "  I  had  a  dream  last  night  of  the  three  sons  of 
Usnach,  and  they  bound  and  put  in  the  grave  by  Con- 
chubar of  the  Red  Branch."  But  Naoise  said  :  "  Lay 
down  your  dream,  Deirdre,  on  the  heights  of  the  hills, 
lay  down  your  dream  on  the  sailors  of  the  sea,  lay 
down  your  dream  on  the  rough  grey  stones,  for  we  will 
give  peace  and  we  will  get  it  from  the  king  of  the 
world  and  from  Conchubar."  But  Deirdre  spoke  again, 
and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  There  is  the  howling  of  dogs 
in  my  ears  ;  a  vision  of  the  night  is  before  my  eyes,  I 
see  Fergus  away  from  us,  I  see  Conchubar  without 
mercy  in  his  dun ;  I  see  Naoise  without  strength  in 
battle  ;  I  see  Ainnle  without  his  loud-sounding  shield  ; 
I  see  Ardan  without  shield  or  breastplate,  and  the  Hill 


I20  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

of  Atha  without  delight.  I  see  Conchubar  asking  for 
blood ;  I  see  Fergus  caught  with  hidden  lies  ;  I  see 
Deirdre  crying  with  tears,  I  see  Deirdre  crying  with 
tears." 

"  A  thing  that  is  unpleasing  to  me,  and  that  I  would 
never  give  in  to,"  said  Fergus,  "  is  to  listen  to  the  howling 
of  dogs,  and  to  the  dreams  of  women ;  and  since  Con- 
chubar, the  High  King,  has  sent  a  message  of  friendship, 
it  would  not  be  right  for  you  to  refuse  it."  "It  would 
not  be  right,  indeed,"  said  Naoise,  "  and  we  will  go  with 
you  to-morrow."  And  Fergus  gave  his  word,  and  he 
said,  "  If  all  the  men  of  Ireland  were  against  you,  it 
would  not  profit  them,  for  neither  shield  nor  sword  or  a 
helmet  itself  would  be  any  help  or  protection  to  them 
against  you,  and  I  myself  to  be  with  you."  "  That  is 
true,"  said  Naoise,  "and  we  will  go  with  you  to 
Ireland." 

They  spent  the  night  there  until  morning,  and  then 
they  went  where  the  ships  were,  and  they  went  on  the 
sea,  and  a  good  many  of  their  people  with  them,  and 
Deirdre  looked  back  on  the  land  of  Alban,  and  it  is 
what  she  said  :  "  My  love  to  you,  O  land  to  the  east, 
and  it  goes  ill  with  me  to  leave  you  ;  for  it  is  pleasant 
are  your  bays  and  your  harbours  and  your  wide  flowery 
plains  and  your  green-sided  hills ;  and  little  need  was 
there  for  us  to  leave  you."  And  she  made  this  com- 
plaint :  "  Dear  to  me  is  that  land,  that  land  to  the  east, 
Alban,  with  its  wonders  ;  I  would  not  have  come  from  it 
hither  but  that  I  came  with  Naoise. 

"  Dear  to  me,  Dun  Fiodhaigh  and  Dun  Fionn  ;  dear  is 
the  dun  above  them  ;  dear  to  me  Inis  Droignach,  dear  to 
me  Dun  Suibhne. 

"  O  Coin  Cuan !  Ochone  !  Coil  Cuan !  where  Ainnle 
used  to  come.  My  grief!  it  was  short  I  thought  his 
stay  there  with  Naoise  in  Western  Alban.  Glen  Laoi, 
O  Glen  Laoi,  where  I  used  to  sleep  under  soft  coverings  ; 


BORACH'S   FEAST  121 

fish  and  venison  and  badger's  flesh,  that  was  my  portion 
in  Glen  Laoi. 

"Glen  Masan,  my  grief!  Glen  Masan !  high  its  hart's- 
tongue,  bright  its  stalks  ;  we  were  rocked  to  pleasant 
sleep  over  the  wooded  harbour  of  Masan. 

"Glen  Archan,  my  grief!  Glen  Archan,  the  straight 
valley  of  the  pleasant  ridge ;  never  was  there  a  young 
man  more  light-hearted  than  my  Naoise  used  to  be  in 
Glen  Archan. 

"Glen  Eitche,  my  grief!  Glen  Eitche,  it  was  there 
I  built  my  first  house ;  beautiful  were  the  woods  on 
our  rising ;  the  home  of  the  sun  is  Glen  Eitche. 

"  Glen-da-Rua,  my  grief!  Glen-da- Rua,  my  love  to 
every  man  that  belongs  to  it ;  sweet  is  the  voice  of  the 
cuckoo  on  the  bending  branch  on  the  hill  above  Glen- 
da-Rua. 

"  Dear  to  me  is  Droighin  over  the  fierce  strand,  dear 
are  its  waters  over  the  clean  sand ;  I  would  never  have 
come  out  from  it  at  all  but  that  I  came  with  my 
beloved ! " 

After  she  had  made  that  complaint  they  came  to  Dun 
Borach,  and  Borach  gave  three  fond  kisses  to  Fergus 
and  to  the  sons  of  Usnach  along  with  him.  It  was  then 
Borach  said  he  had  a  feast  laid  out  for  Fergus,  and  that 
it  was  geasa  for  him  to  leave  it  until  he  would  have 
eaten  it.  But  Fergus  reddened  with  anger  from  head  to 
foot,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  It  is  a  bad  thing  you  have 
done,  Borach,  laying  out  a  feast  for  me,  and  Conchubar 
to  have  made  me  give  my  word  that  as  soon  as  I  would 
come  to  Ireland,  whether  it  would  be  by  day  or  in  the 
night-time,  I  would  send  on  the  sens  of  Usnach  to  Emain 
Macha."  "I  hold  you  under  bonds,"  said  Borach,  "to 
stop  and  use  the  feast." 

Then  Fergus  asked  Naoise  what  should  he  do  about 
the  feast.  "  You  must  choose,"  said  Deirdre,  "  whether 
you  will  forsake  the  children  of  Usnach  or  the  feast,  and 


122  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

it  would  be  better  for  you  to  refuse  the  feast  than  to 
forsake  the  sons  of  Usnach."     "  I  will  not  forsake  them," 
said    he,   "for    I    will    send    my  two  sons,  Fair-Haired 
lollan    and   Rough-Red   Buinne,  with  them,  to  Emain 
Macha."     "  On  my  word,"  said  Naoise,  "  that  is  a  great 
deal    to   do    for   us ;   for    up   to   this    no   other    person 
ever  protected    us  but   ourselves."     And    he  went   out 
of  the   place  in  great  anger;  and  Ainnle,  and  Ardan, 
and  Deirdre,  and  the  two  sons  of  Fergus  followed  him, 
and   they   left    Fergus  dark    and  sorrowful  after  them. 
But   for   all    that,  Fergus  was    full  sure  that  if  all  the 
provinces   of  Ireland  would   go  into  one  council,  they 
would    not  consent  to  break  the  pledge  he  had  given. 
As  for  the  sons  of  Usnach,  they  went  on  their  way 
by   every    short   road,    and    Deirdre   said   to  them,    "  I 
will  give  you  a  good  advice,  Sons  of  Usnach,  though 
you  may  not  follow  it."     "  What  is  that  advice,  Queen  ?  " 
said    Naoise.     "  It   is,"   said  she,  "  to  go  to  Rechrainn, 
between  Ireland  and  Scotland,  and  to  wait  there  until 
Fergus  has  done  with  the  feast ;  and  that  will  be  the 
keeping   of  his    word    to    Fergus,   and    it   will    be   the 
lengthening  of  your  lives  to  you."     "  We  will  not  follow 
that  advice,"  said  Naoise ;  and  the  children  of  Fergus 
said    it   was    little   trust    she   had    in    them,   when    she 
thought  they  would  not  protect  her,  though  their  hands 
might  not  be  so  strong  as  the  hands  of  the  sons  of 
Usnach ;  and  besides  that,  Fergus  had  given  them  his 
word.     "  Alas !  it  is  sorrow  came  on  us  with  the  word 
of  Fergus,"  said  Deirdre,  "  and  he  to  forsake  us  for  a 
feast,"  and  she  made  this  complaint :  "  It  is   grief  to 
me  that  ever  I  came  from  the  east  on  the  word  of  the 
unthinking  son  of  Rogh.     It  is  only  lamentations  I  will 
make.     Och  !  it  is  very  sorrowful  my  heart  is  ! 

"  My  heart  is  heaped  up  with  sorrow  ;  it  is  to-night 
my  great  hurt  is.  My  grief!  my  dear  companions,  the 
end  of  your  days  is  come." 


DEIRDRE'S   VISION  123 

And  it  is  what  Naoise  answed  her :  "  Do  not  say 
that  in  your  haste,  Deirdre,  more  beautiful  than  the 
sun.  Fergus  would  never  have  come  for  us  eastward 
to  bring  us  back  to  be  destroyed." 

And  Deirdre  said,  *' My  grief!  I  think  it  too  far  for 
you,  beautiful  sons  of  Usnach,  to  have  come  from  Alban 
of  the  rough  grass  ;  it  is  lasting  will  be  its  life-long 
sorrow." 

After  that  they  went  forward  to  Finncairn  of  the 
watch-tower  on  sharp-peaked  Slieve  Fuad,  and  Deirdre 
stayed  after  them  in  the  valley,  and  sleep  fell  on  her 
there. 

When  Naoise  saw  that  Deirdre  was  left  after  them, 
he  turned  back  as  she  was  rising  out  of  her  sleep,  and 
he  said,  "What  made  you  wait  after  us,  Queen?" 
"  Sleep  that  was  on  me,"  said  Deirdre ;  "  and  I  saw  a 
vision  in  it."  "What  vision  was  that?"  said  Naoise. 
"  It  was,"  she  said,  "  Fair-Haired  lollan  that  I  saw  with- 
out his  head  on  him,  and  Rough-Red  Buinne  with  his 
head  on  him ;  and  it  is  without  help  of  Rough-Red 
Buinne  you  were,  and  it  is  with  the  help  of  Fair- Haired 
lollan  you  were."     And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  It  is  a  sad  vision  has  been  shown  to  me,  of  my  four 
tall,  fair,  bright  companions  ;  the  head  of  each  has  been 
taken  from  him,  and  no  help  to  be  had  one  from 
another." 

But  when  Naoise  heard  this  he  reproached  her,  and 
said,  "  O  fair,  beautiful  woman,  nothing  does  your  mouth 
speak  but  evil.  Do  not  let  the  sharpness  and  the 
great  misfortune  that  come  from  it  fall  on  your 
friends."  And  Deirdre  answered  him  with  kind,  gentle 
words,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  It  would  be  better  to 
me  to  see  harm  come  on  any  other  person  than  upon 
any  one  of  you  three,  with  whom  I  have  travelled  over 
the  seas  and  over  the  wide  plains ;  but  when  I  look  on 
you,  it  is  only  Buinne  I  can  see  safe  and  whole,  and 


124    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

I  know  by  that  his.  Hfe  will  be  longest  among  you  ;  and 
indeed  it  is  I  that  am  sorrowful  to-night." 

After  that  they  came  forward  to  the  high  willows, 
and  it  was  then  Deirdre  said,  "  I  see  a  cloud  in  the 
air,  and  it  is  a  cloud  of  blood  ;  and  I  would  give  you 
a  good  advice,  sons  of  Usnach,"  she  said.  "  What  is 
that  advice  ? "  said  Naoise.  "  To  go  to  Dundealgan 
where  Cuchulain  is,  until  Fergus  has  done  with  the 
feast,  and  to  be  under  the  protection  of  Cuchulain,  for 
fear  of  the  treachery  of  Conchubar."  "  Since  there  is 
no  fear  on  us,  we  will  not  follow  that  advice,"  said 
Naoise.  And  Deirdre  complained,  and  it  is  what  she 
said :  "  O  Naoise,  look  at  the  cloud  I  see  above  us 
in  the  air ;  I  see  a  cloud  over  green  Macha,  cold  and 
deep  red  like  blood.  I  am  startled  by  the  cloud  that 
I  see  here  in  the  air ;  a  thin,  dreadful  cloud  that  is  like 
a  clot  of  blood.  I  give  a  right  advice  to  the  beautiful 
sons  of  Usnach  not  to  go  to  Emain  to-night,  because 
of  the  danger  that  is  over  them. 

"We  will  go  to  Dundealgan,  where  the  Hound  of 
the  Smith  is  ;  we  will  come  to-morrow  from  the  south 
along  with  the  Hound,  Cuchulain." 

But  Naoise  said  in  his  anger  to  Deirdre,  "  Since  there 
is  no  fear  on  us,  we  will  not  follow  your  advice."  And 
Deirdre  turned  to  the  grandsons  of  Rogh,  and  it  is  what 
she  said  :  "  It  is  seldom  until  now,  Naoise,  that  yourself 
and  myself  were  not  of  the  one  mind.  And  I  say  to 
you,  Naoise,  that  you  would  not  have  gone  against  me 
like  this,  the  day  Manannan  gave  me  the  cup  in  the 
time  of  his  great  victory." 

After  that  they  went  on  to  Emain  Macha.  "  Sons  of 
Usnach,"  said  Deirdre,  "  I  have  a  sign  by  which  you  will 
know  if  Conchubar  is  going  to  do  treachery  on  you." 
"What  sign  is  that?"  said  Naoise.  "If  you  are  let 
come  into  the  house  where  Conchubar  is,  and  the  nobles 
of  Ulster,  then  Conchubar  is  not  going  to  do  treachery 


THE   RETURN   TO   EMAIN  125 

on  you.  But  if  it  is  in  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  you 
are  put,  then  he  is  going  to  do  treachery  on  you." 

After  that  they  came  to  Emain  Macha,  and  they  took 
the  handwood  and  struck  the  door,  and  the  doorkeeper 
asked  who  was  there.  They  told  him  that  it  was  the 
sons  of  Usnach,  and  Deirdre,  and  the  two  sons  of 
Fergus  were  there. 

When  Conchubar  heard  that,  he  called  his  stewards 
and  serving  men  to  him,  and  he  asked  them  how  was 
the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  for  food  and  for  drink. 
They  said  that  if  all  the  seven  armies  of  Ulster  would 
come  there,  they  would  find  what  would  satisfy  them. 
"  If  that  is  so,"  said  Conchubar,  "  bring  the  sons  of 
Usnach  into  it." 

It  was  then  Deirdre  said,  "It  would  have  been  better 
for  you  to  follow  my  advice,  and  never  to  have  come 
to  Emain,  and  it  would  be  right  for  you  to  leave  it,  even 
at  this  time."  "  We  will  not,"  said  Fair-Haired  loUan, 
''  for  it  is  not  fear  or  cowardliness  was  ever  seen  on  us, 
but  we  will  go  to  the  house."  So  they  went  on  to  the 
House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  the  stewards  and  the 
serving-men  with  them,  and  well-tasting  food  was 
served  to  them,  and  pleasant  drinks,  till  they  were 
all  glad  and  merry,  except  only  Deirdre  and  the  sons 
of  Usnach ;  for  they  did  not  use  much  food  or  drink, 
because  of  the  length  and  the  greatness  of  their  journey 
from  Dun  Borach  to  Emain  Macha.  Then  Naoise  said, 
"  Give  the  chessboard  to  us  till  we  go  playing."  So 
they  gave  them  the  chessboard  and  they  began  to  play. 

It  was  just  at  that  time  Conchubar  was  asking, 
"  Who  will  I  send  that  will  bring  me  word  of  Deirdre, 
and  that  will  tell  me  if  she  has  the  same  appearance 
and  the  same  shape  she  had  before,  for  if  she  has,  there 
is  not  a  woman  in  the  world  has  a  more  beautiful  shape 
or  appearance  than  she  has,  and  I  will  bring  her  out 
with  edge  of  blade  and  point  of  sword  in  spite  of  the 


126  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USN  AC  H 

sons  of  Usnach.  sfood  thoucrh  thev  be.  But  if  not,  let 
Naoise  have  her  for  himself."  ''  I  myself  will  go  there," 
said  Levarcham,  *'  and  I  will  bring  you  word  of  that." 
x\nd  it  is  how  it  was,  Deirdre  was  dearer  to  her  than 
any  other  person  in  the  world  ;  for  it  was  often  she 
went  through  the  world  looking  for  Deirdre  and  bring- 
ing news  to  her  and  from  her.  So  Levarcham  went 
over  to  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  near  it  she 
saw  a  great  troop  of  armed  men,  and  she  spoke  to 
them,  but  they  made  her  no  answer,  and  she  knew  by 
that  it  was  none  of  the  men  of  Ulster  were  in  it,  but 
men  from  some  strange  country  that  Conchubar's 
messengers  had  brought  to  Emain. 

And  then  she  went  in  where  Naoise  and  Deirdre 
were,  and  it  is  how  she  found  them,  the  polished 
chessboard  between  them,  and  they  playing  on  it ; 
and  she  gave  them  fond  kisses,  and  she  said :  "  You 
are  not  doing  well  to  be  playing  ;  and  it  is  to  bring 
Conchubar  word  if  Deirdre  has  the  same  shape  and 
appearance  she  used  to  have  that  he  sent  me  here 
now ;  and  there  is  grief  on  me  for  the  deed  that  will 
be  done  in  Emain  to-night,  treacher)-  that  will  be  done, 
and  the  killing  of  kindred,  and  the  three  bright  candles 
of  the  Gael  to  be  quenched,  and  Emain  will  not  be  the 
better  of  it  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,"  and  she  made 
this  complaint  sadly  and  wearily : 

"  My  heart  is  hea\y  for  the  treachery  that  is  being 
done  in  Emain  this  night ;  on  account  of  this  treachery, 
Emain  will  never  be  at  peace  from  this  out. 

''  The  three  that  are  most  king-like  to-day  under  the 
sun ;  the  three  best  of  all  that  live  on  the  earth,  it  is 
grief  to  me  to-night  they  to  die  for  the  sake  of  any 
woman.  Naoise  and  Ainnle  whose  deeds  are  known, 
and  Ardan,  their  brother ;  treachery  is  to  be  done  on 
the  young,  bright-faced  three  ;  it  is  not  I  that  am  not 
sorrowful  to-night." 


GELBAN  127 

When  she  had  made  this  complaint,  Levarcham  said 
to  the  sons  of  Usnach  and  to  the  children  of  Fergus  to 
shut  close  the  doors  and  the  windows  of  the  house  and 
to  do  bravery.  "  And  oh,  sons  of  Fergus,"  she  said, 
"  defend  your  charge  and  your  care  bravely  till  Fergus 
comes,  and  you  will  have  praise  and  a  blessing  for  it." 
And  she  cried  with  many  tears,  and  she  went  back  to 
where  Conchubar  was,  and  he  asked  news  of  Deirdre 
of  her.  And  Levarcham  said,  "  It  is  good  news  and 
bad  news  I  have  for  you."  "  What  news  is  that  ? " 
said  Conchubar.  "  It  is  the  good  news,"  she  said,  "  the 
three  sons  of  Usnach  to  have  come  to  you  and  to  be 
over  there,  and  they  are  the  three  that  are  bravest  and 
mightiest  in  form  and  in  looks  and  in  countenance,  of 
all  in  the  world ;  and  Ireland  will  be  yours  from  this 
out,  since  the  sons  of  Usnach  are  with  you  ;  and  the 
new^s  that  is  worst  with  me  is,  the  woman  that  was  best 
of  the  women  of  the  world  in  form  and  in  looks,  going 
out  of  Emain,  is  without  the  form  and  without  the 
appearance  she  used  to  have." 

When  Conchubar  heard  that,  much  of  his  jealousy 
went  backward,  and  he  was  drinking  and  making  merry 
for  a  while,  until  he  thought  on  Deirdre  again  the 
second  time,  and  on  that  he  asked,  "Who  will  I  get 
to  bring  me  word  of  Deirdre  ?  "  But  he  did  not  find 
any  one  would  go  there.  And  then  he  said  to  Gelban, 
the  merry,  pleasant  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlann  :  "  Go 
over  and  bring  me  word  if  Deirdre  has  the  same  shape 
and  the  same  appearance  she  used  to  have,  for  if  she  has, 
there  is  not  on  the  ricige  of  the  world  or  on  the  waves 
of  the  earth,  a  woman  more  beautiful  than  herself" 

So  Gelban  went  to  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch, 
and  he  found  the  doors  and  the  windows  of  the  fort 
shut,  and  fear  came  on  him.  And  it  is  what  he  said  : 
"  It  is  not  an  easy  road  for  any  one  that  would  get  to 
the   sons   of  Usnach,  for   I    think  there  is  very  great 


128  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

anger  on  them."  And  after  that  he  found  a  window 
that  was  left  open  by  forgetfulness  in  the  house,  and 
he  was  looking  in.  Then  Deirdre  saw  him  through 
the  window,  and  when  she  saw  him  looking  at  her,  she 
went  into  a  red  blaze  of  blushes,  and  Naoise  knew  that 
some  one  was  looking  at  her  from  the  window,  and  she 
told  him  that  she  saw  a  young  man  looking  in  at  them. 
It  is  how  Naoise  was  at  that  time,  with  a  man  of  the 
chessmen  in  his  hand,  and  he  made  a  fair  throw  over  his 
shoulder  at  the  young  man,  that  put  the  eye  out  of  his 
head.  The  young  man  went  back  to  where  Conchubar 
was.  "  You  were  merry  and  pleasant  going  out,"  said 
Conchubar,  "  but  you  are  sad  and  cheerless  coming 
back."  And  then  Gelban  told  him  the  story  from 
beginning  to  end.  "  I  see  well,"  said  Conchubar,  "  the 
man  that  made  that  throw  will  be  king  of  the  world, 
unless  he  has  his  life  shortened.  And  what  appearance 
is  there  on  Deirdre  ?  "  he  said.  "  It  is  this,"  said  Gelban, 
"  although  Naoise  put  out  my  eye,  I  would  have  wished 
to  stay  there  looking  at  her  with  the  other  eye,  but  for 
the  haste  you  put  on  me ;  for  there  is  not  in  the  world 
a  woman  is  better  of  shape  or  of  form  than  herself." 

When  Conchubar  heard  that,  he  was  filled  with 
jealousy  and  with  envy,  and  he  bade  the  men  of  his 
army  that  were  with  him,  and  that  had  been  drink- 
ing at  the  feast,  to  go  and  attack  the  place  were 
the  sons  of  Usnach  were.  So  they  went  forward  to 
the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  they  gave  three 
great  shouts  around  it,  and  they  put  fires  and  red 
flames  to  it.  When  the  sons  of  Usnach  heard  the 
shouts,  they  asked  who  those  men  were  that  were 
about  the  house.  "  Conchubar  and  the  men  of  Ulster," 
they  all  said  together.  "  Is  it  the  pledge  of  Fergus  you 
would  break  ?  "  said  Fair-Haired  loUan.  "  On  my  word," 
said  Conchubar,  "there  will  be  sorrow  on  the  sons  of 
Usnach,   Deirdre   to   be   with  them."     "That  is  true," 


FAIR-HAIRED    lOLLAN  129 

said  Deirdre,  "  Fergus  had  deceived  you."  "  By  my 
oath,"  said  Rough-Red  Buinne,  "  if  he  betrayed,  we 
will  not  betray."  It  was  then  Buinne  went  out  and 
killed  three-fifths  of  the  fighting  men  outside,  and  put 
great  disturbance  on  the  rest ;  and  Conchubar  asked 
who  was  there,  and  who  was  doing  destruction  on  his 
men  like  that.  "  It  is  I,  myself,  Rough-Red  Buinne, 
son  of  Fergus,"  said  he.  "  I  will  give  you  a  good  gift 
if  you  will  leave  off,"  said  Conchubar.  "What  gift  is 
that  ?  "  said  Rough-Red  Buinne.  "  A  hundred  of  land," 
said  Conchubar.  "  What  besides  ? "  said  Rough-Red 
Buinne.  "  My  own  friendship  and  my  counsel,"  said 
Conchubar.  "  I  will  take  that,"  said  Rough-Red  Buinne. 
It  was  a  good  mountain  that  was  given  him  as  a 
reward,  but  it  turned  barren  in  the  same  night,  and 
no  green  grew  on  it  again  for  ever,  and  it  used  to  be 
called  the  Mountain  of  the  Share  of  Buinne. 

Deirdre  heard  what  they  were  saying.  "  By  my 
word,"  she  said,  "  Rough-Red  Buinne  has  forsaken 
you,  and  in  my  opinion,  it  is  like  the  father  the  son 
is."  "I  give  my  word,"  says  Fair-Haired  lollan,  "that 
is  not  so  with  me ;  as  long  as  this  narrow,  straight 
sword  stays  in  my  hand,  I  will  not  forsake  the  sons 
of  Usnach." 

After  that,  Fair-Haired  lollan  went  out,  and  made 
three  courses  around  the  house,  and  killed  three-fifths 
of  heroes  outside,  and  he  came  in  again  where  Naoise 
was,  and  he  playing  chess,  and  Ainnle  with  him.  So 
lollan  went  out  the  second  time,  and  made  three  other 
courses  round  the  fort,  and  he  brought  a  lighted  torch 
with  him  on  the  lawn,  and  he  went  destroying  the 
hosts,  so  that  they  dared  not  come  to  attack  the 
house.  And  he  was  a  good  son,  Fair-Haired  lollan, 
for  he  never  refused  any  person  on  the  ridge  of  the 
world  anything  that  he  had,  and  he  never  took  wages 
from  any  person  but  only  Fergus. 

I 


130    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

It  was  then  Conchubar  said  :  '•'  What  place  is  my  own 
son,  Fiacra  the  Fair?"  "I  am  here,  High  Prince," 
said  Fiacra.  "  By  my  word,"  said  Conchubar,  "  it  is 
on  the  one  night  yourself  and  lollan  were  born,  and 
as  it  is  the  arms  of  his  father  he  has  with  him,  let 
you  take  my  arms  with  you,  that  is,  my  shield,  the 
Ochain,  my  two  spears,  and  my  great  sword,  the  Gorm 
Glas,  the  Blue  Green — and  do  bravery  and  great  deeds 
with  them." 

Then  Fiacra  took  Conchubar's  arms,  and  he  and 
Fair-Haired  lollan  attacked  one  another,  and  they 
made  a  stout  fight,  one  against  the  other.  But 
however  it  was.  Fair- Haired  lollan  put  down  Fiacra, 
so  that  he  made  him  lie  under  the  shelter  of  his  shield, 
till  it  roared  for  the  greatness  of  the  strait  he  was  in  ; 
for  it  was  the  way  with  the  Ochain,  the  shield  of  Con- 
chubar, to  roar  when  the  person  on  whom  it  would  be 
was  in  danger  ;  and  the  three  chief  waves  of  Ireland, 
the  Wave  of  Tuagh,  the  Wave  of  Cliodna,  and  the  Wave 
of  Rudraige,  roared  in  answer  to  it. 

It  was  at  that  time  Conall  Cearnach  was  at  Dun 
Sobairce,  and  he  heard  the  Wave  of  Tuagh.  "  True  it 
is,"  said  Conall,  '*  Conchubar  is  in  some  danger,  and  it 
is  not  right  for  me  to  be  here  listening  to  him." 

Conall  rose  up  on  that,  and  he  put  his  arms  and  his 
armour  on  him,  and  came  forward  to  where  Conchubar 
was  at  Emain  Macha,  and  he  found  the  fight  going  on 
on  the  lawn,  and  Fiacra,  the  son  of  Conchubar,  greatly 
pressed  by  Fair-Haired  lollan,  and  neither  the  king  of 
Ulster  nor  any  other  person  dared  to  go  between 
them.  But  Conall  went  aside,  behind  Fair-Haired  lollan 
and  thrust  his  sword  through  him.  "  Who  is  it  has 
wounded  me  behind  my  back  ?  "  said  Fair-Haired  lollan. 
•'  Whoever  did  it,  by  my  hand  of  valour,  he  would  have 
got  a  fair  fight,  face  to  face,  from  myself"  ''  Who  are 
you    yourself?"     said    Conall.     "I    am    lollan,  son   of 


THE   APPEAL   TO   CONCHUBAR    131 

Fergus,  and  are  you  yourself  Conall  ?  "  "  It  is  I/'  said 
Conall.  "  It  is  evil  and  it  is  heavy  the  work  you  have 
done,"  said  lollan,  "  and  the  sons  of  Usnach  under  my 
protection."  "Is  that  true?"  said  Conall.  "  It  is  true, 
indeed,"  said  lollan.  "  By  my  hand  of  valour,"  said 
Conall,  "  Conchubar  will  not  get  his  own  son  alive 
from  me  to  avenge  it,"  and  he  gave  a  stroke  of  the 
sword  to  Fiacra,  so  that  he  struck  his  head  off,  and  he 
left  them  so.  The  clouds  of  death  came  upon  Fair- 
Haired  lollan  then,  and  he  threw  his  arms  towards 
the  fortress,  and  called  out  to  Naoise  to  do  bravery, 
and  after  that  he  died. 

It  is  then  Conchubar  himself  came  out  and  nineteen 
hundred  men  with  him,  and  Conall  said  to  him  :  "  Go 
up  now  to  the  doorway  of  the  fort,  and  see  where  your 
sister's  children  are  lying  on  a  bed  of  trouble."  And 
when  Conchubar  saw  them  he  said  :  "  You  are  not 
sister's  children  to  me  ;  it  is  not  the  deed  of  sister's 
children  you  have  done  me,  but  you  have  done  harm 
to  me  with  treachery  in  the  sight  of  all  the  men  of 
Ireland."  i\nd  it  is  what  Ainnle  said  to  him  :  "  Although 
we  took  well-shaped,  soft-handed  Deirdre  from  you,  yet 
we  did  a  little  kindness  to  you  at  another  time,  and 
this  is  the  time  to  remember  it.  That  day  your  ship 
was  breaking  up  on  the  sea,  and  it  full  of  gold  and 
silver,  we  gave  you  up  our  own  ship,  and  ourselves 
went  swimming  to  the  harbour."  But  Conchubar  said  : 
"  If  you  did  fifty  good  deeds  to  me,  surely  this  would 
be  my  thanks  ;  I  would  not  give  you  peace,  and  you  in 
distress,  but  every  great  want  I  could  put  on  you." 

And  then  Ardan  said  :  ''  We  did  another  little  kind- 
ness to  you,  and  this  is  the  time  to  remember  it  ;  the 
day  the  speckled  horse  failed  you  on  the  green  of 
Dundealgan,  it  was  we  gave  you  the  grey  horse  that 
would  bring  you  fast  on  your  road." 

But   Conchubar  said  :  "  If  you  had   done  fifty  good 


132    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

deeds  to  me,  surely  this  would  be  my  thanks  ;  I  would 
not  give  you  peace,  and  you  in  distress,  but  every  great 
want  I  could  put  on  you." 

And  then  Naoise  said  :  "  We  did  you  another  good 
deed,  and  this  is  the  time  to  remember  it ;  we  have  put 
you  under  many  benefits  ;  it  is  strong  our  right  is  to 
your  protection. 

"  The  time  when  Murcael,  son  of  Brian,  fought  the 
seven  battles  at  Beinn  Etair,  we  brought  you,  without 
fail,  the  heads  of  the  sons  of  the  king  of  the  South- 
East." 

But  Conchubar  said  :  "  If  you  had  done  me  fifty  good 
deeds,  surely  this  is  my  thanks  ;  I  would  not  give  you 
peace  in  your  distress,  but  every  great  want  I  could  put 
upon  you. 

"  Your  death  is  not  a  death  to  me  now,  young  sons  of 
Usnach,  since  he  that  was  innocent  fell  by  you,  the 
third  best  of  the  horsemen  of  Ireland." 

Then  Deirdre  said  :  "  Rise  up,  Naoise,  take  your  sword, 
good  son  of  a  king,  mind  yourself  well,  for  it  is  not  long 
that  life  will  be  left  in  your  fair  body." 

It  is  then  all  Conchubar's  men  came  about  the  house, 
and  they  put  fires  and  burning  to  it.  Ardan  went  out 
then,  and  his  men,  and  put  out  the  fires  and  killed  three 
hundred  men.  And  Ainnle  went  out  in  the  third  part 
of  the  night,  and  he  killed  three  hundred,  and  did 
slaughter  and  destruction  on  them. 

And  Naoise  went  out  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  night, 
and  drove  away  all  the  army  from  the  house. 

He  came  into  the  house  after  that,  and  it  is  then 
Deirdre  rose  up  and  said  to  him  :  "  By  my  word,  it  is 
well  you  won  your  way  ;  and  do  bravery  and  valour 
from  this  out,  and  it  was  bad  advice  you  took  when  you 
ever  trusted  Conchubar." 

As  for  the  sons  of  Usnach,  after  that  they  made  a  good 
protection  with  their  shields,  and  they  put  Deirdre  in  the 


THE   DRUID   SEA  133 

middle  and  linked  the  shields  around  her,  and  they  gave 
three  leaps  out  over  the  walls  of  Emain,  and  they  killed 
three  hundred  men  in  that  sally. 

When  Conchubar  saw  that,  he  went  to  Cathbad,  the 
Druid,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Go,  Cathbad,  to  the  sons  of 
Usnach,  and  work  enchantment  on  them  ;  for  unless 
they  are  hindered  they  will  destroy  the  men  of  Ulster 
for  ever  if  they  go  away  in  spite  of  them  ;  and  I  give  the 
word  of  a  true  hero,  they  will  get  no  harm  from  me,  but 
let  them  only  make  agreement  with  me."  When  Cath- 
bad heard  that,  he  agreed,  believing  him,  and  he  went 
to  the  end  of  his  arts  and  his  knowledge  to  hinder  the 
sons  of  Usnach,  and  he  worked  enchantment  on  them,  so 
that  he  put  the  likeness  of  a  dark  sea  about  them,  with 
hindering  waves.  And  when  Naoise  saw  the  waves 
rising  he  put  up  Deirdre  on  his  shoulder,  and  it  is 
how  the  sons  of  Usnach  were,  swimming  on  the  ground 
as  they  were  going  out  of  Emain  ;  yet  the  men  of  Ulster 
did  not  dare  to  come  near  them  until  their  swords  had 
fallen  from  their  hands.  But  after  their  swords  fell  from 
their  hands,  the  sons  of  Usnach  were  taken.  And  when 
they  were  taken,  Conchubar  asked  of  the  children  of 
Durthacht  to  kill  them.  But  the  children  of  Durthacht 
said  they  would  not  do  that.  There  was  a  young  man 
with  Conchubar  whose  name  was  Maine,  and  his  surname 
Rough-Hand,  son  of  the  king  of  the  fair  Norwegians,  and 
it  is  Naoise  had  killed  his  father  and  his  two  brothers  ; 
Athrac  and  Triathrach  were  their  names.  And  he  said 
he  himself  would  kill  the  sons  of  Usnach.  "  If  that  is 
so,"  said  Ardan,  "  kill  me  the  first,  for  I  am  younger 
than  my  brothers,  so  that  I  will  not  see  my  brothers 
killed."  "  Let  him  not  be  killed  but  myself,"  said  Ainnle. 
"  Let  that  not  be  done,"  said  Naoise,  "  for  I  have  a 
sword  that  Manannan,  son  of  Lir,  gave  me,  and  the 
stroke  of  it  leaves  nothing  after  it,  track  nor  trace ;  and 
strike  the   three  of  us  together,  and  we  will  die  at  the 


134    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

one  time."  ''  That  is  well,"  said  they  all,  "  and  let  you 
lay  down  your  heads,"  they  said.  They  did  that,  and 
Maine  gave  a  strong  quick  blow  of  the  sword  on  the 
three  necks  together  on  the  block,  and  struck  the  three 
heads  off  them  with  one  stroke  ;  and  the  men  of  Ulster 
gave  three  loud  sorrowful  shouts,  and  cried  aloud  about 
them  there. 

As  for  Deirdre,  she  cried  pitifully,  wearily,  and  tore 
her  fair  hair,  and  she  was  talking  on  the  sons  of  Usnach 
and  on  Alban,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  A  blessing  eastward  to  Alban  from  me  ;  good  is 
the  sight  of  her  bays  and  valleys,  pleasant  was  it  to 
sit  on  the  slopes  of  her  hills,  where  the  sons  of  Usnach 
used  to  be  hunting. 

"  One  day,  when  the  nobles  of  Scotland  were  drinking 
with  the  sons  of  Usnach,  to  whom  they  owed  their 
affection,  Naoise  gave  a  kiss  secretly  to  the  daughter 
of  the  lord  of  Duntreon.  He  sent  her  a  frightened 
deer,  wild,  and  a  fawn  at  its  foot ;  and  he  went  to 
visit  her  coming  home  from  the  host  of  Inverness, 
When  myself  heard  that,  my  head  filled  full  of  jealousy  ; 
I  put  my  boat  on  the  waves,  it  was  the  same  to  me  to 
live  or  to  die.  They  followed  me  swimming,  Ainnle 
and  Ardan,  that  never  said  a  lie ;  they  turned  me  back 
again,  two  that  would  give  battle  to  a  hundred  ;  Naoise 
gave  me  his  true  word,  he  swore  three  times  with  his 
arms  as  witness,  he  would  never  put  vexation  on  me 
again,  until  he  would  go  from  me  to  the  hosts  of  the 
dead. 

"  Och !  if  she  knew  to-night,  Naoise  to  be  under  a 
covering  of  clay,  it  is  she  would  cry  her  fill,  and  it  is  I 
would  cry  along  with  her." 

After  she  had  made  this  complaint,  seeing  they  were 
all  taken  up  with  one  another,  Deirdre  came  forward 
on  the  lawn,  and  she  was  running  round  and  round, 
up  and  down,  from  one  to  another,  and  Cuchulain  met 


DEIRDRE'S   LAMENT  135 

her,  and  she  told  him  the  story  from  first  to  last,  how 
it  had  happened  to  the  sons  of  Usnach.  It  is  sorrow- 
ful Cuchulain  was  for  that,  for  there  was  not  in  the 
world  a  man  was  dearer  to  him  than  Naoise.  And 
he  asked  who  killed  him.  "  Maine  Rough- Hand,"  said 
Deirdre.  Then  Cuchulain  went  away,  sad  and  sorrow- 
ful, to  Dundealgan. 

After  that  Deirdre  lay  down  by  the  grave,  and 
they  were  digging  earth  from  it,  and  she  made  this 
lament  after  the  sons  of  Usnach  : 

"  Long  is  the  day  without  the  sons  of  Usnach  ;  it 
was  never  wearisome  to  be  in  their  company  ;  sons  of 
a  king  that  entertained  exiles  ;  three  lions  of  the  Hill  of 
the  Cave. 

"  Three  darlings  of  the  women  of  Britain  ;  three 
hawks  of  Slieve  Cuilenn  ;  sons  of  a  king  served  by 
valour,  to  whom  warriors  did  obedience.  The  three 
mighty  bears  ;  three  lions  of  the  fort  of  Conrach  ; 
three  sons  of  a  king  who  thought  well  of  their  praise  ; 
three  nurslings  of  the  men  of  Ulster. 

"  Three  heroes  not  good  at  homage  ;  their  fall  is  a 
cause  of  sorrow  ;  three  sons  of  the  sister  of  a  king  ; 
three  props  of  the  army  of  Cuailgne. 

"  Three  dragons  of  Dun  Monad,  the  three  valiant 
men  from  the  Red  Branch ;  I  myself  will  not  be  living 
after  them,  the  three  that  broke  hard  battles. 

"  Three  that  were  brought  up  by  Aoife,  to  whom 
lands  were  under  tribute  ;  three  pillars  in  the  breach 
of  battle  ;  three  pupils  that  were  with  Scathach. 

"  Three  pupils  that  were  with  Uathach ;  three 
champions  that  were  lasting  in  might  ;  three  shin- 
ing sons  of  Usnach  ;  it  is  weariness  to  be  without 
them. 

"  The  High  King  of  Ulster,  my  first  betrothed,  I 
forsook  for  love  of  Naoise  ;  short  my  life  will  be  after 
him  ;  I  will  make  keening  at  their  burial. 


136    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSNACH 

"That  I  would  live  after  Naoise  let  no  one  think 
on  the  earth  ;  I  will  not  go  on  living  after  Ainnle  and 
after  Ardan. 

"  After  them  I  myself  will  not  live ;  three  that 
would  leap  through  the  midst  of  battle ;  since  my  be- 
loved is  gone  from  me  I  will  cry  my  fill  over  his 
grave. 

"  O  young  man,  digging  the  new  grave,  do  not 
make  the  grave  narrow  ;  I  will  be  along  with  them  in 
the  grave,  making  lamentation  and  ochones ! 

"  Many  the  hardship  I  met  with  along  with  the  three 
heroes  ;  I  suffered  want  of  house,  want  of  fire,  it  is 
myself  that  used  not  to  be  troubled. 

"  Their  three  shields  and  their  spears  made  a  bed 
for  me  often.  O  young  man,  put  their  three  swords 
close  over  their  grave. 

"  Their  three  hounds,  their  three  hawks,  will  be  from 
this  time  without  huntsmen ;  three  helpers  of  every 
battle ;    three  pupils  of  Conall  Cearnach. 

"  The  three  leashes  of  those  three  hounds  have 
brought  a  sigh  from  my  heart ;  it  is  I  had  the  care  of 
them,  the  sight  of  them  is  a  cause  of  grief 

"  I  was  never  one  day  alone  to  the  day  of  the  making 
of  this  grave,  though  it  is  often  that  myself  and  your- 
selves were  in  loneliness. 

"  My  sight  is  gone  from  me  with  looking  at  the  grave  of 
Naoise ;  it  is  short  till  my  life  will  leave  me,  and  those 
who  would  have  keened  me  do  not  live. 

"  Since  it  is  through  me  they  were  betrayed  I  will  be 
tired  out  with  sorrow ;  it  is  a  pity  I  was  not  in  the 
earth  before  the  sons  of  Usnach  were  killed. 

"  Sorrowful  was  my  journey  with  Fergus,  betraying 
me  to  the  Red  Branch ;  we  were  deceived  all  together 
with  his  sweet,  flowery  words.  I  left  the  delights  of 
Ulster  for  the  three  heroes  that  were  bravest ;  my  life 
will  not  be  long,  I  myself  am  alone  after  them. 


CONCHUBAR'S   MESSAGE         137 

"  I  am  Deirdre  without  gladness,  and  I  at  the  end  of 
my  life ;  since  it  is  grief  to  be  without  them,  I  myself 
will  not  be  long  after  them." 

After  that  complaint  Deirdre  loosed  out  her  hair,  and 
threw  herself  on  the  body  of  Naoise  before  it  was  put 
in  the  grave  and  gave  three  kisses  to  him,  and  when  her 
mouth  touched  his  blood,  the  colour  of  burning  sods 
came  into  her  cheeks,  and  she  rose  up  like  one  that  had 
lost  her  wits,  and  she  went  on  through  the  night  till  she 
came  to  where  the  waves  were  breaking  on  the  strand. 
And  a  fisherman  was  there  and  his  wife,  and  they 
brought  her  into  their  cabin  and  sheltered  her,  and  she 
neither  smiled  nor  laughed,  nor  took  food,  drink,  or 
sleep,  nor  raised  her  head  from  her  knees,  but  crying 
always  after  the  sons  of  Usnach. 

But  when  she  could  not  be  found  at  Emain, 
Conchubar  sent  Levarcham  to  look  for  her,  and  to 
bring  her  back  to  his  palace,  that  he  might  make  her 
his  wife.  And  Levarcham  found  her  in  the  fisherman's 
cabin,  and  she  bade  her  come  back  to  Emain,  where  she 
would  have  protection  and  riches  and  all  that  she  would 
ask.  And  she  gave  her  this  message  she  brought  from 
Conchubar  :  "  Come  up  to  my  house,  O  branch  with 
the  dark  eye-lashes,  and  there  need  be  no  fear  on  your 
fair  face,  of  hatred  or  of  jealousy  or  of  reproach."  And 
Deirdre  said  :  "  I  will  not  go  up  to  his  house,  for  it  is 
not  land  or  earth  or  food  I  am  wanting,  or  gold  or 
silver  or  horses,  but  leave  to  go  to  the  grave  where  the 
sons  of  Usnach  are  lying,  till  I  give  the  three  honey 
kisses  to  their  three  white,  beautiful  bodies."  And  she 
made  this  complaint : 

"  Make  keening  for  the  heroes  that  were  killed  on 
their  coming  to  Ireland  ;  stately  they  used  to  be,  coming 
to  the  house,  the  three  great  sons  of  Usnach. 

"The  sons  of  Usnach  fell  in  the  fight  like  three 
branches  that  were  growing  straight  and  nice,  and  they 


138  FATE  OF  THE  SONS  OF  US  XACH 

destroyed  in  a  heavy  storm  that  left  neither   bud    nor 
twig  of  them. 

''  Xaoise,  my  gentle,  well-learned  comrade,  make  no 
delay  in  crying  him  with  me ;  cry  for  Ardan  that 
killed  the  wild  boars,  cry  for  Ainnle  whose  stength 
was  great 

"  It  was  Naoise  that  would  kiss  my  lips,  my  first 
man  and  my  first  sweetheart ;  it  was  Ainnle  would 
pour  out  my  drink,  and  it  was  Ardan  would  lay  my 
pillow. 

"  Though  sweet  to  you  is  the  mead  that  is  drunk  by 
the  soft-living  son  of  Ness,  the  food  of  the  sons  of 
Usnach  was  sweeter  to  me  all  through  my  lifetime. 

"  Whenever  Naoise  would  go  out  to  hunt  through  the 
woods  or  the  wide  plains,  all  the  meat  he  would  bring 
back  was  better  to  me  than  honey. 

"  Though  sweet  to  you  are  the  sounds  of  pipes  and 
of  trumpets,  it  is  truly  I  say  to  the  king,  I  have  heard 
music  that  is  sweeter. 

"  Delightful  to  Conchubar,  the  king,  are  pipes  and 
trumpets  ;  but  the  singing  of  the  sons  of  Usnach  was 
more  delightful  to  me. 

"It  was  Naoise  had  the  deep  sound  of  the  waves  in 
his  voice  ;  it  was  the  song  of  Ardan  that  was  good,  and 
the  voice  of  Ainnle  towards  their  green  dwelling-place. 

"  Their  birth  was  beautiful  and  their  blossoming,  as 
they  grew  to  the  strength  of  manhood ;  sad  is  the 
end  to-day,  the  sons  of  Usnach  to  be  cut  down. 

"  Dear  were  their  pleasant  words,  dear  their  young, 
high  strength ;  in  their  going  through  the  plains  of 
Ireland  there  was  a  welcome  before  the  coming  of 
their  strength. 

"  Dear  their  grey  eyes  that  were  loved  by  women, 
many  looked  on  them  as  they  went ;  when  they  went 
freely  searching  through  the  woods,  their  steps  were 
pleasant  on  the  dark  mountain. 


DEIRDRE'S    DEATH  139 

"  I  do  not  sleep  at  any  time,  and  the  colour  is  gone 
from  my  face ;  there  is  no  sound  can  give  me  delight 
since  the  sons  of  Usnach  do  not  come. 

"  I  do  not  sleep  through  the  night ;  my  senses  are 
scattered  away  from  me,  I  do  not  care  for  food  or 
drink.  I  have  no  welcome  to-day  for  the  pleasant 
drink  of  nobles,  or  ease,  or  comfort,  or  delight,  or  a 
great  house,  or  the  palace  of  a  king. 

•'  Do  not  break  the  strings  of  my  heart  as  you  took 
hold  of  my  young  youth,  Conchubar ;  though  my 
darling  is  dead,  my  love  is  strong  to  live.  What  is 
country  to  me,  or  land,  or  lordship?  What  are  swift 
horses?  What  are  jewels  and  gold?  Och !  it  is  I 
will  be  lying  to-night  on  the  strand  like  the  beautiful 
sons  of  Usnach." 

So  Levarcham  went  back  to  Conchubar  to  tell  him 
what  way  Deirdre  was,  and  that  she  would  not  come 
with  her  to  Emain  Macha. 

And  when  she  was  gone,  Deirdre  went  out  on  the 
strand,  and  she  found  a  carpenter  making  an  oar 
for  a  boat,  and  making  a  mast  for  it,  clean  and 
straight,  to  put  up  a  sail  to  the  wind.  And  when 
she  saw  him  making  it,  she  said  :  "  It  is  a  sharp  knife 
you  have,  to  cut  the  oar  so  clean  and  so  straight,  and 
if  you  will  give  it  to  me,"  she  said,  "  I  will  give  you 
a  ring  of  the  best  gold  in  Ireland  for  it,  the  ring  that 
belonged  to  Naoise,  and  that  was  with  him  through 
the  battle  and  through  the  fight ;  he  thought  much 
of  it  in  his  lifetime ;  it  is  pure  gold,  through  and 
through."  So  the  carpenter  took  the  ring  in  his  hand, 
and  the  knife  in  the  other  hand,  and  he  looked  at  them 
together,  and  he  gave  her  the  knife  for  the  ring,  and 
for  her  asking  and  her  tears.  Then  Deirdre  went  close 
to  the  waves,  and  she  said :  "  Since  the  other  is  not  with 
me  now,  I  will  spend  no  more  of  my  lifetime  without 
him."     And  with  that  she  drove  the  black  knife  into 


140    FATEOFTHESONSOFUSXACH 

her  side,  but  she  drew  it  out  again  and  threw  it  in  the 
sea  to  her  right  hand,  the  way  no  one  would  be  blamed 
for  her  death. 

Then  Conchubar  came  down  to  the  strand  and  five 
hundred  men  along  with  him,  to  bring  Deirdre  away  to 
Emain  Macha,  but  all  he  found  before  him  was  her 
white  body  on  the  ground,  and  it  without  life.  And  it 
is  what  he  said  : 

"A  thousand  deaths  on  the  time  I  brought  death  on 
my  sister's  children  ;  now  I  am  myself  without  Deirdre, 
and  they  themselves  are  without  life. 

"  They  were  my  sister's  children,  the  three  brothers 
I  vexed  with  blows,  Naoise,  and  Ainnle,  and  Ardan ; 
they  have  died  along  with  Deirdre." 

And  they  took  her  white,  beautiful  body,  and  laid 
it  in  a  grave,  and  a  flagstone  was  raised  over  her  grave, 
and  over  the  grave  of  the  sons  of  Usnach,  and  their 
names  were  written  in  Ogham,  and  keening  was  made 
for  their  burial. 

And  as  to  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  he  came  on  the  day 
after  the  children  of  Usnach  were  killed,  to  Emain 
Macha.  And  when  he  found  they  had  been  killed 
and  his  pledge  to  them  broken,  he  himself,  and  Cormac 
Conloingeas,  Conchubar's  own  son,  and  Dubthach,  the 
Beetle  of  Ulster,  with  their  men,  made  an  attack  on 
Conchubar's  house  and  men,  and  a  great  many  were 
killed  by  them,  and  Emain  Macha  was  burned  and 
destroyed. 

And  after  doing  that,  they  went  into  Connaught,  to 
Ailell  and  to  Maeve  at  Cruachan,  and  they  were  made 
welcome  there,  and  they  took  service  with  them  and 
fought  with  them  against  Ulster  because  of  the  treachery 
that  was  done  by  Conchubar.  And  that  is  the  way 
Fergus  and  the  others  came  to  be  on  the  side  of  the 
men  of  Connaught  in  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of 
Cuailgne. 


CATHEAD'S   CURSE  141 

And  Cathbad  laid  a  curse  on  Emain  Macha,  on 
account  of  that  great  wrong.  And  it  is  what  he  said, 
that  none  of  the  race  of  Conchubar  should  have  the 
kingdom,  to  the  end  of  life  and  time. 

And  that  came  true,  for  the  most  of  Conchubar's  sons 
died  in  his  own  lifetime,  and  when  he  was  near  his 
death,  he  bade  the  men  of  Ulster  bring  back  Cormac 
Conloingeas  out  of  Cruachan,  and  give  him  the 
kingdom. 

So  they  sent  messengers  to  Cormac,  and  he  set  out 
and  his  three  troops  of  men  with  him,  and  he  left  his 
blessing  with  Ailell  and  with  Maeve,  and  he  promised 
them  a  good  return  for  all  the  kind  treatment  they  had 
given  him.  And  they  crossed  the  river  at  Athluain, 
and  there  they  saw  a  red  woman  at  the  edge  of  the 
ford,  and  she  washing  her  chariot  and  her  harness.  And 
after  that  they  met  a  young  girl  coming  towards  them, 
and  a  light  green  cloak  about  her,  and  a  brooch  of 
precious  stones  at  her  breast.  And  Cormac  asked  her 
was  she  coming  with  them,  and  she  said  she  was  not, 
and  it  would  be  better  for  himself  to  turn  back,  for  the 
ruin  of  his  life  was  come. 

And  he  stopped  for  the  night  at  the  House  of  the  Two 
Smiths  on  the  hill  ofBruighean  Mor,  the  great  dwelling- 
place. 

But  a  troop  of  the  men  of  Connaught  came  about  the 
house  in  the  night,  for  they  were  on  the  way  home  after 
destroying  and  robbing  a  district  of  Ulster,  and  they 
thought  to  make  an  end  of  Cormac  before  he  would  get 
to  Emain. 

And  it  chanced  there  was  a  great  harper,  Craiftine, 
living  close  by,  and  his  wife,  Sceanb,  daughter  of 
Scethern,  a  Druid  of  Connaught,  loved  Cormac  Con- 
loingeas, and  three  times  she  had  gone  to  meet  him  at 
Athluain,  and  she  planted  three  trees  there — Grief, 
and  Dark,  and  Dumbness. 


142    FATE  OFTHE  SONS  OF  USNACH 

And  there  was  great  hatred  and  jealousy  of  Cormac 
on  Craiftine,  so  when  he  knew  the  men  of  Connaught 
were  going  to  make  an  attack  on  him,  he  went  outside 
the  house  with  his  harp,  and  played  a  soft  sleepy  tune  to 
him,  the  way  he  had  not  the  strength  to  rouse  himself 
up,  and  himself  and  the  most  of  his  people  were  killed. 
And  Amergin,  that  had  gone  with  the  message  to  him, 
made  his  grave  and  his  mound,  and  the  place  is  called 
Cluain  Duma,  the  Lawn  of  the  Mound. 


VIII 

THE  DREAM  OF  ANGUS  OG 

A  NGUS,  son  of  the  Dagda,  was  asleep  in  his  bed  one 
'^^  night,  and  he  saw  what  he  thought  was  a  young 
girl  standing  near  him  at  the  top  of  the  bed,  and  she  the 
most  beautiful  he  had  ever  seen  in  Ireland.  He  put  out 
his  hand  to  take  her  hand,  but  she  vanished  on  the 
moment,  and  in  the  morning  when  he  awoke  there  were 
no  trace  or  tidings  of  her. 

He  got  no  rest  that  day  thinking  of  her,  and  that  she 
had  gone  away  before  he  could  speak  to  her.  And  the 
next  night  he  saw  her  again,  and  this  time  she  brought 
a  little  harp  in  her  hand,  the  sweetest  he  ever  heard,  and 
she  played  a  song  to  him,  so  that  he  fell  asleep  and  slept 
till  morning.  And  the  same  thing  happened  every  night 
for  a  year.  She  would  come  to  his  bedside  and  be  playing 
on  the  harp  to  him,  but  she  would  be  gone  before  he 
could  speak  with  her.  And  at  the  end  of  the  year  she  came 
no  more,  and  Angus  began  to  pine  away  with  love  of  her 
and  with  fretting  after  her ;  and  he  would  take  no  food, 
but  lay  upon  the  bed,  and  no  one  knew  what  it  was  ailed 
him.  And  all  the  physicians  of  Ireland  came  together, 
but  they  could  not  put  a  name  on  his  sickness  or  find 
any  cure  for  him. 

But  at  last  Fergne,  the  physician  of  Conn,  was  brought 
to  him,  and  as  soon  as  he  looked  at  him  he  knew  it  was 
not  on  his  body  the  sickness  was,  but  on  his  mind.    And 

U3 


144   THE  DREAM  OF  ANGUS  OG 

he  sent  every  one  away  out  of  the  room,  and  he  said  :  "  I 
think  it  is  for  the  love  of  some  woman  that  you  are 
wasting  away  like  this."  "  That  is  true,  indeed,"  said 
Angus  ;  "  and  it  is  my  sickness  has  betrayed  me."  And 
then  he  told  him  how  the  woman  with  the  most  beautiful 
appearance  of  any  woman  in  Ireland,  used  to  come  and 
to  be  playing  the  harp  to  him  through  the  night,  and 
how  she  had  vanished  away. 

Then  Fergne  went  and  spoke  with  Boann,  Angus's 
mother,  and  he  told  her  all  that  happened,  and  he 
bade  her  to  send  and  search  all  through  Ireland  if  she 
could  find  a  young  girl  of  the  same  appearance  as  the 
one  Angus  had  seen  in  his  sleep.  And  then  he  left 
him  in  his  mother's  care,  and  she  had  all  Ireland 
searched  for  a  year,  but  no  young  girl  of  that  appear- 
ance could  be  found. 

At  the  end  of  the  year,  Boann  sent  for  Fergne  to 
come  again,  and  she  said  :  "  We  have  not  got  any  help 
from  our  search  up  to  this."  And  Fergne  said  :  "  Send 
for  the  Dagda,  that  he  may  come  and  speak  to  his  son." 
So  they  sent  for  the  Dagda,  and  when  he  came,  he  said  : 
"  What  have  I  been  called  for  ?  "  "  To  give  an  advice 
to  your  son,"  said  Fergne,  "  and  to  help  him,  for  he  is 
lying  sick  on  account  of  a  young  girl  that  appeared  to 
him  in  his  sleep,  and  that  cannot  be  found  ;  and  it 
would  be  a  pity  for  him  to  die."  "  What  use  will  it  be, 
I  to  speak  to  him  ?  "  said  the  Dagda,  "  for  my  knowledge 
is  no  higher  than  your  own."  "  By  my  word,"  said 
Fergne,  "you  are  the  king  of  all  the  Sidhe  of  Ireland, 
and  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  go  to  Bodb,  the  king  of  the 
Sidhe  of  Munster,  for  he  has  a  name  for  knowledge  all 
through  Ireland."  So  messengers  were  sent  to  Bodb, 
at  his  house  in  Sidhe  Femain,  and  he  bade  them 
welcome.  "  A  welcome  before  you,  messenger  of  the 
Dagda,"  he  said,  "and  what  is  the  message  you  have 
brought  ? "     "  This  is  the  message,"  they  said,  "  Angus 


CAER  145 

Og,  son  of  the  Dagda,  is  wasting  away  these  two  years 
with  love  of  a  woman  he  saw  in  his  dreams,  and  we 
have  not  been  able  to  find  her  in  any  place.  And  this 
is  an  order  to  you,"  they  said,  "  from  the  Dagda,  to 
search  out  through  Ireland  a  young  girl  of  the  same 
form  and  appearance  as  the  one  he  saw."  "  The  search 
will  be  made,"  said  Bodb,  "  if  it  lasts  me  a  year." 

And  at  the  end  of  a  year  he  sent  messengers  to  the 
Dagda.  "  Is  it  a  good  message  you  have  brought  ? " 
said  the  Dagda.  "  It  is,  indeed,"  they  said  ;  "  and  this 
is  the  message  Bodb  bade  us  give  you, '  I  have  searched 
all  Ireland  until  I  found  the  young  girl  with  the  same 
form  and  appearance  that  you  said,  at  Loch  Beul 
Draguin,  at  the  Harp  of  Cliach.'  And  now,"  they  said, 
"  he  bids  Angus  to  come  with  us,  till  he  sees  if  it  is  the 
same  woman  that  appeared  to  him  in  his  dream." 

So  Angus  set  out  in  his  chariot  to  Sidhe  Femain, 
and  Bodb  bade  him  welcome,  and  made  a  great  feast 
for  him,  that  lasted  three  days  and  three  nights.  And 
at  the  end  of  that  time  he  said :  "  Come  out  now 
with  me,  and  see  if  this  is  the  same  woman  that  came 
to  you." 

So  they  set  out  together  till  they  came  to  the  sea, 
and  there  they  saw  three  times  fifty  young  girls,  and 
the  one  they  were  looking  for  among  them  ;  and  she 
was  far  beyond  them  all.  And  there  was  a  silver  chain 
between  every  two  of  them,  but  about  her  own  neck 
there  was  a  necklace  of  shining  gold.  And  Bodb  said  : 
"  Do  you  see  that  woman  you  were  looking  for  ?  "  "I 
see  her,  indeed,"  said  Angus.  "  But  tell  me  who  is  she, 
and  what  her  name  is."  '*  Her  name  is  Caer  Ormaith, 
daughter  of  Ethal  Anbual,  from  Sidhe  Uaman,  in  the 
province  of  Connaught.  But  you  cannot  bring  her 
away  with  you  this  time,"  said  Bodb. 

Then  Angus  went  to  visit  his  father,  the  Dagda, 
and  his  mother,  Boann,  at  Brugh  na  Boinne ;  and  Bodb 

K 


146   THE  DREAM  OF  ANGUS  OG 

went  with  him,  and  they  told  how  they  had  seen  the 
girl,  and  they  had  heard  her  own  name,  and  her  father's 
name.  "  What  had  we  best  do  now  ?  "  said  the  Dagda. 
"  The  best  thing  for  you  to  do,"  said  Bodb,  "  is  to  go 
to  Ailell  and  Maeve,  for  it  is  in  their  district  she  lives, 
and  you  had  best  ask  their  help." 

So  the  Dagda  set  out  until  he  came  into  the  province 
of  Connaught,  and  sixty  chariots  with  him  ;  and  Ailell 
and  Maeve  made  a  great  feast  for  him.  And  after 
they  had  been  feasting  and  drinking  for  the  length 
of  a  week,  Ailell  asked  the  reason  of  their  journey. 
And  the  Dagda  said  :  "  It  is  by  reason  of  a  young  girl 
in  your  district,  for  my  son  has  sickness  upon  him  on 
account  of  her,  and  I  am  come  to  ask  if  you  will  give 
her  to  him."  "  Who  is  she  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  She  is  Caer 
Ormaith,  daughter  of  Ethal  Anbual."  "We  have  no 
power  over  her  that  we  could  give  her  to  him,"  said 
Ailell  and  Maeve.  "  The  best  thing  for  you  to  do," 
said  the  Dagda,  "  would  be  to  call  her  father  here  to 
you." 

So  Ailell  sent  his  steward  to  Ethal  Anbual,  and  he 
said  :  "  I  am  come  to  bid  you  to  go  and  speak  with 
Ailell  and  with  Maeve."  "  I  will  not  go,"  he  said ;  "  I 
will  not  give  my  daughter  to  the  son  of  the  Dagda." 
So  the  steward  went  back  and  told  this  to  Ailell.  "  He 
will  not  come,"  he  said,  "  and  he  knows  the  reason  you 
want  him  for." 

Then  there  was  anger  an  Ailell  and  on  the  Dagda, 
and  they  went  out,  and  their  armed  men  with  them, 
and  they  destroyed  the  whole  place  of  Ethal  Anbual, 
and  he  was  brought  before  them.  And  Ailell  said  to 
him :  "  Give  your  daughter  now  to  the  son  of  the 
Dagda."  "That  is  what  I  cannot  do,"  he  said,  "for 
there  is  a  power  over  her  that  is  greater  than  mine." 
"  What  power  is  that  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  It  is  an  enchant- 
ment," he  said,  "  that  is  on  her,  she  to  be  in  the  shape 


THE   TWO   SWANS  147 

of  a  bird  for  one  year,  and  in  her  own  shape  the  next 
year,"  "Which  shape  is  on  her  at  this  time?"  said 
Ailell.  "  I  would  not  like  to  say  that,"  said  her  father. 
"  Your  head  from  you  if  you  will  not  tell  it,"  said  Ailell. 

"  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  will  tell  you  this  much  ;  she  will 
be  in  the  shape  of  a  swan  next  month  at  Loch  Beul 
Draguin,  and  three  fifties  of  beautiful  birds  will  be 
along  with  her,  and  if  you  will  go  there,  you  will  see 
her." 

So  then  Ethal  was  set  free,  and  he  made  friends 
again  with  Ailell  and  Maeve;  and  the  Dagda  went 
home  and  told  Angus  all  that  had  happened,  and  he 
said  :  "  Go  next  summer  to  Loch  Beul  Draguin,  and 
call  her  to  you  there." 

So  when  the  time  came,  Angus  Og  went  to  the  loch, 
and  he  saw  the  three  times  fifty  white  birds  there,  with 
their  silver  chains  about  their  necks.  And  Angus  stood 
in  a  man's  shape  at  the  edge  of  the  loch,  and  he  called 
to  the  girl  :  "  Come  and  speak  with  me,  O  Caer ! " 
"  Who  is  calling  me  ?  "  said  Caer.  "  Angus  calls  you," 
he  said,  "  and  if  you  come,  I  swear  by  my  word,  I  will 
not  hinder  you  from  going  into  the  loch  again."  "  I 
will  come,"  she  said.  So  she  came  to  him,  and  he  laid 
his  two  hands  on  her,  and  then,  to  hold  to  his  word,  he 
took  the  shape  of  a  swan  on  himself,  and  they  went  into 
the  loch  together,  and  they  went  around  it  three  times. 
And  then  they  spread  their  wings  and  rose  up  from 
the  loch,  and  went  in  that  shape  till  they  were  at 
Brugh  na  Boinne.  And  as  they  were  going,  the  music 
they  made  was  so  sweet  that  all  the  people  that  heard 
it  fell  asleep  for  three  days  and  three  nights. 

And  Caer  stopped  there  with  him  ever  afterwards, 
and  from  that  time  there  was  friendship  between  Angus 
Og  and  Ailell  and  Maeve.  And  it  was  on  account  of 
that  friendship,  Angus  gave  them  his  help  at  the  time  of 
the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


IX 

CRUACHAN 

"VTOW  as  to  Cruachan,  the  home  of  Ailell  and  of 
Maeve,  it  is  on  the  plain  of  IMagh  Ai  it  was,  in 
the  province  of  Connaught. 

And  this  is  the  way  the  plain  came  by  its  name.  In 
the  time  long  ago,  there  was  a  king  whose  name  was 
Conn,  that  had  the  Druid  power,  so  that  when  the  Sidhe 
themselves  came  against  him,  he  was  able  to  defend 
himself  with  enchantments  as  good  as  their  own.  And 
one  time  he  went  out  against  them,  and  broke  up  their 
houses,  and  carried  away  their  cattle,  and  then,  to 
hinder  them  from  following  after  him,  he  covered  the 
whole  province  with  a  deep  snow. 

The  Sidhe  went  then  to  consult  with  Dalach,  the 
king's  brother,  that  had  the  Druid  knowledge  even 
better  than  himself;  and  it  is  what  he  told  them  to 
do,  to  kill  three  hundred  white  cows  with  red  ears, 
and  to  spread  out  their  livers  on  a  certain  plain.  And 
when  they  had  done  this,  he  made  spells  on  them,  and 
the  heat  the  livers  gave  out  melted  the  snow  over  the 
whole  plain  and  the  whole  province,  and  after  that  the 
plain  was  given  the  name  of  Magh  Ai,  the  Plain  of  the 
Livers. 

Ailell  was  son  of  Ross  Ruadh,  king  of  Leinster,  and 
Maeve  was  daughter  of  Eochaid,  king  of  Ireland,  and  her 
brothers  were  the  Three  Fair  Twins  that  rose  up  against 

14S 


THE   ROYAL   HOUSE  149 

their  father,  and  fought  against  him  at  Druim  Criadh. 
And  they  were  beaten  in  the  fight,  and  went  back  over 
the  Sionnan,  and  they  were  overtaken  and  their  heads 
were  cut  off,  and  brought  back  to  their  father,  and  he 
fretted  after  them  to  the  end  of  his  Hfe. 

Seven  sons  Ailell  and  Maeve  had,  and  the  name  of 
every  one  of  them  was  Maine.  There  was  Maine 
Mathremail,  Hke  his  mother,  and  Maine  Athremail, 
like  his  father,  and  Maine  Mo  Epert,  the  Talker,  and 
Maine  Milscothach,  the  Honey-Worded,  and  Maine 
Andoe  the  Quick,  and  Maine  Mingor,  the  Gently 
Dutiful,  and  Maine  Morgor,  the  Very  Dutiful.  Their 
own  people  they  had,  and  their  own  place  of  living. 

This  now  was  the  appearance  of  Cruachan,  the  Royal 
house  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  that  some  called  Cruachan 
of  the  poets  ;  there  were  seven  divisions  in  the  house, 
with  couches  in  them,  from  the  hearth  to  the  wall ;  a 
front  of  bronze  to  every  division,  and  of  red  yew  with 
carvings  on  it ;  and  there  were  seven  strips  of  bronze 
from  the  foundation  to  the  roof  of  the  house.  The 
house  was  made  of  oak,  and  the  roof  was  covered  with 
oak  shingles  ;  sixteen  windows  with  glass  there  were, 
and  shutters  of  bronze  on  them,  and  a  bar  of  bronze  across 
every  shutter.  There  was  a  raised  place  in  the  middle 
of  the  house  for  Ailell  and  Maeve,  with  silver  fronts 
and  strips  of  bronze  around  it,  and  four  bronze  pillars 
on  it,  and  a  silver  rod  beside  it,  the  way  Ailell  and 
Maeve  could  strike  the  middle  beam  and  check  their 
people. 

And  outside  the  royal  house  was  the  dun,  with  the 
walls  about  it  that  were  built  by  Brocc,  son  of  Blar,  and 
the  great  gate  ;  and  it  is  there  the  houses  were  for 
strangers  to  be  lodged. 

And  besides  this,  there  was  at  Cruachan  the  Hill  of 
the  Sidhe,  or,  as  some  called  it,  the  Cave  of  Cruachan,  It 
was  there  Midhir  brought  Etain  one  time,  and  it  is  there 


150  CRUACHAN 

the    people  of  the   Sidhe  lived  ;   but  it  is  seldom  any 
living  person  had  the  power  to  see  them. 

It  is  out  of  that  hill  a  flock  of  white  birds  came  one 
time,  and  everything  they  touched  in  all  Ireland 
withered  up,  until  at  last  the  men  of  Ulster  killed  them 
with  their  slings.  And  another  time  enchanted  pigs 
came  out  of  the  hill,  and  in  every  place  they  trod,  neither 
corn  nor  grass  nor  leaf  would  sprout  before  the  end  of 
seven  years,  and  no  sort  of  weapon  would  wound  them. 
But  if  they  were  counted  in  any  place,  or  if  the  people 
so  much  as  tried  to  count  them,  they  would  not  stop  in 
that  place,  but  they  would  go  on  to  another.  But  how- 
ever often  the  people  of  the  country  tried  to  count 
them,  no  two  people  could  ever  make  out  the  one 
number,  and  one  man  would  call  out,  "  There  are  three 
pigs  in  it,"  and  another,  "  No,  but  there  are  seven,"  and 
another  that  it  was  eleven  were  in  it,  or  thirteen,  and  so 
the  count  would  be  lost.  One  time  Maeve  and  Ailell 
themselves  tried  to  count  them  on  the  plain,  but  while 
they  were  doing  it,  one  of  the  pigs  made  a  leap  over 
Maeve's  chariot,  and  she  in  it.  Every  one  called  out, 
"A  pig  has  gone  over  you,  Maeve  I"  "  It  has  not,"  she 
said,  and  with  that  she  caught  hold  of  the  pig  by  the 
shank,  but  if  she  did,  its  skin  opened  at  the  head,  and  it 
made  its  escape.  And  it  is  from  that  the  place  was 
called  Magh-mucrimha,  the  Plain  of  Swine-counting. 

Another  time  Fraech,  son  of  Idath,  of  the  men  of 
Connaught,  that  was  son  of  Boann's  sister,  Befind,  from 
the  Sidhe,  came  to  Cruachan.  He  was  the  most  beauti- 
ful of  the  men  of  Ireland  or  of  Alban,  but  his  life  was  not 
long.  It  was  to  ask  Findabair  for  his  wife  he  came,  and 
before  he  set  out  his  people  said  :  "  Send  a  message  to 
your  mother's  people,  the  way  they  will  send  you  cloth- 
ing of  the  Sidhe."  So  he  went  to  Boann,  that  was  at 
Magh  Breagh,  and  he  brought  away  fifty  blue  cloaks  with 
four  black  ears  on  each  cloak,  and  a  brooch  of  red  gold 


FRAECH   AT    CRUACHAN  151 

with  each,  and  pale  white  shirts  with  looped  beasts  of 
gold  around  them  ;  and  fifty  silver  shields  with  edges, 
and  a  candle  of  a  king's  house  in  the  hand  of  each  of 
the  men,  knobs  of  carbuncle  under  them,  and  their 
points  of  precious  stones.  They  used  to  light  up  the 
night  as  if  they  were  sun's  rays. 

And  he  had  with  him  seven  trumpeters  with  gold  and 
silver  trumpets,  with  many  coloured  clothing,  with  golden, 
silken,  heads  of  hair,  with  coloured  cloaks  ;  and  three 
harpers  with  the  appearance  of  a  king  on  each  of  them, 
every  harper  having  the  white  skin  of  a  deer  about  him 
and  a  cloak  of  white  linen,  and  a  harp-bag  of  the  skins 
of  water-dogs. 

The  watchman  saw  them  from  the  dun  when  they  had 
come  into  the  Plain  of  Cruachan.  "  I  see  a  great  crowd," 
he  said,  "  coming  towards  us.  Since  Ailell  was  king  and 
Maeve  was  queen,  there  never  came  and  there  never 
will  come  a  grander  or  more  beautiful  crowd  than  this 
one.  It  is  like  as  if  I  had  my  head  in  a  vat  of  wine,  with 
the  breeze  that  goes  over  them." 

Then  Fraech's  people  let  out  their  hounds,  and  the 
hounds  found  seven  deer  and  seven  foxes  and  seven 
hares  and  seven  wild  boars,  and  hunted  them  to  Rath 
Cruachan,  and  there  they  were  killed  on  the  lawn  of  the 
dun. 

Then  Ailell  and  Maeve  gave  them  a  welcome,  and 
they  were  brought  into  the  house,  and  while  food  was 
being  made  ready,  Maeve  sat  down  to  play  a  game  of 
chess  with  Fraech.  It  was  a  beautiful  chess-board 
they  had,  all  of  white  bronze,  and  the  chessmen  of  gold 
and  silver,  and  a  candle  of  precious  stones  lighting  them. 

Then  Ailell  said  :  "  Let  your  harpers  play  for  us  while 
the  feast  is  being  made  ready."  "  Let  them  play,  in- 
deed," said  Fraech. 

So  the  harpers  began  to  play,  and  it  was  much  that 
the  people  of  the  house  did  not  die  with  crying  and 


152  CRUACHAN 

with  sadness.  And  the  music  they  played  was  the  Three 
Cries  of  Uaithne.  It  was  Uaithne,  the  harp  of  the 
Dagda,  that  first  played  those  cries  the  time  Boann's 
sons  were  born.  The  first  was  a  song  of  sorrow  for 
the  hardness  of  her  pains,  and  the  second  was  a  song 
of  smiling  and  joy  for  the  birth  of  her  sons,  and  the 
third  was  a  sleeping  song  after  the  birth. 

And  with  the  music  of  the  harpers,  and  with  the 
light  that  shone  from  the  precious  stones  in  the  house, 
they  did  not  know  the  night  was  on  them,  till  at  last 
Maeve  started  up,  and  she  said :  "  We  have  done  a 
great  deed  to  keep  these  young  men  without  food." 
"  It  is  more  you  think  of  chess-playing  than  of  providing 
for  them,"  said  Ailell  ;  "  and  now,  let  them  stop  from 
the  music,"  he  said,  "till  the  food  is  given  out." 

Then  the  food  was  divided.  It  was  Lothar  used  to 
be  sitting  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  dividing  the  food 
with  his  cleaver,  and  he  not  eating  himself,  and  from 
the  time  he  began  dividing,  food  never  failed  under 
his  hand. 

After  that,  Fraech  was  brought  into  the  conversation- 
house,  and  they  asked  him  what  was  it  he  wanted. 

"  A  visit  to  yourselves,"  he  said,  but  he  said  nothing 
of  Findabair.  So  they  told  him  he  was  welcome,  and 
he  stopped  with  them  for  a  while,  and  every  day  they 
went  out  hunting,  and  all  the  people  of  Connaught 
used  to  come  and  to  be  looking  at  them. 

But  all  this  time  Fraech  got  no  chance  of  speaking 
with  Findabair,  until  one  morning  at  daybreak,  he 
went  down  to  the  river  for  washing,  and  Findabair  and 
her  young  girls  had  gone  there  before  him.  And  he 
took  her  hand,  and  he  said  :  "  Stay  here  and  talk  with 
me,  for  it  is  for  your  sake  I  am  come,  and  would  you 
go  away  with  me  secretly ? "  "I  will  not  go  secretly," 
she  said,  "  for  I  am  the  daughter  of  a  king  and  of 
a  queen." 


AILELL'S   TREACHERY  153 

So  she  went  from  him  then,  but  she  left  him  a  ring 
to  remember  her  by.  It  was  a  ring  her  mother  had 
given  her. 

Then  Fraech  went  to  the  conversation-house  to  Ailell 
and  to  Maeve.  "  Will  you  give  your  daughter  to  me  ?  " 
he  said.  "  We  will  give  her  if  you  will  give  the  marriage 
portion  we  ask,"  said  Ailell,  "  and  that  is,  sixty  black- 
grey  horses  with  golden  bits,  and  twelve  milch  cows, 
and  a  white  red-eared  calf  with  each  of  them  ;  and  you 
to  come  with  us  with  all  your  strength  and  all  your 
musicians  at  whatever  time  we  go  to  war  in  Ulster." 
"  I  swear  by  my  shield  and  my  sword,  I  would  not  give 
that  for  Maeve  herself,"  he  said  ;  and  he  went  away  out 
of  the  house. 

But  Ailell  had  taken  notice  of  Findabair's  ring  with 
Fraech,  and  he  said  to  Maeve :  "  If  he  brings  our 
daughter  away  with  him,  we  will  lose  the  help  of  many 
of  the  kings  of  Ireland.  Let  us  go  after  him  and 
make  an  end  of  him  before  he  has  time  to  harm  us." 
"  That  would  be  a  pity,"  said  Maeve.  "  and  it  would  be 
a  reproach  on  us."  "  It  will  be  no  reproach  on  us,  the 
way  I  will  manage  it,"  said  he.  And  Maeve  agreed  to 
it,  for  there  was  vexation  on  her  that  it  was  Findabair 
that  Fraech  wanted,  and  not  herself  So  they  went 
into  the  palace,  and  Ailell  said  :  "  Let  us  go  and  see 
the  hounds  hunting  until  mid-day."  So  they  did  so, 
and  at  mid-day  they  were  tired,  and  they  all  went  to 
bathe  in  the  river.  And  Fraech  was  swimming  in  the 
river,  and  Ailell  said  to  him  :  "  Do  not  come  back  till 
you  bring  me  a  branch  of  the  rowan-tree  there  beyond, 
with  the  beautiful  berries."  For  he  knew  there  was  a 
prophecy  that  it  was  in  a  river  Fraech  would  get  his 
death. 

So  he  went  and  broke  a  branch  off  the  tree  and 
brought  it  back  over  the  water,  and  it  is  beautiful  he 
looked   over  the  black  water,  his  body  without  fault, 


154  CRUACHAN 

and  his  face  so  nice,  and  his  eyes  very  grey,  and  the 
branch  with  the  red  berries  between  the  throat  and 
the  white  face.  And  then  he  threw  the  branch  to 
them  out  of  the  water.  "  It  is  ripe  and  beautiful  the 
berries  are,"  said  Ailell  ;  "  bring  us  more  of  them." 

So  he  went  off  again  to  the  tree,  and  the  water- worm 
that  guarded  the  tree  caught  a  hold  of  him.  "  Let  me 
have  a  sword,"  he  called  out,  but  there  was  not  a  man 
on  the  land  would  dare  to  give  it  to  him,  through  fear  of 
Ailell  and  of  Maeve.  But  Findabair  made  a  leap  to  go 
into  the  water  with  a  gold  knife  she  had  in  her  hand,  but 
Ailell  threw  a  sharp-pointed  spear  from  above,  through 
her  plaited  hair,  that  held  her ;  but  she  threw  the  knife 
to  Fraech,  and  he  cut  off  the  head  of  the  monster,  and 
brought  it  with  him  to  the  land,  but  he  himself  had  got 
a  deep  wound.  Then  Ailell  and  Maeve  went  back  to 
the  house.  "  It  is  a  great  deed  we  have  done,"  said 
Maeve.  "It  is  a  pity,  indeed,  what  we  have  done  to 
the  man,"  said  Ailell.  "  And  let  a  healing-bath  be 
made  for  him  now,"  he  said,  "  of  the  marrow  of  pigs 
and  of  a  heifer."  Fraech  was  put  in  the  bath  then, 
and  pleasant  music  was  played  by  the  trumpeters,  and 
a  bed  was  made  for  him. 

Then  a  sorrowful  crying  was  heard  on  Cruachan,  and 
they  saw  three  times  fifty  women  with  purple  gowns, 
with  green  head-dresses,  and  pins  of  silver  on  their 
wrists,  and  a  messenger  went  and  asked  them  who 
was  it  they  were  crying  for.  "  For  Fraech,  son  of 
Idath,"  they  said,  "  boy  darling  of  the  king  of  the  Sidhe 
of  Ireland." 

Then  Fraech  heard  their  crying,  and  he  said  :  "  Lift  me 
out  of  this,  for  that  is  the  cry  of  my  mother,  and  of  the 
women  of  Boann."  So  they  lifted  him  out,  and  the 
women  came  round  him  and  brought  him  away  into  the 
Hill  of  Cruachan. 

And  the  next  day   he  came  out,  and  he  whole  and 


NERA'S    ADVENTURE  155 

sound,  and  fifty  women  with  him,  and  they  with  the 
appearance  of  women  of  the  Sidhe.  And  at  the  door 
of  the  dun  they  left  him,  and  they  gave  out  their  cry 
again,  so  that  all  the  people  that  heard  it  could  not  but 
feel  sorrowful.  It  is  from  this  the  musicians  of  Ireland 
learned  the  sorrowful  cry  of  the  women  of  the  Sidhe. 

And  when  he  went  into  the  house,  the  whole  house- 
hold rose  up  before  him  and  bade  him  welcome,  as  if  it 
was  from  another  world  he  was  come.  And  there  was 
shame  and  repentance  on  Ailell  and  on  Maeve  for 
trying  to  harm  him,  and  peace  was  made,  and  he  went 
away  to  his  own  place. 

And  it  was  after  that  he  came  to  help  Ailell  and 
Maeve,  and  that  he  got  his  death  in  a  river  as  was 
foretold,  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull 
of  Cuailgne. 

And  one  time  the  Hill  was  robbed  by  the  men  of 
Cruachan,  and  this  is  the  way  it  happened. 

One  night  at  Samhain,  Ailell  and  Maeve  were  in 
Cruachan  with  their  whole  household,  and  the  food  was 
being  made  ready. 

Two  prisoners  had  been  hanged  by  them  the  day 
before,  and  Ailell  said  :  "  Whoever  will  put  a  gad  round 
the  foot  of  either  of  the  two  men  on  the  gallows,  will 
get  a  prize  from  me." 

It  was  a  very  dark  night,  and  bad  things  would  always 
appear  on  that  night  of  Samhain,  and  every  man  that 
went  out  to  try  came  back  very  quickly  into  the  house. 
"  I  will  go  if  I  will  get  a  prize,"  said  Nera,  then.  "  I 
will  give  you  this  gold-hilted  sword,"  said  Ailell. 

So  Nera  went  out  and  he  put  a  gad  round  the  foot  of 
one  of  the  men  that  had  been  hanged.  Then  the  man 
spoke  to  him.  "  It  is  good  courage  you  have,"  he  said, 
"and  bring  me  with  you  where  I  can  get  a  drink,  for 
I  was  very  thirsty  when  I  was  hanged."  So  Nera 
brought  him  where  he  would  get  a  drink,  and  then  he 


IS6  CRUACHAN 

put    him    on    the    gallows   again,    and    went    back    to 
Cruachan. 

But  what  he  saw  was  the  whole  of  the  palace  as  if 
on  fire  before  him,  and  the  heads  of  the  people  of  it 
lying  on  the  ground,  and  then  he  thought  he  saw  an 
army  going  into  the  Hill  of  Cruachan,  and  he  followed 
after  the  army.  "  There  is  a  man  on  our  track,"  the 
last  man  said.  "  The  track  is  the  heavier,"  said  the 
next  to  him,  and  each  said  that  word  to  the  other  from 
the  last  to  the  first.  Then  they  went  into  the  Hill  of 
Cruachan.  And  they  said  to  their  king :  "  What  shall 
be  done  to  the  man  that  is  come  in  ?  "  ''  Let  him  come 
here  till  I  speak  with  him,"  said  the  king.  So  Nera 
came,  and  the  king  asked  him  who  it  was  had  brought 
him  in.  "  I  came  in  with  your  army,"  said  Nera.  "  Go 
to  that  house  beyond,"  said  the  king  :  "  there  is  a  woman 
there  will  make  you  welcome.  Tell  her  it  is  I  myself 
sent  you  to  her.  And  come  every  day,"  he  said,  "  to 
this  house  with  a  load  of  firing." 

So  Nera  went  where  he  was  told,  and  the  woman  said  : 
"  A  welcome  before  you,  if  it  is  the  king  sent  you."  So 
he  stopped  there,  and  took  the  woman  for  his  wife. 
And  every  day  for  three  days  he  brought  a  load  of  firing 
to  the  king's  house,  and  on  each  day  he  saw  a  blind 
man,  and  a  lame  man  on  his  back,  coming  out  of  the 
house  before  him.  They  would  go  on  till  they  were  at  the 
brink  of  a  well  before  the  Hill.  "  Is  it  there  ?  "  the  blind 
man  would  say.  "  It  is,  indeed,"  the  lame  man  would 
say.     "  Let  us  go  away,"  the  lame  man  would  say  then. 

And  at  the  end  of  three  days,  as  he  thought,  Nera 
asked  the  woman  about  this.  "  Why  do  the  blind  man 
and  the  lame  man  go  every  day  to  the  well  ?  "  he  said. 
"  They  go  to  know  is  the  crown  safe  that  is  in  the  well. 
It  is  there  the  king's  crown  is  kept."  "Why  do  these 
two  go  ?  "  said  Nera.  "  It  is  easy  to  tell  that,"  she  said  ; 
"  they  are  trusted  by  the  king  to  visit  the  crown,  and 


THE    HILL   OF   THE    SIDHE        157 

one  of  them  was  blinded  by  him,  and  the  other  was 
lamed.  And  another  thing,"  she  said,  "go  now  and 
give  a  warning  to  your  people  to  mind  themselves  next 
Samhain  night,  unless  they  will  come  to  attack  the  hill, 
for  it  is  only  at  Samhain,"  she  said,  "  the  army  of  the 
Sidhe  can  go  out,  for  it  is  at  that  time  all  the  hills  of  the 
Sidhe  of  Ireland  are  opened.  But  if  they  will  come,  I 
will  promise  them  this,  the  crown  of  Briun  to  be  carried 
off  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve." 

"  How  can  I  give  them  that  message,"  said  Nera, 
"when  I  saw  the  whole  dun  of  Cruachan  burned  and 
destroyed,  and  all  the  people  destroyed  with  it  ?  "  "  You 
did  not  see  that,  indeed,"  she  said.  "  It  was  the  host  of 
the  Sidhe  came  and  put  that  appearance  before  your 
eyes.  And  go  back  to  them  now,"  she  said,  "  and  you 
will  find  them  sitting  round  the  same  great  pot,  and  the 
meat  has  not  yet  been  taken  off  the  fire." 

"  How  will  it  be  believed  that  I  have  gone  into  the 
Hill  ? "  said  Nera,  "  Bring  flowers  of  summer  with 
you,"  said  the  woman.  So  he  brought  wild  garlic  with 
him,  and  primroses  and  golden  fern. 

So  he  went  back  to  the  palace,  and  he  found  his  people 
round  the  same  great  pot,  and  he  told  them  all  that 
had  happened  him,  and  the  sword  was  given  to  him,  and 
he  stopped  with  his  people  to  the  end  of  a  year. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  Ailell  said  to  Nera :  "  We  are 
going  now  against  the  Hill  of  the  Sidhe,  and  let  you  go 
back,"  he  said,  "  if  you  have  anything  to  bring  out  of  it." 
So  he  went  back  to  see  the  woman,  and  she  bade  him 
welcome.  "  Go  now,"  she  said,  "  and  bring  in  a  load  of 
firing  to  the  king,  for  I  went  in  myself  every  day  for 
the  last  year  with  the  load  on  my  back,  and  I  said  there 
was  sickness  on  you."     So  he  did  that. 

Then  the  men  of  Connaught  and  the  black  host  of  the 
exiles  of  Ulster  went  into  the  Hill  and  robbed  it  and 
brought  away  the  crown  of  Briun,  son  of  Smetra,  that 


158  CRUACHAN 

was  made  by  the  smith  of  Angus,  son  of  Umor,  and  that 
was  kept  in  the  well  at  Cruachan,  to  save  it  from  the 
Morrigu.  And  Nera  was  left  with  his  people  in  the 
hill,  and  he  has  not  come  out  till  now,  and  he  will  not 
come  out  till  the  end  of  life  and  time. 

Now  one  time  the  Morrigu  brought  away  a  cow  from 
the  Hill  of  Cruachan  to  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne, 
and  after  she  brought  it  back  again  its  calf  v/as  born. 
And  one  day  it  went  out  of  the  Hill,  and  it  bellowed  three 
times.  At  that  time  Ailell  and  Fergus  were  playing 
draughts,  for  it  was  after  Fergus  had  come  as  an  exile 
from  Ulster,  because  of  the  death  of  the  sons  of  Usnach, 
and  they  heard  the  bellowing  of  the  bull-calf  in  the  plain. 
Then  Fergus  said  :  "  I  do  not  like  the  sound  of  the  calf 
bellowing.  There  will  be  calves  without  cows,"  he  said, 
"  when  the  king  goes  on  his  march." 

But  now  Ailell's  bull,  Finbanach,  the  White- Horned, 
met  the  calf  in  the  plain  of  Cruachan,  and  they  fought 
together,  and  the  calf  was  beaten  and  it  bellowed. 
*'  What  did  the  calf  bellow  ?  "  Maeve  asked  her  cow-herd 
Buaigle.  "  I  know  that,  my  master,  Fergus,"  said  Bricriu. 
"  It  is  the  song  that  you  were  singing  a  while  ago."  On 
that  Fergus  turned  and  struck  with  his  fist  at  his  head, 
so  that  the  five  men  of  the  chessmen  that  were  in  his 
hand  went  into  Bricriu's  head,  and  it  was  a  lasting  hurt 
to  him.  "  Tell  me  now,  Buaigle,  what  did  the  calf 
bellow?"  said  Maeve.  "It  said  indeed,"  said  Buaigle, 
"  that  if  its  father  the  Brown  of  Cuailgne  would  come  to 
fight  with  the  White-Horned,  he  would  not  be  seen  any 
more  in  Ai,  he  would  be  beaten  through  the  whole  plain 
of  Ai  on  every  side."  And  it  is  what  Maeve  said :  "  I 
swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,  I  will  not  lie 
down  on  feathers,  or  drink  red  or  white  ale,  till  I  see 
those  two  bulls  fighting  before  my  face." 


X 

THE  WEDDING  OF  MAINE  MORGOR 

■\  1  rHEN  Maine  Morgor,  the  Very  Dutiful,  the  son  of 
Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  set  out  for  his  wedding  with 
Ferb,  daughter  of  Gerg  of  Rath  Ini,  in  Ulster,  he  brought 
three  troops  of  young  men  with  him,  and  fifty  men  in 
each  troop,  and  this  is  the  appearance  that  was  on 
the  first  two  troops.  Shining  white  shirts  they  had, 
striped  with  purple  down  the  sides  ;  gold  shields  on 
their  backs  with  borders  of  white  silver,  with  figures 
engraved  on  them,  and  with  edges  of  white  bronze  as 
sharp  as  knives.  Great  two-edged  swords  with  silver 
hilts  at  their  belts  ;  chains  of  white  silver  round  their 
necks.  And  there  were  neither  helmets  on  their  heads, 
or  shoes  on  their  feet. 

And  as  to  the  third  troop,  the  one  Maine  himself 
was  in,  there  were  fifty  reddish-brown  horses  in  it,  and 
fifty  white  horses  with  red  ears,  with  long  manes  and 
tails  coloured  purple,  and  bridles  on  them,  with  a  ball 
of  red  gold  on  the  one  side,  and  a  ball  of  white  silver 
on  the  other  side,  and  a  gold  or  a  silver  bit  to  every 
one  of  them.  A  collar  of  gold  with  bells  from  it  on 
the  neck  of  every  horse,  and  when  the  horses  would 
be  moving,  the  sound  of  these  bells  would  be  as  sweet 
as  the  strings  of  a  harp  when  the  player  strikes  it  with 
his  hand.  There  was  a  chariot  of  white  bronze  ribbed 
with    gold    and    silver    to    every    two    of  the    horses  ; 


i6o     WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

purple  cushions  sewed  with  gold  bound  to  every  chariot ; 
fifty  fair  slender  young  men  in  these  fifty  chariots,  and 
not  one  among  them  but  was  the  son  of  a  king  and 
a  queen,  and  was  a  hero  and  a  brave  man  of  Connaught, 
and  they  wearing  purple  cloaks  about  them,  that  had 
borders  ornamented  with  gold  and  silver,  and  a  clasp 
of  pure  red  gold  to  every  cloak  ;  fine  silk  coats  fastened 
with  hooks  of  gold  close  to  their  white  bodies ;  fifty 
silver  shields  on  their  backs  with  gold  rims  studded 
with  carbuncles  and  other  precious  stones  of  ever}- 
colour ;  two  candles  of  valour  were  the  two  shining 
spears  on  the  hand  of  every  man  of  them  ;  fifty  rivets 
of  bronze  and  of  gold  in  every  spear,  and  if  any  man 
of  them  had  a  debt  of  a  bushel  of  silver  or  gold,  one 
rivet  from  his  spear  would  pay  it.  And  there  were 
precious  stones  on  their  spears  that  would  flame  in 
the  night  like  the  rays  of  the  sun.  At  their  belts  they 
had  long,  gold-hilted  swords  with  silver  sheaths  ;  goads 
in  their  hands  of  white  bronze  with  silver  crooks.  And 
as  to  the  young  men  themselves,  they  were  very  hand- 
some and  stately,  and  large  and  shining  ;  curled  yellow 
hair  on  them,  hanging  down  on  their  shoulders  ;  proud, 
clear,  blue  eyes  ;  their  cheeks  like  the  flowers  of  the 
woods  in  May,  or  like  the  foxglove  of  the  mountains. 
There  were  seven  greyhounds  following  Maine's  chariot 
in  chains  of  silver,  and  apples  of  gold  on  every  chain. 
There  were  seven  trumpeters  with  gold  and  silver 
trumpets,  wearing  clothes  of  many  colours,  and  having 
all  of  them  light  yellow  hair.  And  three  Druids  went 
in  front  of  them,  and  they  having  bands  of  silver  on 
their  heads,  and  speckled  cloaks  on  them,  and  carrying 
shields  of  bronze  with  ornaments  of  red  copper.  And 
there  were  three  harpers  with  them,  that  had  the  appear- 
ance of  kings. 

It   is  like  that  they  gathered   at  the  royal  house   of 
Cruachan,  and  they  went  three  times   round   the  lawn 


THE   ARRIVAL   AT   RATH    INI      i6i 

before  the  house.  And  they  said  farewell  to  Maeve 
and  to  Ailell,  and  then  they  set  out  for  Rath  Ini. 

"  It  is  a  fine  setting  out  you  are  having,"  said  Bricriu  ; 
"  but  maybe  the  coming  back  will  not  be  so  fine."  "  It 
is  a  journey  that  will  be  heard  of  in  every  place,"  said 
Maine.  "  I  suppose,"  said  Bricriu,  "  it  is  but  a  day  visit 
you  will  make  there,  for  you  will  hardly  stop  to  feast 
through  the  night  in  a  district  that  is  under  Conchubar." 
"  I  give  my  word,"  said  Maine,  "  we  will  not  turn  back 
to  Cruachan  till  we  have  feasted  three  days  and  three 
nights  in  Gerg's  house."  He  did  not  waste  any  more 
time  talking,  but  set  out  on  the  journey. 

When  the  messengers  they  sent  before  them  came  to 
Gerg's  house  at  Rath  Ini,  the  people  there  began  to 
make  all  ready  before  them,  and  they  laid  down  green- 
leaved  birch  branches  and  fresh  green  rushes  in  the 
house.  Then  Ferb  sent  her  foster-sister,  Findchoem, 
daughter  of  Erg,  and  bade  her  go  a  part  of  the  way 
with  the  messengers,  and  bring  her  back  word  what 
appearance  was  on  Maine  and  on  his  companions.  She 
was  not  long  away,  and  as  soon  as  she  came  back  she 
went  with  her  report  to  the  sunny  parlour  where  Ferb 
was,  and  it  is  what  she  said :  "  I  never  saw  since  Con- 
chubar was  in  Emain,  and  I  never  will  see  till  the  end 
of  life  and  time,  a  finer,  or  grander,  or  a  more  beautiful 
troop,  than  the  troop  that  is  coming  now  over  the 
plain.  It  was  the  same  as  if  I  was  in  a  sweet  apple- 
garden,  from  the  sweetness  that  came  to  me  when 
the  light  wind  passed  over  them  and  stirred  their 
clothes." 

With  that,  the  men  of  Connaught  came  to  the  dun, 
and  the  people  within  pressed  upon  one  another  to  look 
at  them.  And  the  gates  were  set  open,  and  their 
chariots  unyoked,  and  baths  of  pure  water  were  made 
ready  for  them.  And  then  they  were  brought  into  the 
hall  of  heroes  in  the  middle  of  the  house,  and  they  were 

L 


i62     WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORG  OR 

given  every  sort  of  food    and  of  drink    that    is   to   be 
found  on  the  whole  ridge  of  the  world. 

But  as  they  were  using  the  feast  and  making  merry, 
there  came  a  sudden  blast  of  wind  that  shook  the  whole 
place,  so  that  the  hall  they  were  in  trembled,  and  the 
shields  fell  from  their  hooks,  and  the  spears  from  their 
places,  and  the  tables  fell  like  leaves  in  an  oak  wood. 
All  the  young  men  were  astonished,  and  Gerg  asked 
Maine's  Druids  what  meaning  they  could  put  on  that 
blast.  And  Ollgaeth,  Maine's  chief  Druid,  said  :  "  I  think 
it  is  no  good  sign  for  those  who  are  come  to-night  to 
this  wedding.  A  blast  of  wind,"  he  said  ;  "  a  sorrowful 
sound  ;  it  is  the  man  that  will  conquer. 

"  A  shield  struck  out  of  a  white  hand  ;  the  bodies  of 
dead  men  laid  under  stones ;  a  high  stone  over  stiff 
bodies  ;  the  story  is  sorrowful ! 

"  And  if  you  will  take  my  advice,"  he  said,  "  you  will 
quit  this  feast  this  very  night." 

But  he  got  a  sharp  rebuke  from  Maine  for  saying 
that,  and  Gerg  said  :  "  There  is  no  cause  for  any  un- 
easiness, for  the  men  of  Ulster  are  not  gathered  at 
Emain  at  this  time.  And  if  they  were  itself,"  he  said, 
"  I  and  my  two  sons  would  be  ready  to  go  out  and  fight 
against  Conchubar  along  with  you." 

They  hung  up  their  arms  then  again,  and  gave  no 
more  heed  to  what  the  Druid  had  said. 

Now  on  the  mornihg  of  this  very  day,  when 
Conchubar  was  lying  in  his  sleep  at  Emain,  he  saw 
in  a  dream  a  beautiful  woman  coming  to  his  bedside, 
and  she  having  the  appearance  of  a  queen.  Yellow 
plaited  hair  she  had,  and  folds  of  silk  over  her  white 
skin,  and  a  cloak  of  green  silk  from  her  shoulders,  and 
two  sandals  of  white  bronze  between  her  soft  feet 
and  the  ground.  "  All  good  be  with  you,  Conchubar," 
she  said.  "  What  is  the  reason  of  your  coming  ? "  said 
Conchubar.     "  It  is  not  long  from  this  time,"  she  said, 


CONCHUBAR'S   VISION  163 

"  that  Ulster  will  be  attacked  and  will  be  robbed,  and 
the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne  will  be  driven  away.  And 
the  son  of  the  man  that  will  do  this  thing,"  she  said, 
"  Maine  Morgor,  son  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  is  coming 
this  very  night  to  his  wedding  with  Ferb,  daughter  of 
Gerg  of  Rath  Ini,  and  three  times  fifty  young  men  with 
him.  Rise  up  now,"  she  said,  "  there  are  but  three  times 
fifty  men  against  you,  and  the  victory  will  be  with 
you." 

Then  Conchubar  sprang  up,  and  sent  for  Cathbad,  the 
Druid,  and  told  him  his  vision.  "  It  is  likely  enough," 
he  said,  "  that  it  is  meant  to  warn  us  against  the  men 
of  Connaught.  And  you  may  be  sure,"  he  said,  "  that 
if  we  stop  here  quietly,  they  will  be  doing  their  robbery. 
And  let  me  have  the  truth  from  you  now,  and  tell  me 
what  is  best  to  do,  for  there  is  not  the  like  of  you 
among  the  Druids." 

And  Cathbad  said  :  "  It  is  what  your  vision  means, 
that  many  men  will  get  their  death,  and  Maine  of 
Connaught,  he  that  is  above  all  disgrace,  along  with 
them ;  and  he  and  his  companions  will  never  go  back 
again  to  beautiful  Cruachan.  But  you  yourself  will  come 
back  safe,"  he  said,  ''  with  fame  and  victory." 

Then  Conchubar  set  out,  and  there  went  with  him 
Cathrach  Catuchenn,  a  queen  with  a  great  name,  that 
had  come  to  Emain  from  the  country  of  Spain  for  love 
of  Cuchulain ;  and  she  went  out  now  with  Conchubar's 
army.  And  there  went  with  him  as  well,  the  three 
outlaws  of  the  race  of  the  Fomor,  Siabarcha,  son  of 
Suilremar,  and  Berngal  Brec,  and  Buri  of  the  Rough 
Word.  And  Facen,  son  of  Dublongsech  of  the  old 
stock  of  Ulster  came,  and  Fabric  Fiacail  from  Great 
Asia,  and  Forais  Fingalach  from  the  Isle  of  Man. 
So  Conchubar  set  out,  and  three  times  fifty  men  with 
him,  but  he  brought  none  of  the  men  of  Ulster  with 
him,   but    himself    and    his    chariot-driver    Brod,   and 


i64     WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

Imrinn  the  Druid,  Cathbad's  son.  And  none  of  them 
brought  a  servant  with  him,  except  only  Conchubar, 
but  their  shields  on  their  backs,  and  their  bright  green 
spears  in  their  hands,  and  their  heavy  swords  in  their 
belts.  And  if  they  were  not  many  in  number,  the  pride 
of  their  minds  was  great. 

When  they  were  come  within  sight  of  Rath  Ini,  they 
saw  a  great  heavy  cloud  over  it,  the  one  end  of  it  black 
and  the  middle  red,  and  the  other  end  green.  And 
Conchubar  asked  Imrinn  the  Druid,  "  What  is  this  cloud 
over  the  house  a  token  of? "  "  I  know  well,"  said  Imrinn, 
"  it  is  a  sign  there  will  be  fighting  to-night,  and  the  sorrow 
of  death  will  be  on  the  house  like  a  cloud,  and  it  is  for  a 
young  man  the  death  darkness  is  made  ready." 

Then  Conchubar  went  on  towards  the  dun,  and  just 
at  that  time  the  great  vat  that  belonged  to  the  house, 
and  that  got  afterwards  the  name  of  the  Ol  Guala,  was 
brought  into  the  feasting  hall,  and  it  full  of  wine.  But 
whoever  went  to  draw  it  let  the  silver  vessel  fall  into 
the  vat,  so  that  the  wine  flowed  over  the  edges  in  three 
waves.  "  My  grief!  "  said  OUgaeth  the  Druid,  "  it  is  not 
long  before  these  vessels  will  be  with  strangers.  He  is 
not  a  happy  son  born  of  a  mother  that  is  in  this  house 
to-night." 

Then  Conchubar  came  to  the  door,  and  the  strangers 
that  were  with  him  gave  their  shout  of  attack  around 
the  dun,  as  their  custom  was.  At  that  Gerg  rose  up,  and 
his  two  sons  with  him.  Conn  Coscorach  and  Cobthach 
Cnesgel,  and  they  took  hold  of  their  arms.  And  Gerg 
said  to  Maine  :  "  Let  this  be  fought  out  now  between  us 
men  of  Ulster  till  you  see  which  of  us  are  the  bravest. 
And  we  are  all  answerable  for  you,  and  it  is  best  for  you 
that  we  should  fight  together.  But  if  we  fall,  then  let 
you  hold  the  place  if  you  can." 

And  then  Gerg  went  out  and  his  two  sons  along  with 
him  and   their  people.     And  they  held  the  place,  and 


DEATHOFGERG  165 

fought  Conchubar  outside ;  and  for  a  long  time  they  did 
not  let  any  one  go  past  them.  And  Gerg  stood  outside 
the  door,  and  a  hewing  and  cutting  was  aimed  at  him  on 
every  side,  and  five  men  of  the  Fomor  fell  by  him,  and 
Imrinn  the  Druid,  along  with  them,  and  he  cut  his  head 
off  and  brought  it  to  the  door  with  him. 

Then  Cathrach  Catuchenn  came  between  him  and  the 
door,  and  she  made  a  sharp  attack  on  him,  and  Gerg 
struck  her  head  off,  and  brought  it  back  with  him  into 
the  house,  for  he  had  got  a  hard  wound.  And  he  threw 
the  heads  down  before  Maine,  and  he  sat  down  on  a 
bed,  and  gave  a  heavy  sigh  and  asked  for  a  drink.  And 
then  Conchubar  and  his  people  came  up  to  the  wall,  and 
they  were  holding  their  shields  over  their  heads  with 
their  left  hands,  and  tearing  down  the  wall  with  their 
right  hands,  till  they  were  able  to  make  their  way 
through  it. 

Then  Brod,  Conchubar's  chariot-driver,  threw  one  of 
the  spears  he  had  in  his  hand  into  the  house,  and  it  went 
through  Gerg's  body,  and  through  the  body  of  Airisdech 
his  servant  that  was  behind  him,  so  that  the  two  of  them 
fell  together.  And  Conchubar  attacked  Gerg's  people 
in  the  house,  so  that  thirty  of  them  fell,  and  he  killed 
Conn,  Gerg's  son,  by  his  own  hand,  and  many  of  his  own 
people  got  their  death  as  well. 

Then  Nuagal,  Gerg's  wife,  rose  up,  and  she  gave  three 
great  angry  cries  of  grief,  and  she  took  the  head  of  her 
husband  into  her  bosom.  "  By  my  word,"  she  said,  "  it 
is  a  fine  servant's  deed,  Brod  to  have  killed  Gerg  in  his 
own  house.  But  there  are  many,"  she  said,  "  that  will 
keen  you,  and  as  you  have  fallen  on  account  of  your 
daughter,  many  women  shall  have  sorrow  on  account  of 
you."     And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  It  is  a  good  fight  Gerg  made,  that  is  lying  here  now, 
the  fair-haired  champion  with  the  red  sword  ;  he  that 
was  proud,  open-handed,  brave,  wise,  beautiful. 


i66    WEDDIXG   OF    MAIXE    MORGOR 

'•  Where  is  there  a  better  hero  than  Gerg  ?  Where  is 
the  man  that  has  not  anger  on  him.  Where  is  the  army 
that  does  not  keen  for  your  death  ? 

"  It  is  grief  to  me  to  see  you  on  your  bed  of  death, 
O  beautiful  fair-haired  Gerg !  It  is  a  pit)'  for  me,  you 
to  be  dead. 

"  Before  you  here  in  Rath  Ini,  and  at  Loch  Ane  and 
at  Irard,  and  in  the  valleys  of  the  south,  there  were 
many  women  that  gave  you  their  love. 

"  You  were  the  friend  of  even-  armv  ;  even-  one  crave 
you  full  obedience  ;  your  friendl)'  word  was  dear  to 
ever)'  one ;  surely  it  is  you  v^-ere  the  good  adviser. 

"It  is  great  indeed  your  deeds  were,  it  is  stately  your 
assemblies  were  ;  you  were  a  king  among  great  lords. 

"Your  house  was  great,  it  was  well-known,  the  house 
within  which  harm  came  to  you  ;  it  was  there  Brod 
killed  you  in  the  hall  of  kings. 

"It  was  a  great  harm  and  a  great  curse  Brod  put  on 
us,  he  to  kill  a  king  of  Ireland  before  his  time ;  he  has 
killed  him  ;  he  has  killed  all  of  us  along  with  him." 

Then  Gerg's  two  sons  said  they  would  hold  the  place, 
and  they  were  not  without  killing  many  in  the  fight 
Then  Maine  could  not  hold  in  his  strength  any  longer, 
and  he  went  out  to  avenge  his  father-in-law.  And  his 
three  times  fifty  companions  rose  up  along  with  him,  and 
it  was  not  easy  to  stand  against  them.  There  was  great 
pride  in  the  mind,  and  great  courage  in  the  heart  of 
ever>-  one  of  them,  and  there  was  great  desire  and  longing 
on  them  to  do  high  deeds. 

And  as  to  Maine,  the  king's  son,  he  was  stately,  kind, 
mannerly,  and  although  he  was  hardly  out  of  his 
bo}'hood,  he  was  braver  in  the  fight  than  any  other. 
He  w^as  gentle  in  the  drinking-house,  and  he  was  hard 
in  battle,  and  he  was  mindful  of  his  enemies,  and  he  was 
pitiful  in  wounding,  and  a  sp)ender  of  treasure,  and  a 
stone  of  anger,  and  a  wave  of  justice ;  and  he  was  the 


THE    FIGHT   AT    RATH    INI         167 

head  in  the  gatherings  of  the  three  Connaughts,   and 
their  hand  in  spending,  and  their  fitting  king. 

He  thought  it  would  be  dishonour  on  him,  ever  to 
be  overcome  in  equal  fight  by  any  men  in  the  world, 
or  the  place  to  be  taken  that  he  was  defending.  And 
he  went  out  and  drove  the  Fomor  away  from  the 
house,  and  it  is  not  a  hand  of  healing  Maine  had  that 
time ;  and  nine  of  the  Fomor  fell  by  his  first  attack. 
Then  the  outlaw  of  Great  Asia,  Fabric  Fiacail,  came 
up  to  the  threshold,  and  began  destroying  the  men 
before  him,  and  no  one  stood  against  him  till  he  came 
to  the  place  where  Maine  was.  And  then  they  two 
set  their  shields  one  against  the  other,  and  they  were 
fighting  together  till  after  midnight ;  and  Fabric  gave 
Maine  three  deep  wounds,  and  when  they  were  tired 
out  with  the  fight,  Maine  struck  off  his  head.  Then 
Conchubar  came,  and  thirty  of  Gerg's  men  were  killed 
by  him,  and  the  two  armies  fell  upon  one  another,  and 
it  is  much  that  even  the  toes  of  their  feet  did  not 
make  an  attack  of  their  own.  And  the  blood  that 
was  in  the  dun  was  as  high  as  a  man's  knees,  and  in 
all  the  district  round  nothing  could  be  heard  but  the 
striking  of  blows  on  shields,  and  the  clinking  of  spears, 
and  the  clash  of  swords  against  one  another,  and  the 
roar  of  beaten  men. 

And  Maine,  when  he  had  overcome  the  Fomor,  came 
where  Facen,  son  of  Dublongsech  was,  and  they  fought 
together  a  good  while,  and  then  Facen  was  killed.  Then 
Maine  and  Cobthach  were  driven  up  into  the  house 
after  their  people  were  put  down,  and  they  held  it 
bravely  till  morning,  and  no  one  was  able  to  make  a 
way  in. 

In  this  same  night,  the  same  woman  that  had  brought 
news  to  Conchubar,  went  to  where  Maeve  was  lying  in 
her  sleep  at  Cruachan,  and  said  to  her :  "  If  you  had 
the  Druid  sight,  Maeve,"  she  said,  "  you  would  not  be 


i68    WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

in  your  sleep  now."  "  What  has  happened  ? "  said 
Maeve.  "  Conchubar  is  at  this  very  moment,"  said  the 
strange  woman,  "getting  the  upper  hand  of  Maine,  and 
he  is  on  the  point  of  putting  him  to  death.  Rise  up 
now,  and  gather  your  men  together,"  she  said,  "and 
go  out  and  avenge  him." 

With  that  Maeve  wakened  out  of  her  sleep,  and  she 
called  to  Ailell  and  told  him  the  vision,  and  told  it 
to  her  people  as  well.  "There  is  no  truth  in  it,"  said 
Bricriu. 

But  when  Fiannamail,  the  innkeeper's  son  at  Cruachan, 
heard  it,  he  waited  for  no  one  and  made  no  delay,  but 
set  out  for  the  place  where  Maine  was,  for  Maine 
was  his  foster-brother.  And  Maeve  chose  out  seven 
hundred  armed  men,  the  best  that  were  to  be  found  in 
Cruachan  at  that  time.  And  then  Donall  Dearg  came, 
that  was  the  best  fighter  in  the  province,  and  that  was 
another  of  Maine's  foster-brothers.  And  he  set  out  in 
the  same  way,  before  the  others,  and  thirty  fighting  men 
with  him,  and  the  name  of  every  one  of  them  was  Donall. 
And  then  Maeve  set  out  after  them  on  her  journey. 

But  as  to  Maine,  he  held  the  house  till  the  bright 
rising  of  the  sun  on  the  morrow,  and  it  was  not  pleasant 
rest  this  night  brought  to  either  side.  When  they  could 
see  each  other  by  the  light  of  day,  each  remembered  the 
other  to  his  hurt,  and  Conchubar  began  to  rouse  up  his 
people.  "  If  it  was  the  men  of  Ulster  I  had  with  me 
now,"  he  said,  "  they  would  not  be  dragging  on  with 
this  battle,  the  way  the  Fomor  are  doing."  When  the 
Fomor  heard  that  sharp  reproach,  their  courage  rose 
up  in  them,  and  they  pressed  on  hard  in  the  fight,  and 
never  left  off  till  they  were  through  the  door  of  the 
house.  The  house  they  came  into  had  a  great  name 
for  grandeur,  but  it  was  bad  work  that  was  done  in  it 
now.  There  were  a  hundred  tables  of  white  silver  in  it, 
and  three  hundred  of  brass,  and  three  hundred  of  white 


DEATHOFMAINE  169 

bronze.  And  there  were  thirty  vessels  with  pure  silver 
from  Spain  on  their  rims,  and  two  hundred  cowhorns 
ornamented  with  gold  or  silver,  and  thirty  silver  cups, 
and  thirty  brass  cups,  and  on  the  walls  there  were 
hangings  of  white  linen  with  wonderful  figures  worked 
on  them. 

Then  the  two  armies  met  one  another  in  the  middle 
of  the  house,  and  a  great  many  were  killed  there.  And 
Cobthach,  Gerg's  son,  after  he  had  killed  many  of  the 
Fomor,  came  to  where  Berngal  Brec  was  hewing  the 
heads  off  the  men  of  Connaught,  and  they  fought  to- 
gether, and  Berngal  was  worsted  in  the  end. 

And  as  to  Maine,  he  killed  Buri  of  the  Rough  Word, 
and  after  that  he  went  mad  and  raging  through  the  house, 
and  thirty  other  men  fell  by  him.  But  when  Conchubar 
saw  the  madness  that  was  on  Maine,  he  turned  to  him, 
and  Maine  waited  for  him,  and  they  fought  a  long 
while,  and  Maine  threw  his  casting  spear  so  strong 
and  straight,  that  it  went  through  Conchubar's  body ; 
and  while  Conchubar  was  striving  to  draW  out  that 
spear,  Maine  wounded  him  with  the  long  spear  that 
was  in  his  hand.  Then  Brod  came  to  help  Conchubar, 
and  Maine  gave  him  three  heavy  wounds,  so  that  he 
was  able  to  fight  no  more.  But  then  Conchubar  attacked 
him  with  blows  on  every  side,  until  he  laid  him  dead 
before  him. 

And  after  he  had  killed  Maine,  he  began  to  attack 
the  crowd  about  him,  so  that  they  fell,  foot  to  foot,  and 
neck  to  neck,  all  through  the  house.  And  at  the  end, 
there  was  not  one  of  Maine's  people  left  living ;  and  of 
the  three  times  fifty  men  that  came  with  Conchubar, 
there  was  not  one  left  living  but  himself  and  Brod,  and 
if  they  were  itself,  they  did  not  come  whole  out  of  it. 

Then  Conchubar  drove  Cobthach,  Gerg's  son,  out  of  the 
house ;  and  while  he  was  following  him  over  the  plain, 
Ferb  came  with  her  foster-sister  to  the  place  where  Maine 


I70    WEDDING   OF   MAINE    MORGOR 

was  lying,  and  she  cried  and  lamented  over  him,  and 
she  said  :  "  My  grief!  you  are  alone  now,  you  that  spent 
so  many  nights  in  company."  And  she  made  this 
complaint : — 

"  O  young  man,  it  is  red  your  bed  is  !  It  is  bad  the 
signs  were,  and  you  coming  into  the  house,  a  foretelling 
of  tears  to  all  your  people. 

"  O  son  of  Maeve !  O  branch  of  high  honour !  O  son 
of  Ailell  who  is  not  weak  !  It  is  a  pity  it  is  for  my  heart 
and  my  body,  you  to  be  lying  there  for  ever  ! 

"  O  young  man,  the  best  I  ever  saw ;  a  rod  of  gold 
and  you  lying  on  the  pillow ;  whenever  you  and  an 
enemy  met  together,  that  was  the  last  meeting  there 
was  between  you. 

"  There  is  grief  on  me,  you  to  be  lying  there,  young 
man,  son  of  Maeve ;  your  face  was  ruddy,  your  hand  was 
rough  in  battle ;  it  is  grief  has  been  put  into  my  heart 
that  was  waiting  for  you. 

"  It  is  seldom  you  were  without  arms  up  to  this,  until 
you  were  struck  down,  lying  dead.  The  shining  spear 
pierced  you,  the  hard  sword  wounded  you,  till  blood  was 
dropping  down  on  your  cheeks. 

"  Och !  What  were  you  to  me,  and  I  not  to  have  seen 
your  death  ;  my  darling,  my  choice  among  men,  he  that 
was  worth  good  treasure. 

"  He  is  my  husband  for  all  my  days,  great  Maine, 
Ailell's  son  ;  I  will  die  for  the  want  of  him,  and  he  not 
able  to  come  and  care  me. 

"  His  purple  cloak  is  grief  to  me,  and  himself  lying 
there  on  the  floor  of  the  house,  and  his  hand  that  was 
struck  off  after  he  fell,  and  his  head  in  the  hand  of 
Conchubar ; 

"  And  his  sword  that  was  strong,  heavy  in  striking, 
Conchubar  has  carried  it  far  away ;  and  his  shield  there 
where  he  fell,  and  he  defending  his  people 

"  He  himself  a  hero,  and  no  lie  in  it ;  it  is  he  divided 


THE    INNKEEPER'S    SON  171 

much  riches  ;  it  is  not  a  Httle  thing  he  did  to  die  Hke 
that,  and  he  defending  his  people. 

"  The  fair  young  man  of  Connaught  to  be  lying  there 
cold,  and  the  best  of  his  troop  along  with  him  ;  it  is  a  pity 
for  his  people  that  died  defending  him  ;  it  is  a  pity  for 
me,  his  unmarried  wife. 

"  There  is  nothing  I  can  do  for  you,  Maine  ;  it  is  on 
myself  the  hurt  is  come ;  my  heart  is  broken  with  it,  and 
I  looking  at  you,  Maine." 

Then  Fiannamail,  the  innkeeper's  son  from  Cruachan, 
came  to  the  house,  and  Ferb  saw  him,  and  she  said : 
"  Here  is  Fiannamail  come  to  visit  us,  but  whatever 
companions  he  has  left  at  home,  he  will  find  none  before 
him  here."  "  That  is  rough  news  you  are  giving  me, 
Ferb,"  said  Fiannamail ;  "  and  indeed  I  am  parted  from 
my  companions  if  it  is  they  that  are  lying  here,"  he  said. 
"  They  are  your  companions  indeed,"  said  Ferb  ;  "  they 
overcame  others,  and  now  they  are  overcome  them- 
selves." 

And  Fiannamail  said  :  "  And  Maine,  is  he  living  ?  my 
comrade,  my  dear  friend,  my  prince  at  home ! "  And 
Ferb  said  :  "  It  is  bitter  to  me,  you  to  ask  this,  for  I  know 
you  did  not  think  it  was  Maine's  last  bed  you  would  find 
here." 

And  then  she  told  Fiannamail  all  that  had  happened. 
And  Fiannamail  said  ;  "  When  this  news  of  the  thing  the 
people  of  Ulster  have  done  goes  out,  they  will  be 
attacked  in  the  west  and  in  the  east  as  long  as  there  is  a 
man  living  in  Connaught."  But  Ferb  said  :  "  There  are 
not  left  of  the  army  of  Ulster  but  Conchubar  himself 
and  Brod  his  chariot-driver,  and  the  both  of  them  were 
wounded  by  Mainebefore  Conchubar  killed  him  at  the  last." 

Then  Fiannamail  went  out  to  follow  after  Conchubar, 
to  get  satisfaction  for  Maine's  death.  And  he  met  with 
Niall  of  the  Fair  Head,  Conchubar's  son,  and  a  hundred 
men  with  him,  and  they  looking   for  Conchubar ;   and 


172    WEDDING  OF   MAINE    M  ORG  OR 

for  all  they  were  so  many,  he  fought  a  hot  battle  with 
them,  till  he  fell  dead. 

And  after  he  left  Ferb,  she  was  looking  at  the  young 
men  of  Connaught,  and  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  A  pity  it  is,  young  men  of  Connaught,  that  there  is 
not  soft  down  in  your  pillows  under  you ;  you  that  took 
the  defence  and  would  not  give  it  up.  What  troop  was 
there  better  than  yourselves,  and  now  you  are  lying  like 
a  loosened  thread. 

"  It  is  a  heavy  hand  was  laid  on  your  eyes  ;  you  were 
given  the  sour  drink  of  beaten  men ;  your  story  is  hard, 
it  will  be  a  cause  of  battles ;  it  will  be  a  foretelling  of 
many  tears. 

"  It  is  a  pity  there  is  no  help  for  me  to  bring  you,  but 
only  to  be  keening  and  crying  over  you ;  it  would  be 
better  for  me  to  go  with  you,  and  my  ashes  to  be 
scattered   abroad. 

"  You  were  the  best  of  the  armies  of  Ireland,  young 
men  of  Connaught,  and  I  keening  you  ;  many  women 
will  cry  Och  !  Och  !  after  your  proud  ways. 

"  It  is  proud  you  were  coming  into  the  house  ;  it  is  not 
common  men  you  had  for  your  fathers.  O  beautiful 
young  men  of  Connaught,  it  is  a  pity  it  is  the  way 
you  are  now  !  " 

Then  Donall  Dearg  came  to  the  lawn  before  the  dun- 
And  Ferb's  foster-sister  saw  him,  and  she  said  :  "  It  is  a 
pity  he  was  not  here  and  Maine  living,  for  he  would  have 
given  him  good  help."  And  when  Ferb  heard  he  was  there, 
she  went  out  to  him  and  she  said  :  "  Well,  Donall,  hawk 
of  valour,  here  is  a  thing  for  you  to  do,  to  avenge  your 
foster-brother  that  has  got  his  death."  And  it  is  what 
Donall  said  :  "  If  Maine  has  fallen,  the  man  has  fallen 
that  was  above  all  his  companions,  in  courage,  in  wisdom, 
and  in  gentleness."  And  Ferb  said :  "  It  is  not  the 
work  of  a  hero,  you  to  be  sighing  and  keening  and 
crying  Ochone !  But  since  Maine  will  not  come  back  for 


FERB'S   LAMENTS  i73 

that,  it  is  better  for  you  to  go  out  against  his  enemies." 
And  Donall  said  :  "  I  will  go ;  I  will  destroy  Conchubar, 
I  will  destroy  his  two  sons  in  revenge  for  Maine."  And 
Ferb  said  :  "  If  it  had  been  yourself,  Donall  Dearg,  that 
had  got  your  death  from  the  men  of  Ulster  on  account  of 
me,  the  story  of  the  great  vengeance  Maine  did  for  it 
would  be  told  in  every  place."  Then  Donall  said : 
"  And  as  it  is  Maine  Morgor  himself  has  got  his  death, 
I  will  never  go  home  westward  so  long  as  there  is  a  man 
left  living  in  Ulster. 

So  Donall  went  out,  and  he  had  not  long  to  wait  till 
he  saw  a  great  troop  coming  towards  him,  and  Feradach 
of  the  Long  Hand,  Conchubar's  son,  with  them.  And 
Donall  and  his  men  attacked  them,  but  they  were  out- 
numbered, and  all  his  men  fell.  And  he  himself 
wounded  Feradach  twice,  but  then  his  men  came  at  him, 
and  Feradach  struck  his  head  off,  and  let  out  his  shout 
of  victory,  and  his  people  shouted  along  with  him. 

And  Ferb  was  gone  into  the  house  again,  and  she  was 
looking  at  Maine.  "  There  is  no  good  appearance  on 
you  now,  the  way  you  are,  Maine,"  she  said  ;  "  and  my 
father  got  his  death  through  you,  and  my  father's  son  ; 
but  even  so,  I  will  die  with  the  fret  of  losing  you."  And 
it  is  what  she  said  :  "  There  are  many  women  and  many 
young  girls  will  be  lonely  after  you,  you  to  be  the  only 
one  to  fail  them. 

"  It  is  beautiful  you  were  up  to  this,  proud  and  tall, 
going  out  with  your  young  hounds  to  the  hunting ;  it 
is  spoiled  your  body  is  now,  it  is  pale  your  hands  are. 

"  It  is  bad  the  news  is  that  will  travel  westward  to 
Findabair  of  the  Fair  Eyebrows ;  the  story  of  her 
brother  that  failed  Ferb ;  it  is  not  I  that  have  not  my 
fill  of  sorrow." 

Then  Maeve  and  her  men  came  up  to  where 
Conchubar  was,  and  his  two  sons  that  had  joined  him, 
and  they  faced  one  another,  and  the  fight  began  ;  and 


174    WEDDING   OF   MAINE    M  ORG  OR 

Maeve  broke  through  the  army  of  Ulster  to  get  satisfac- 
tion for  her  son  and  for  her  people,  and  she  killed 
Conchubar's  two  sons.  But  Conchubar  stood  out  and 
faced  her  in  spite  of  his  wounds,  and  in  spite  of  being  tired 
out ;  for  his  hurts  were  healed  by  the  greatness  of  his 
anger  after  his  two  sons  being  kiiled. 

Then  Maeve  was  driven  back  and  lost  the  battle  ; 
and  the  Druids  brought  her  away  as  was  their  custom  ; 
and  Conchubar  followed  after  them  till  they  had  passed 
Magh  Ini.  And  then  he  turned  back  to  spoil  Gerg's 
dun,  and  he  carried  away  with  him  all  he  could  find  of 
treasures ;  and  he  took  away  the  great  brass  vat  that 
was  in  the  house,  and  brought  it  to  Emain.  And  when 
it  was  filled  with  beer,  all  the  province  of  Ulster  used  to 
drink  from  it ;  and  it  got  the  name  of  the  Champion's 
Drinking  Vat. 

And  Ferb  died  with  grief  for  Maine,  and  Nuagal  died 
with  grief  for  her  husband  and  for  her  two  sons.  And  a 
grave  was  made  for  them,  and  a  stone  put  over  it,  and 
their  names  were  written  in  Ogham  ;  and  Rath  Ini  got 
the  name  of  Duma  Ferb,  Ferb's  Mound,  after  that. 

And  this  was  the  first  blood  shed  in  Ulster  on  the 
account  of  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


XI 

THE  WAR  FOR  THE  BULL  OF  CUAILGNE 

TT  happened  one  time  when  Maeve  and  Ailell  rose  up 
^  from  their  royal  bed  in  Cruachan,  they  began  to 
talk  with  one  another.  "It  is  what  I  am  thinking,"  said 
"^Ailell,  "  it  is  a  true  saying,  '  Good  is  the  wife  of  a  good 
man.' "  "  A  true  saying,  indeed,"  said  Maeve,  "  but  why 
do  you  bring  it  to  mind  at  this  time  ?  "  "I  bring  it  to 
mind  now  because  you  are  better  to-day  than  the  day  I 
married  you."  "  I  was  good  before  I  ever  had  to  do 
with  you,"  said  Maeve.  "  How  well  we  never  heard  of 
that  and  never  knew  it  until  now,"  said  Ailell,  "  but 
only  that  you  stopped  at  home  like  any  other  woman, 
while  the  enemies  at  your  boundaries  were  slaughtering 
and  destroying  and  driving  all  before  them,  and  you  not 
able  to  hinder  them."  "  That  is  not  the  way  it  was  at 
all,"  said  Maeve,  "  but  of  the  six  daughters  of  my  father 
Eochaid,  King  of  Ireland,  I  was  the  best  and  the  one 
that  was  thought  most  of.  As  to  dividing  gifts  and 
giving  wages,  I  was  the  best  of  them,  and  as  to  battle 
feats  and  arms  and  fighting,  I  was  the  best  of  them. 
It  was  I  had  fifteen  hundred  paid  soldiers,  and  fifteen 
hundred  more  that  were  the  sons  of  chief  men.  And 
I  had  these,"  she  said,  "  for  my  own  household ;  and 
along  with  that  my  father  gave  me  one  of  the  provinces 
of  Ireland,  the  province  of  Cruachan  ;  so  that  Maeve  of 
Cruachan  is  the  name  that  was  given  to  me. 

176 


176     WARFORBULLOFCUAILGNE 

"  And  as  to  being  asked  in  marriage,"  she  said, 
"  messengers  came  to  me  from  your  own  brother,  Finn, 
son  of  Ross  Ruadh,  king  of  Leinster,  and  I  gave  him 
a  refusal ;  and  after  that  there  came  messengers  from 
Cairbre  Niafer,  son  of  Rossa,  king  of  Teamhair ;  and 
from  Conchubar,  son  of  Ness,  king  of  Ulster  ;  and  after 
that  again  from  Eochu  Beag,  son  of  Luchta,  and  I  refused 
them  all.  For  it  is  not  a  common  marriage  portion  would 
have  satisfied  me,  the  same  as  is  asked  by  the  other 
women  of  Ireland,"  she  said  ;  "  but  it  is  what  I  asked  as 
a  marriage  portion,  a  man  without  stinginess,  without 
jealousy,  without  fear.  For  it  would  not  be  fitting  for 
me  to  be  with  a  man  that  would  be  close-handed,  for 
my  own  hand  is  open  in  wage-paying  and  in  free-giving  ; 
and  it  would  be  a  reproach  on  my  husband,  I  to  be  a 
better  wage-payer  than  himself  And  it  would  not  be 
fitting  for  me  to  be  with  a  man  that  would  be  cowardly, 
for  I  myself  go  into  struggles  and  fights  and  battles  and 
gain  the  victory ;  and  it  would  be  a  reproach  to  my 
husband,  his  wife  to  be  braver  than  himself  And  it 
would  not  be  fitting  for  me  to  be  with  a  husband  that 
would  be  jealous,  for  I  would  never  hold  myself  to  be 
bound  to  one  man  only.  Now  I  have  got  such  a 
husband  as  I  looked  for  in  yourself,  Ailell,  son  of  Ross 
Ruadh,  king  of  Leinster,  for  you  are  not  close-handed  or 
jealous  or  cowardly.  And  I  gave  you  good  wedding 
gifts,"  she  said,  "  suits  of  clothing  enough  for  twelve  men  ; 
a  chariot  that  was  worth  three  times  seven  serving-maids  ; 
the  width  of  your  face  in  red  gold,  the  round  of  your  arm 
in  a  bracelet  of  white  bronze.  And  the  fine  or  the 
tribute  you  can  ask  of  your  enemies  is  no  more  than  the 
fine  or  the  tribute  I  have  a  right  to  ask,  for  you  are 
nothing  of  yourself,  but  it  is  in  the  pay  of  a  woman  you 
are,"  she  said.  "  That  is  not  so,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  I  am  a 
king's  son,  and  I  have  two  brothers  that  are  kings,  Finn, 
king  of  Leinster,  and  Cairbre,  king  of  Teamhair,  and  I 


QUARREL  OF  MAEVE  AND  AILELL    177 

would  have  been  king  in  their  places  but  that  they  are 
older  than  myself.  And  as  to  giving  of  wages  and 
dividing  of  gifts,"  he  said,  "  you  are  no  better  than  my- 
self;  and  if  this  province  is  under  the  rule  of  a  woman, 
it  is  the  only  province  in  Ireland  that  is  so :  and  it  is 
not  through  your  right  I  took  the  kingship  of  it,  but 
through  the  right  of  my  mother,  Mata  of  Murrisk, 
daughter  of  Magach.  And  if  I  took  the  daughter  of  the 
chief  king  of  Ireland  for  my  wife,  it  was  because  I 
thought  she  was  a  fitting  wife  for  me."  "  You  know 
well,"  said  Maeve,  "  the  riches  that  belong  to  me  are 
greater  than  the  riches  that  belong  to  you."  "  There  is 
no  truth  in  that,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  there  is  no  one  in 
Ireland  has  a  better  store  of  jewels  and  riches  and 
treasure  than  myself,  and  you  know  well  there  is  not." 

"  Let  our  goods  and  our  riches  be  put  beside  one 
another,  and  let  a  value  be  put  on  them,"  said  Maeve, 
"  and  you  will  know  which  of  us  owns  most."  "  I  am 
content  to  do  that,"  said  Ailell. 

With  that,  orders  were  given  to  their  people  to  bring 
out  their  goods  and  to  count  them,  and  to  put  a  value  on 
them.  They  did  so,  and  the  first  things  they  brought 
out  were  their  drinking  vessels,  their  vats,  their  iron 
vessels,  and  all  the  things  belonging  to  their  households, 
and  they  were  found  to  be  equal.  Then  their  rings  were 
brought  out,  and  their  bracelets  and  chains  and  brooches, 
their  clothing  of  crimson  and  blue  and  black  and  green 
and  yellow  and  saffron  and  speckled  silks,  and  these 
were  found  to  be  equal.  Then  their  great  flocks  of 
sheep  were  driven  from  the  green  plains  of  the  open 
country  and  were  counted,  and  they  were  found  to  be 
equal ;  and  if  there  was  a  ram  among  Maeve's  flocks 
that  was  the  equal  of  a  serving-maid  in  value,  Ailell  had 
one  that  was  as  good.  And  their  horses  were  brought 
in  from  the  meadows,  and  their  herds  of  swine  out  of  the 
woods   and  the   valleys,   and    they   were  equal    one  to 

M 


178    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

another.  And  the  last  thing  that  was  done  was  to 
bring  in  the  herds  of  cattle  from  the  forest  and  the  wild 
places  of  the  province,  and  when  they  were  put  beside 
one  another  they  were  found  to  be  equal,  but  for  one 
thing  only.  It  happened  a  bull  had  been  calved  in 
Maeve's  herd,  and  his  name  was  Fionnbanach,  the 
White-horned.  But  he  would  not  stop  in  jMaeve's  herds, 
for  he  did  not  think  it  fitting  to  be  under  the  rule 
of  a  woman,  and  he  had  gone  into  Ailell's  herds  and 
stopped  there  ;  and  now  he  was  the  best  bull  in  the  whole 
province  of  Connaught.  And  when  Maeve  saw  him, 
and  knew  he  was  better  than  any  bull  of  her  own,  there 
was  great  vexation  on  her,  and  it  was  as  bad  to  her  as  if 
she  did  not  own  one  head  of  cattle  at  all.  So  she  called 
Mac  Roth,  the  herald,  to  her,  and  bade  him  to  find  out 
where  there  was  a  bull  as  good  as  the  White-horned  to 
be  got  in  any  province  of  the  provinces  of  Ireland. 

"  You  know  that  well  yourself,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  for 
there  is  a  bull  that  is  twice  as  good  as  himself  at  the 
house  of  Daire,  son  of  Fachtna,  in  the  district  of 
Cuailgne,  and  that  is  Donn  Cuailgne,  the  Brown  Bull 
of  Cuailgne."  "  Rise  up,  then,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  make 
no  delay,  but  go  to  Daire  from  me,  and  ask  the  loan 
of  that  bull  for  a  year,  and  I  will  return  him  at  the  end 
of  the  year,  and  fifty  heifers  along  with  him,  as  fee  for 
the  loan.  And  there  is  another  thing  for  you  to  say, 
Mac  Roth  ;  if  the  people  of  Daire's  district  and  country 
think  bad  of  him  for  sending  away  that  wonderful  jewel 
the  Donn  of  Cuailgne,  let  Daire  himself  come  along  with 
him,  and  I  will  give  him  the  equal  of  his  own  lands  on 
the  smooth  plain  of  Ai,  and  a  chariot  that  is  worth  three 
times  seven  serving-maids,  and  my  own  close  friendship 
along  with  that." 

So  Mac  Roth  set  out  on  his  journey,  and  nine 
men  along  with  him,  and  when  they  came  to  Daire's 
house  there  was  a  good  welcome  before  them,  as  there 


DA  IRE'S    FEAST  179 

should    be,  for  Mac    Roth   was  the  chief  herald  of  all 
Ireland. 

Daire  asked  him  then  what  was  the  reason  of  his 
journey,  and  Mac  Roth  told  him  the  whole  story  of  the 
quarrel  between  Maeve  and  Ailell  and  of  the  counting 
of  their  herds,  and  of  the  great  rewards  Maeve  offered 
him  if  he  would  give  her  the  loan  for  one  year  of  the 
Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne.  Daire  was  so  well  pleased 
when  he  heard  this,  that  he  started  up  and  said  :  "  By  my 
hand  of  valour,  I  will  send  him  to  Maeve  into 
Connaught,  with  no  delay,  whether  the  men  of  Ulster 
like  it  or  do  not  like  it."  Mac  Roth  was  well  content 
with  what  he  said,  and  then  he  and  his  men  were 
attended  to,  and  fresh  rushes  were  spread,  and  a  feast 
was  put  before  them,  with  every  sort  of  food  and  of 
drink,  so  that  after  a  while  they  were  not  so  clear  in  their 
wits  as  they  were  before. 

Two  of  them  began  talking  to  one  another  then,  and 
one  said  :  "  This  is  a  good  man  in  whose  house  we  are." 
"  He  is  good  indeed,"  said  the  other.  "  Is  there  any  man 
in  Ulster  better  than  himself?  "  said  the  first.  "  There  is, 
surely,"  said  the  other,  "for  Conchubarthe  High  King  is 
a  better  man,  and  it  is  no  shame  for  all  the  men  of 
Ulster  to  gather  to  him."  "  It  is  a  wonder,"  said  the 
first,  "  Daire  to  have  given  up  to  us  what  it  would  have 
taken  the  strength  of  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  to 
bring  away  by  force."  "  That  I  may  see  the  mouth  that 
spoke  those  words  filled  with  blood,"  said  another  of  the 
men  ;  "  for  if  Daire  had  refused  to  give  it  willingly,  the 
strength  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  and  the  knowledge  of 
Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  would  have  brought  it  from  him 
against  his  will." 

Just  as  they  were  talking,  the  chief  steward  of  Daire's 
house  came  in,  and  servants  along  with  him  bringing 
meat  and  drink ;  and  he  heard  what  the  men  of 
Connaught  said  and  great  anger  came  on  him,  and  he 


i8o    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

bade  the  servants  put  down  the  food  for  them,  but  he 
never  told  them  to  use  it  or  not  to  use  it,  but  he  went  to 
where  Daire  was  and  said  :  "  Was  it  you,  Daire,  promised 
the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne  to  these  messengers  ?  "  "  It 
was  myself  indeed,"  said  Daire.  "  Then  what  they  have 
said  is  true?"  "What  is  that?"  said  Daire.  "They 
say  that  you  knew  if  you  did  not  give  him  willingly 
you  would  have  had  to  give  him  against  your  will  by 
the  strength  of  Ailell  and  Maeve  and  by  the  guidance 
of  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh."  "If  they  say  that,"  said 
Daire,  "  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,  that 
they  will  not  take  him  away  till  they  take  him  by 
force." 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow  the  messengers  rose 
up  and  went  into  the  house  where  Daire  was.  "  Show 
us  now,"  they  said,  "  the  place  where  the  bull  is."  "  I 
will  not  indeed,"  said  Daire ;  "  but  if  it  was  a  habit  with 
me,"  he  said,  "  to  do  treachery  to  messengers  or  to 
travellers  or  to  men  on  their  road,  not  one  of  you  would 
go  back  alive  to  Cruachan."  "  What  reason  have  you 
for  this  change  ?  "  said  Mac  Roth.  "  I  have  a  good  reason 
for  it,  for  you  were  saying  last  night  that  if  I  did  not 
give  the  bull  willingly,  I  would  be  forced  to  give  it 
against  my  will  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve  and  by  Fergus." 
"  If  that  was  said,  it  was  the  talk  of  common  messengers, 
and  they  after  eating  and  drinking,"  said  Mac  Roth, 
"  and  it  is  not  fitting  for  you  to  take  notice  of  a  thing 
like  that." 

"  It  may  be  so  "  said  Daire  ;  "  but  for  all  that,"  he  said 
"  I  will  not  give  the  bull  this  time." 

They  went  back  then  to  Cruachan,  and  Maeve  asked 
news  of  them,  and  Mac  Roth  told  her  the  whole  story, 
how  Daire  gave  them  the  promise  of  the  bull  at  first,  and 
refused  it  afterwards.  "  What  was  the  reason  of  that  ?  " 
she  asked.  And  when  it  was  told  her  she  said  :  "  This 
riddle  is  not  hard  to  guess ;  they  did   not  intend  to  let 


THE   CAMP   AT    CRUACHAN        i8i 

us  get  the  bull  at  all ;  but  now  we  will  take  him  from 
them  by  force,"  she  said. 

And  this  was  the  cause  of  the  great  war  for  the  Brown 
Bull  of  Cuailgne. 

Then  Maeve  sent  messengers  to  the  six  Maines,  her 
sons,  to  come  to  Cruachan,  the  brothers  of  Maine  Morgor 
that  got  his  death  at  Dun  Gerg.  And  she  sent  mes- 
sengers to  the  sons  of  Magach ;  and  they  came,  with 
thirty  hundred  armed  men,  and  to  Cormac  Conloingeas, 
son  of  King  Conchubar,  and  to  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh  ; 
and  they  came,  and  thirty  hundred  armed  men  with 
them. 

This  is  the  appearance  that  was  on  the  first  troop. 
Black  heads  of  hair  they  had,  and  green  cloaks  about 
them,  held  with  silver  brooches,  and  on  their  bodies 
shirts  of  gold  thread,  embroidered  with  red  gold,  and 
they  had  swords  with  white  sheaths  and  hilts  of 
silver. 

As  to  the  second  troop,  they  had  short-cut  hair,  and 
grey  cloaks  about  them,  and  on  their  bodies  pure  white 
shirts  ;  and  they  had  swords  with  knobbed  hilts  of  gold, 
and  sheaths  of  silver.  Every  one  asked :  "  Is  that 
Cormac  among  them  ? "  "  It  is  not  indeed,"  said 
Maeve. 

As  to  the  last  troop,  they  had  gold-yellow  hair,  falling 
loose  like  manes,  and  crimson  cloaks,  well  ornamented, 
about  them,  and  gold  brooches  with  jewels  at  their 
breasts,  and  long  silk  shirts  coming  down  to  their  ankles. 
And  as  they  walked  they  lifted  up  their  feet  and  put 
them  down  again  all  together.  "Is  that  Cormac 
among  them  ? "  every  one  asked.  "  It  is,  surely,"  said 
Maeve. 

So  they  made  their  camp  there,  and  between  the  four 
fords  of  Ai,  Athmaga,  Athslisen,  Athberena,  and  Ath- 
coltna,  there  were  red  fires  blazing  through  the  night. 


i82    WAR   FOR    BULL   OFCUAILGNE 

And  they  stopped  a  fortnight  there  at  Cruachan,  eating 
drinking,  and  resting  themselves,  that  they  might  be 
the  better  able  for  the  journey  and  the  marching. 

Then  Maeve  bade  her  chariot-driver  to  yoke  her 
horses,  that  she  might  go  and  consult  with  her  Druid 
and  ask  a  prophecy  from  him,  to  foretell  for  her  if  the 
army  she  was  bringing  out  would  get  the  victory,  and 
would  come  back  safely.  And  she  said  to  the  Druid  : 
"  There  are  many  that  will  part  here  to-day  from  their 
companions  and  their  friends,  from  their  country  and 
their  lands,  from  their  father  and  their  mother.  And  if 
it  happens  that  the  whole  of  them  do  not  come  back 
again  safe  and  sound,  it  is  on  me  the  complaints  and 
the  curses  will  fall.  And  besides  that,"  she  said,  "  there 
is  no  one  that  goes  out  or  that  stops  behind,  that  is 
dearer  to  us  than  we  are  to  ourselves.  So  find  out  for 
us  now  whether  we  shall  return,  or  not  return."  And 
the  Druid  said  :  "  Whoever  returns  or  does  not  return, 
you  yourself  will  return." 

Her  chariot  was  turned  then,  and  she  went  back  again 
homeward.  But  presently  she  saw  a  thing  she  wondered 
at,  a  woman  sitting  on  the  shaft  of  the  chariot,  facing 
her,  and  this  is  how  she  was :  a  sword  of  white  bronze 
in  her  hand,  with  seven  rings  of  red  gold  on  it  and  she 
seemed  to  be  weaving  a  web  with  it ;  a  speckled  green 
cloak  about  her,  fastened  at  the  breast  with  a  brooch 
of  red  gold  ;  a  ruddy,  pleasant  face  she  had,  her  eyes 
grey,  and  her  mouth  like  red  berries,  and  when  she 
spoke  her  voice  was  sweeter  than  the  strings  of  a  curved 
harp,  and  her  skin  showed  through  her  clothes  like  the 
snow  of  a  single  night.  Long  feet  she  had,  very  white, 
and  the  nails  on  them  pink  and  even  ;  her  hair  gold- 
yellow,  three  locks  of  it  wound  about  her  head,  and 
another  that  fell  down  loose  below  her  knee. 

Maeve  looked  at  her,  and  she  said :  "  What  are  you 
doing  here,  young  girl  ?"     "  It  is  looking  into  the  future 


FEDELM'S    FORETELLING         183 

for  you  I  am,"  she  said,  "  to  see  what  will  be  your 
chances  and  your  fortunes,  now  you  are  gathering  the 
provinces  of  Ireland  to  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of 
Cuailgne."  "  And  why  would  you  be  doing  this  for  me  ?  " 
said  Maeve.  "  There  is  good  reason  for  it,"  she  said, 
"  for  I  am  a  serving-maid  of  your  own  people."  "  Which 
of  my  people  do  you  belong  to  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  I  am 
Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  of  Rath  Cruachan."  "  It  is  well, 
Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe ;  tell  me  what  way  you  see  our 
hosts."  "  I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red."  "  Yet 
Conchubar  is  lying  in  his  weakness  at  Emain ;  my 
messengers  are  come  back  from  there,  and  we  need  not 
be  in  dread  of  anything  from  Ulster,"  said  Maeve.  "  But 
look  again,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  and  tell  me  the  truth 
of  the  matter."  "  I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red," 
said  the  girl.  "  Yet  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthacht,  is  in  his 
weakness  at  Rathairthir ;  my  messengers  are  come  back 
from  him  ;  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  anything  from  Ulster. 
Look  again,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe ;  how  do  you  see  our 
hosts ? "  "I  see  them  all  crimson,  I  see  them  all  red." 
"  Celtchair,  son  of  Uthecar,  is  lying  in  his  weakness 
within  his  fort ;  my  messengers  are  come  back  from  him. 
Tell  me  again,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  how  do  you  see  our 
hosts  ? "  "I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red."  "  There 
may  be  no  harm  in  what  you  see,"  said  Maeve,  "  for 
when  all  the  men  of  Ireland  are  gathered  together  in  one 
place,  there  will  surely  be  quarrels  and  fights  among 
them,  about  going  first  or  last  over  fords  and  rivers,  or 
about  the  first  wounding  of  some  stag  or  boar,  or  such 
like.  Tell  me  truly  now,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  what 
way  do  you  see  our  hosts ? "  "I  see  crimson  on  them, 
I  see  red.  And  I  see,"  she  said,  "  a  low-sized  man  doing 
many  deeds  of  arms ;  there  are  many  wounds  on  his 
smooth  skin  ;  there  is  a  light  about  his  head,  there  is 
victory  on  his  forehead ;  he  is  young  and  beautiful,  and 
modest  towards  women  ;  but  he  is  like  a  dragon  in  the 


i84    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

battle.  His  appearance  and  his  courage  are  like  the 
appearance  and  the  courage  of  Cuchulain  of  Muirthemne  ; 
and  who  that  Hound  from  Muirthemne  may  be  I  do 
not  know ;  but  I  know  this  much  well,  that  all  this  host 
will  be  reddened  by  him.  He  is  setting  out  for  the 
battle ;  he  will  make  your  dead  lie  thickly,  the  memory 
of  the  blood  shed  by  him  will  be  lasting ;  women 
will  be  keening  over  the  bodies  brought  low  by  the 
Hound  of  the  Forge  that  I  see  before  me." 

This  is  the  foretelling  that  was  made  for  Maeve  by 
Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  before  the  setting  out  of  the  hosts 
at  Cruachan  for  Ulster. 

Now,  when  Maeve  told  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe  that 
there  need  be  no  fear  of  the  men  of  Ulster  coming  out 
to  attack  the  army,  for  they  were  lying  in  their  weak- 
ness, she  meant  that  they  were  under  the  curse  and  the 
enchantment  that  was  put  on  them  one  time  by  a 
woman  they  had  ill-treated.  And  the  story  of  it  is 
this  :— 

There  was  a  man  of  the  name  of  Crunden,  son  of 
Agnoman,  that  lived  in  a  lonely  part  of  Ulster,  among 
the  mountains,  and  he  had  a  good  way  of  living  ;  but  his 
wife  had  died,  and  he  had  the  care  of  all  his  children  on 
him.  One  day  he  was  sitting  in  the  house,  and  he  saw 
a  woman  come  in  at  the  door,  tall  and  handsome,  and 
with  good  clothes  on  her,  and  she  did  not  say  a  word, 
but  she  sat  down  by  the  hearth  and  began  to  make  up 
the  fire.  And  then  she  went  to  where  the  meal  was, 
and  took  it  out  and  mixed  it,  and  baked  a  cake.  And 
when  the  evening  was  drawing  on,  she  took  a  vessel  and 
went  out  and  milked  the  cows,  but  all  the  time  she 
never  spoke  a  word.  Then  she  came  back  into  the 
house,  and  took  a  turn  to  the  right,  and  was  the  last  to 
stop  up  and  to  cover  over  the  fire. 

She  stayed  on  there,   and  Crunden,  the  man  of  the 


CRUNDEN'S    WIFE  185 

house,  married  her,  and  she  tended  him  and  his  sons, 
and  everything  he  had  prospered. 

It  happened,  one  day,  there  was  to  be  a  great  gather- 
ing of  the  men  of  Ulster,  for  games  and  races  and  all 
sorts  of  amusements,  and  all  that  could  go,  both  of  men 
and  women,  used  to  go  to  that  gathering.  "  I  will  go 
there  to-day,"  said  Crunden,  "  the  same  as  every  other 
man  is  going."  "  Do  not,"  said  his  wife,  "  for  if  you 
so  much  as  say  my  name  there  at  the  fair,"  she  said, "  I 
will  be  lost  to  you  for  ever."  "  Then  indeed  I  will  not 
speak  of  you  at  all,"  said  Crunden.  So  he  set  out  with 
the  others  to  the  fair,  and  there  was  every  sort  of  amuse- 
ment there,  and  all  the  people  of  the  country  were 
at  it. 

At  the  ninth  hour,  the  royal  chariot  was  brought  on 
the  ground,  and  the  king's  horses  won  the  day.  Then  the 
bards  and  poets,  and  the  Druids,  and  the  servants  of  the 
king,  and  the  whole  gathering,  began  to  praise  the  king 
and  the  queen  and  their  horses,  and  they  cried  out : 
"  There  were  never  seen  such  horses  as  these  ;  there  are 
no  better  runners  in  all  Ireland."  "  My  wife  is  a  better 
runner  than  those  two  horses,"  said  Crunden.  When 
the  king  was  told  of  that  he  said  :  "  Take  hold  of  the  man, 
and  keep  him  until  his  wife  can  be  brought  to  try  her 
chance  and  to  run  against  the  horses." 

So  they  took  hold  of  him,  and  kept  him,  and 
messengers  were  sent  from  the  king  to  the  woman. 
She  bade  the  messengers  welcome,  and  asked  what 
brought  them.  "We  are  come  by  the  king's  order," 
they  said,  "to  bring  you  to  the  fair,  to  see  if  you  will  run 
faster  than  the  king's  horses  ;  for  your  husband  boasted 
that  you  would,  and  he  is  kept  prisoner  now  until  you 
will  come  and  release  him."  "  It  is  foolish  my  husband 
was  to  speak  like  that,"  she  said  ;  "  and  as  for  myself,  I 
am  not  fit  to  go,  for  I  am  soon  going  to  give  birth  to  a 
child."     "  That  is  a  pity,"  said  the  messengers,  "  for  if  you 


i86    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

do  not  come,  your  husband  will  be  put  to  death."  "  If 
that  is  so,  I  must  go,  whatever  happens,"  she  said. 

So  with  that  she  set  out  for  the  gathering,  and  when 
she  got  there  all  the  people  were  crowding  about  her  to 
see  her.  "  It  is  not  fitting  to  be  looking  at  me,  and  I  the 
way  I  am,"  she  said  ;  "  and  what  have  I  been  brought 
here  for  ?  "  "  To  run  against  the  two  horses  of  the  king," 
the  people  called  out.  "  Ochone ! "  she  said, "  do  not  ask  me, 
for  I  am  close  upon  my  hour."  "  Take  out  your  swords 
and  put  the  man  to  death,"  said  the  king.  "  Give  me 
your  help,"  she  said  to  the  people,  "  for  every  one  of  you 
has  been  born  of  a  mother."  And  then  she  said  to  the 
king :  "  Give  me  even  a  delay  until  my  child  is  born." 
"  I  will  give  no  delay,"  said  the  king.  "  Then  the  shame 
that  is  on  you  will  be  greater  than  the  shame  that  is  on 
me,"  she  said.  "  And  because  you  have  showed  no  pity 
and  no  respect  to  me,"  she  said,  "  it  is  a  heavier  punish- 
ment will  fall  on  you  than  has  fallen  upon  me.  And 
bring  out  the  horses  beside  me  now."  Then  they  started, 
and  the  woman  outran  the  horses  and  gained  the  race  ; 
and  at  the  goal  the  pains  of  childbirth  came  on  her,  and 
she  bore  two  children,  a  boy  and  a  girl,  and  she  gave  a 
great  cry  in  her  pain. 

And  a  weakness  came  suddenly  on  all  that  heard  the 
cry,  so  that  they  had  no  more  strength  than  the  woman 
as  she  lay  there.  And  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  From  this 
out,  and  till  the  ninth  generation,  the  shame  that  you  have 
put  on  me  will  fall  on  you  ;  and  at  whatever  time  you  most 
want  your  strength,  at  the  time  your  enemies  are  closing 
on  you,  that  is  the  time  the  weakness  of  a  woman  in 
childbirth  will  come  upon  all  the  men  of  the  province  of 
Ulster." 

And  so  it  happened;  and  of  all  the  men  of  Ulster 
that  were  born  after  that  day,  there  was  no  one 
escaped  that  curse  and  that  enchantment  but  only 
Cuchulain. 


THE    GAILIANA  187 

When  the  men  of  Connaught  set  out  from  Cruachan 
for  the  north  they  stopped  towards  evening  at  Cuilsilinne, 
and  there  they  made  their  encampment  for  the  night 
Ailell  took  his  place  in  the  middle  of  the  camp,  and  on 
his  right  was  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  and  Cormac  Con- 
loingeas  next  to  him  again,  and  their  people  on  the 
same  side  ;  and  on  Ailell's  left  there  was  a  place  made  for 
Maeve  and  Findabair  her  daughter.  But  Maeve  stopped 
behind  until  the  whole  of  the  army  had  come  up,  and 
then  she  went  in  her  chariot  to  see  if  all  was  in  order, 
and  after  that  she  came  and  took  her  seat  at  Ailell's 
right  hand.  "  Which  of  the  troops  do  you  think  the 
best  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  None  of  them  are  any  good  at  all," 
said  Maeve,  "  compared  with  the  men  of  Leinster,  the 
Gailiana."  "  What  have  they  done  beyond  all  the  others 
that  you  praise  them  so  much  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  There  is 
reason  for  praising  them,"  said  Maeve ;  "  for  while  the 
others  were  choosing  a  place  for  themselves,  the  Gailiana 
had  their  huts  and  their  shelters  made,  and  while  the 
others  were  making  their  shelters,  they  had  their  share 
of  food  and  drink  cooked  and  set  out,  and  while  the 
others  were  making  ready  their  food  they  had  theirs 
eaten,  and  while  the  others  were  eating,  they  were  laid 
down  and  sleeping.  And  as  their  servants  have  been 
better  than  the  servants  of  the  men  of  Ireland,"  she  said, 
"so  will  their  young  men  and  their  fighting  men  be 
better  than  the  young  men  of  Ireland  on  this  march." 
"  I  am  well  pleased  to  hear  that,"  said  Ailell,  "  for 
it  was  with  me  they  came,  and  they  are  of  my  own 
province."  "Then  you  need  not  be  so  well  pleased," 
said  Maeve,  "  for  they  shall  march  no  further  with  you, 
for  I  will  not  have  them  boasted  of,  before  me  or  to  me." 
"  Let  them  stop  in  this  camp,  then,"  said  Ailell.  "  They 
shall  not  do  that  either,"  said  Maeve.  "  What  must  they 
do,  then  ?  "  said  Findabair,  "  if  they  are  neither  to  go  on 
nor  to  stop  in  the  camp  ?  "     "  They  will  get  death  and 


i88    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

destruction  from  myself,"  said  Maeve.  "  It  is  a  pity  you 
to  say  that,"  said  Ailell,  "and  they  only  just  after  joining 
us."  "If  you  think  to  harm  them,"  said  Fergus,  "you 
will  have  to  fight  with  me  as  well  as  with  them  ;  for  by 
the  oath  of  my  people,"  he  said,  "  it  is  only  over  my 
body  and  the  bodies  of  the  men  of  Ulster  that  are  with 
me,  you  can  come  at  their  death."  "  Do  not  speak  that 
way,  Fergus,"  said  Maeve  ;  "  for  if  you  were  to  join  with 
these  strangers  against  me,  I  would  have  the  six  Maines 
and  their  men  on  my  side,  and  the  sons  of  Magach  and 
their  men,  and  my  own  troops  along  with  them.  And 
I  think  we  would  be  well  able  for  you,"  she  said.  "  It  is 
not  right  for  you  to  say  that,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  there 
are  no  men  in  Ireland  better  than  the  young  men  of 
Ulster  that  came  to  Connaught  with  me,  and  they  have 
been  a  good  help  to  you  up  to  this.  But  I  will  tell  you 
another  thing  to  do,"  he  said  :  "  let  the  men  of  Leinster 
be  divided  through  all  the  other  troops  of  the  men  of 
Ireland,  the  way  there  will  not  be  more  than  five  of  them 
together  in  any  one  place."  "  I  will  agree  to  that,"  said 
Maeve,  "  for  I  know  there  would  be  nothing  but  fighting 
and  jealousy  if  they  were  left  together  the  way  they  are 
now." 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  they  made  ready  to 
set  out  again,  but  the  chief  men  among  them  consulted 
together  first,  what  way  they  could  best  keep  the  peace 
between  so  many  troops  and  tribes  and  families  ;  and  it 
is  what  they  settled,  to  put  every  troop  under  its  own 
leader,  and  to  let  it,  great  or  small,  take  a  road  of  its 
own.  And  besides  that,  they  consulted  who  would  be 
the  best  man  to  put  over  the  whole  army,  to  lead  them 
and  to  show  them  the  way.  And  they  all  said  Fergus 
would  be  the  best,  for  he  had  been  king  of  Ulster 
seventeen  years,  until  Conchubar  put  him  out  of  the 
kingship,  and  he  had  stopped  on  in  Ulster  after  that  until 
the  time  Conchubar  killed  the  sons  of  Usnach  in  spite 
of  the  guarantee  he  had  given  them. 


SUALTIM    AND   CUCHULAIN       189 

So  Fergus  was  made  leader  of  the  whole  army ;  but 
as  they  went  on,  a  great  love  for  his  own  province  and 
his  home  came  on  him,  and  instead  of  going  on  north- 
wards he  turned  to  the  south.  And  while  he  was  delay- 
ing the  army  like  that,  he  sent  messsengers  into  Ulster 
to  give  warning  and  news  of  their  coming.  But  Maeve 
was  keeping  a  watch  on  him,  and  when  she  saw  what 
had  happened,  she  went  to  him  and  said  :  "  Why  is  it, 
Fergus,  that  we  have  turned  again  to  the  south  ?  "  Then 
Fergus  knew  it  was  no  use  to  try  and  deceive  her,  and 
they  turned  again,  but  they  did  not  go  far,  but  only  to 
the  place  they  had  left  in  the  morning,  Cuilsilinne. 

Then  Fergus  called  to  mind  that  they  were  coming 
near  the  borders  of  Ulster,  and  that  it  was  likely  it 
would  not  be  long  before  they  would  meet  with 
Cuchulain  ;  and  he  gave  a  warning  to  the  army  and 
bade  them  mind  themselves  well,  lest  the  Hound  of 
Muirthemne  should  fall  on  them  and  destroy  them. 

And  then  the  men  of  Connaught  set  out  again  east- 
ward, and  when  they  came  to  Monecolthan,  they  saw 
before  them  eight-score  deer,  in  the  one  herd,  and  the 
whole  army  surrounded  them,  and  all  the  deer  were 
killed  ;  but  if  they  were,  it  was  the  Gailiana,  scattered 
as  they  were,  that  killed  all  the  deer  but  five,  and  those 
five  were  all  that  were  killed  by  the  rest  of  the  men  of 
Ireland. 

It  was  on  that  same  day  Cuchulain  and  his  father, 
Sualtim,  came  to  the  pillar-stone  at  Ardcullin,  for  they 
had  got  the  warning  Fergus  had  sent,  and  there  they 
let  their  horses  graze,  and  Sualtim's  horses  cropped 
the  grass  to  the  north  of  the  pillar-stone  to  the  earth, 
but  Cuchulain's  horses,  at  the  south  side,  cropped  it 
to  the  bare  flags. 

"  It  is  in  my  mind,  Sualtim,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  that 
the  army  of  Connaught  is  not  far  away  from  us  now. 
Go  now,  then,"  he  said,  "and  bring  a  warning  to  the 


I90    WAR    FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

men  of  Ulster,  and  tell  them  not  to  stop  in  the  open 
plains,  but  to  go  into  the  woods  and  the  valleys  of  the 
province,  that  the  men  of  Ireland  may  not  come  upon 
them."  "  And  you  yourself,  little  son,  what  will  you 
do?"  said  Sualtim.  "I  must  go,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"southward  to  Teamhair,  for  I  promised  to  go  there 
to-day,  to  see  a  young  girl  of  the  household  of  Fedelm 
of  the  Fair  Shape,  Laegaire's  wife."  "  It  is  a  pity  for  you 
to  go  for  a  thing  like  that,"  said  Sualtim,  "  and  you 
leaving  Ulster  under  the  feet  of  enemies  and  strangers." 
"  I  must  go,  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  if  I  break 
my  word  to  a  woman,  it  will  be  said  from  this  out  that 
a  woman's  word  is  better  than  a  man's." 

So  Sualtim  set  out  then,  to  give  a  warning  to  the 
men  of  Ulster,  and  Cuchulain  went  into  the  oak  woods 
and  cut  down  an  oak  sapling,  and  twisted  it  into  a  ring, 
and  cut  a  message  on  it  in  Ogham.  And  then  he  forced 
the  ring  over  the  top  of  the  pillar-stone,  and  down  to  the 
thick  part  of  it.  And  then  he  went  on  to  keep  his 
appointment  at  Teamhair. 

As  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  they  went  on  till  they  came 
to  ArdcuUin,  and  the  whole  country  of  Ulster  lay  there 
before  them.  And  then  they  saw  the  pillar-stone  and 
the  oak  ring  that  was  on  it ;  and  Ailell  took  it  off,  and 
gave  it  to  Fergus,  and  bade  him  read  the  Ogham.  And 
what  he  read  on  it  was  Cuchulain's  name,  and  the  warn- 
ing on  it  that  the  men  of  Ulster  should  not  pass  the 
pillar-stone  that  night,  for  if  they  did,  he  would  do  a  great 
revenge  on  them  at  the  sunrise  of  the  morrow. 

"  It  would  be  a  pity,"  said  Maeve,  "  that  the  first  blood 
to  be  shed  after  going  into  the  province  should  be  the 
blood  of  our  own  people :  it  would  be  best  for  us  to 
draw  blood  first  on  the  people  of  Ulster."  "  I  agree  to 
that,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  I  am  loth  to  go  against  this  ring 
or  the  man  that  twisted  it  ;  but  let  us  go  into  the  wood 
and  make  our  camp  there  for  the  night."     So  they  went 


THE    BORDER    PASSED  191 

into  the  wood,  and  cut  a  way  for  the  chariots  with  their 
swords  as  they  went,  and  it  is  from  that  the  place  is 
called  Sleact  na  Gearbat,  the  Cut  Way  of  the  Chariots, 
until  this  time.  And  a  great  snow  fell  that  night,  so 
that  it  made  one  plain  of  the  five  provinces  of  Ireland, 
and  they  could  make  no  shelter  or  prepare  food,  and 
none  of  the  men  in  the  camp  knew  through  the  whole 
night  was  it  friend  or  enemy  was  near  him,  until  the 
clear  light  of  the  sun  fell  on  the  snow  in  the  morning. 
And  then  they  left  that  place,  and  went  on  into  Ulster. 

As  to  Cuchulain,  he  did  not  rise  very  early  that  morn- 
ing, and  when  he  did,  there  was  food  made  ready  for 
him,  and  a  bath  of  pure  water.  Then  he  bade  Laeg  to 
make  his  chariot  ready,  and  they  set  out ;  and  after  a 
while  they  came  to  the  track  of  the  army  of  Ireland 
where  it  had  gone  over  the  border  into  Ulster.  "  Well, 
Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  I  have  not  much  luck  out  of  my 
appointment  that  I  kept  last  night ;  for  it  is  expected 
of  one  that  is  watching  the  borders  that  the  least  he 
should  do  is  to  raise  a  cry  or  give  a  warning  of  the 
enemy  that  is  coming,  and  I  have  missed  doing  this,  so 
that  the  men  of  Ireland  have  slipped  by  without  news  or 
notice  into  Ulster."  "  I  told  you,  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg, 
"that  if  you  kept  to  your  meeting  last  night,  some 
vexation  like  this  would  fall  on  you."  "Well,  Laeg," 
said  Cuchulain,  "  let  you  follow  their  track  now,  and 
count  them,  and  see  what  number  of  the  men  of  Ireland 
are  come  over  the  border."  Laeg  did  this,  and  he  came 
back  and  told  their  number,  as  he  had  counted  them. 
"There  is  a  mistake  in  your  counting,"  said  Cuchulain. 
"  I  will  count  them  myself  this  time."  Then  he  told 
their  number.  "  It  is  with  yourself  the  mistake  is, 
Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg.  "  It  is  not,"  he  said,  "  but  there 
are  eighteen  divisions  have  passed  the  border,  but  the 
eighteenth  is  broken  up  and  distributed  among  the 
others,   so  that  no  sure  reckoning  can  be  made  of  it." 


192    WAR   FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

This,  now,  was  one  of  the  three  best  estimates  ever 
made  in  Ireland,  and  the  other  two  were  made  by 
Lugh  of  the  Long  Hand,  and  by  Angus  at  Brugh  na 
Boinne. 

"  But  now,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  turn  the  chariot  towards 
the  army,  and  hurry  on  the  horses ;  for  unless  I  can 
make  an  end  of  some  of  them  to-day,"  he  said,  "  I  will 
not  live  through  the  night  myself." 

So  they  went  on  to  the  place  that  is  called  now 
Athgowla,  northward  from  Knowth. 

There  they  met  with  the  two  young  men,  the  sons  of 
Neara,  that  were  sent  out  in  front  of  Maeve's  army,  to 
see  was  there  any  hindrance  before  it,  and  Cuchulain 
struck  off  their  heads  and  the  heads  of  their  chariot- 
drivers. 

And  he  cut  down  a  tree  with  his  sword,  and  it  having 
four  branches,  and  he  lopped  them  short,  and  cleared 
the  tree  ;  and  he  stood  up  in  his  chariot,  and  with  one 
cast  he  drove  the  tree  into  the  ground  that  it  stood  deep 
and  firm,  and  he  set  the  four  heads  he  had  struck  off  on 
the  four  lopped  branches  of  it.  And  then  he  turned 
back  their  horses  in  their  chariots  towards  the  army. 

Now  it  is  the  way  Maeve  used  to  be  going,  she  in 
a  chariot  by  herself,  and  two  chariots  on  each  side  of 
her,  and  behind  her  and  before  her,  the  way  no  sod  from 
the  feet  of  the  horses  of  the  army,  or  foam  from  their 
mouths,  would  touch  her  clothing.  And  when  she  saw 
the  two  chariots  coming  back,  and  the  bodies  in  them 
without  heads,  she  stopped  to  see  what  had  happened. 
"  What  are  these  ?  "  she  said.  "  They  are  the  chariots 
and  the  bodies  of  the  two  sons  of  Neara  that  went  on 
before  us,"  said  her  chariot-driver. 

Then  she  held  a  council  with  her  chief  men,  and  it  is 
what  they  agreed,  that  it  must  be  some  part  of  the  army 
of  Ulster  was  there  before  them  at  the  ford  they 
were  drawing  near,  and  that  it  was  best  to  send  out 


FERGUS    AND   THE    POLE  193 

Cormac  Conloingeas  and  his  men  to  see  who  was  in  it. 
for  the  men  of  Ulster  would  not  be  willing  to  harm  the 
son  of  their  High  King. 

So  Cormac  and  his  troop  went  on  to  the  ford,  but 
when  he  got  there  all  he  saw  was  a  lopped  tree  and  four 
heads  on  it,  and  the  blood  dripping  down  from  them, 
and  the  track  of  one  chariot  only,  going  eastward  out  of 
the  ford.     Then  the  rest  of  the  army  came  with  the  other 
chief  men.     "  There  is  wonder  on  me,"  said  Ailell ;  "  our 
four  men  to  have  been  made  an  end  of  so  easily  as  this." 
"  You  may  wonder  as  well,"  said  Fergus,  "  at  the  way 
this  pole  was  driven  into  the  ground  by  one  man,  and  it 
will  be  hard  for  you  to  find  a  man  of  your  army  will 
drag  it  out  again."     "  Do  it  yourself,  Fergus,"  said  Maeve, 
"  for   you  are   of  my  army."     So   Fergus  called  for  a 
chariot,  and  stood  up  in  it,  and  gave  such  a  strong  pull  at 
the  pole,  that  the  chariot  broke  under  him.     "  Give  me 
another  chariot,"  he  said.     And   when   he  had  broken 
seventeen  of  the  war-chariots  of  Connaught  one  after 
another,  and    had    not    so  much    as  loosened  the  pole, 
Maeve  said  :  "  Leave  off  now,  Fergus,  from  breaking  my 
people's  chariots  ;  and  if  you  yourself  had  not  been  with 
us  on  this  march,"  she  said,  "  we  would  have  been  up 
with  the  men  of  Ulster  before  now,  and  we  would  have 
taken  men  and  cattle.     And  I  know  well  why  you  did 
this  ;  it  was  to  give  the  men  of  Ulster  time  to  get  over 
their  weakness  and  their  pains,  and  to  come  out  against 
us  to  defend  their  bull  and  their  cattle."     "  Give  me  my 
own  chariot,  then,"  said  Fergus.     So  they  gave  him  his 
own  chariot,  and  he  got  up  in  it  and  gave  a  great  pull  at 
the  pole ;  and  neither  the  frame  nor  the  wheels  of  his 
chariot  started  or  strained  like  the  others,  and  he  pulled 
up  the  pole  and  gave   it  into  Ailell's  hand,  and  Ailell 
looked  at  it  and  said :  "  There  is  dread  on  me,  of  the 
man  that  set  that  pole  there  ;    do  you  think,  Fergus," 
he  said,  "was    it  Conchubar  the   High   King  that  did 

N 


194    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

it  ? "  ^'  It  was  not,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  if  Conchubar 
had  come  here,  his  army  would  have  come  along  with 
him,  and  all  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  he  would  not 
have  been  so  near  to  you  without  offering  you  battle, 
and  by  this  time  whichever  got  the  better  would  be 
boasting  of  it."  "  Do  you  think  was  it  Cuscraid, 
Conchubar's  son  ? "  said  Ailell  ;  "  or  Eoghan,  son  of 
Durthacht,  king  of  Fernmaighe ;  or  Celthair,  son  of 
Uthecar?"  "I  do  not,"  said  Fergus,  "but  it  is  what 
I  think,  that  it  was  my  own  foster-son  and  Conchubar's 
that  was  here,  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim."  "  We  heard 
you  often  talking  at  Cruachan  about  that  young  man, 
and  what  is  his  age  at  this  time?"  "  His  age  is  of  no 
great  matter,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  he  did  great  deeds, 
when  he  was  but  a  soft  child."  "  He  is  young  enough 
yet,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  I  think  it  will  not  be  hard  to  find 
some  one  of  our  own  men  that  will  get  the  better  of  this 
wild  Hound,  for  he  has  but  the  one  body  to  wound  or  to 
put  to  flight."  "  You  will  get  no  one,"  said  Fergus, 
"  among  your  fighting  men  and  your  young  men  and 
your  champions  that  will  be  able  to  put  down 
Cuchulain  " 

They  stopped  there  then  and  made  their  camp,  and 
rested  that  night,  with  food  and  with  music. 

And  it  was  in  that  night  Fergus  gave  Maeve  and 
Ailell  the  whole  story  of  the  boy  deeds  of  Cuchulain, 
and  how  he  used  to  have  a  stone  for  a  pillow,  and  no 
one  dared  wake  him,  lest  he  might  chance  to  give  them 
a  blow  of  the  stone  in  his  anger.  And  he  told  of  one 
night  when  he  was  asleep,  and  Conchubar  was  attacked 
and  was  beaten  by  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthacht. 
And  Cuchulain  was  awakened  by  the  cries  of  the 
beaten  men  that  were  running  away,  and  he  went  out 
in  the  darkness  of  the  night  to  look  for  Conchubar; 
and  where  the  battle  had  been,  he  saw  a  man  with  the 
half  of  a   man's   body  on  his  back,  and  he  called  to 


DEATH    OF   FRAECH  195 

Cuchulain  to  help  him,  and  threw  the  half-body  to  him, 
and  Cuchulain  threw  it  back  again,  and  they  fought, 
and  he  struck  off  the  man's  head.  And  then  he  found 
Conchubar  lying  in  a  grave,  and  he  dug  him  out  of 
that,  and  as  they  went  home,  they  met  Cuscraid  that 
was  wounded,  and  Cuchulain  brought  him  home  to 
Emain  on  his  back.  And  another  time  he  went  into 
a  wood  and  saw  a  terrible-looking  man  having  a  wild 
boar  in  one  hand,  and  his  weapon  in  the  other  hand,  and 
he  killed  him,  and  brought  home  the  boar.  And  another 
time  when  the  men  of  Ulster  were  in  their  weakness, 
three  times  nine  sea-robbers  came  to  Emain,  and  the 
women  ran  shrieking  to  the  palace  when  they  saw  them, 
and  when  the  boys  that  were  at  play  on  the  lawn  knew 
what  they  were  running  from,  they  ran  along  with  them. 
But  Cuchulain  went  out  and  killed  nine  of  the  sea- 
robbers  and  wounded  the  rest  of  them,  so  that  he  drove 
them  all  back.  And  he  told  them  many  other  stories 
of  his  doings  beside  these. 

The  next  day,  the  army  marched  on  eastward  beyond 
the  mountain.  But  there  was  a  narrow  place  they  had 
to  pass  through,  and  Cuchulain  cut  down  a  great  oak 
tree,  and  laid  it  across  the  gap,  and  wrote  an  Ogham  on 
it ;  and  when  the  men  of  Ireland  came  up  to  it,  it 
hindered  them,  and  they  could  not  move  it,  and  they 
made  their  camp  there  that  night.  And  early  in  the 
morning  they  sent  the  young  man  Fraech,  son  of 
Idath,  to  get  the  hindrance  cleared  away.  But  Fraech 
went  on  beyond  it,  till  he  came  to  a  river,  and  there  he 
found  Cuchulain  bathing.  And  they  attacked  one 
another  in  the  water,  and  Fraech  was  beaten,  and 
Cuchulain  went  away  and  left  his  body  on  the  bank. 

And  when  the  men  of  Ireland  found  his  body  they 
began  to  keen  him.  And  then  they  saw  a  great  band 
of  women  of  the   Sidhe,  with  green  dresses  on  them, 


196    WAR   FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

coming  for  his  body,  and  they  gave  out  a  great  cry 
over  him  and  brought  him  away  to  a  hill  of  the  Sidhe. 
And  Findabair  cried  after  him,  and  went  to  see  the 
green  bank  where  he  was  lying. 

And  they  knew  that  Cuchulain  was  not  far  from  them, 
for  presently  Maeve's  little  dog,  Baiscne,  got  his  death 
by  a  stone  from  a  sling.  There  was  anger  on  Maeve 
then,  and  she  urged  her  men  to  follow  after  Cuchulain, 
so  that  they  broke  the  poles  of  their  chariots  in  their 
hurry. 

The  next  day  Cuchulain  was  going  through  the 
wood,  and  he  heard  the  sound   of  blows  on  the  trees. 

"  It  is  too  bold  the  men  of  Ulster  are,  Laeg,"  he  said, 
"  to  be  cutting  down  trees  like  this,  with  the  men  of 
Ireland  coming  on  them  ;  and  stop  here,"  he  said,  "  till 
I  find  out  who  is  it  that  is  in  the  wood." 

He  went  on  till  he  met  with  a  young  man  of 
Connaught,  that  was  chariot-driver  to  Orlam,  son  of 
Maeve  and  Ailell.  "  What  is  it  you  are  doing  there, 
young  man  ?  "  he  asked.  "  I  am  cutting  holly  poles,"  said 
the  young  man,  "  for  we  have  broken  our  chariots  hunting 
that  notable  deer,  Cuchulain.  And  now,  good  friend," 
he  said,  "  lend  me  a  hand  with  these  poles,  lest  that 
same  notable  Cuchulain  should  come  upon  me  here." 
"  Your  choice,  boy  ;  shall  I  cut  the  holly  poles,  or  shall 
I  trim  them  for  you  ?  "  "  Let  you  do  the  trimming,"  said 
he.  So  Cuchulain  took  them  and  trimmed  them 
straight  and  smooth,  that  a  fly  could  not  have  kept  his 
footing  on  them.  The  chariot-driver  looked  at  the  poles, 
and  he  said  :  "  I  am  thinking  this  is  not  the  work  you 
have  a  right  to  be  put  to.  And  who  are  you  at  all  ?  " 
he  said.  "  I  am  that  notable  Cuchulain  you  were  speak- 
ing of  just  now."  "That  is  bad  news  for  me,"  said  the 
driver,  "  for  surely  I  am  a  dead  man."  "  There  need  be 
no  fear  on  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  "for  I  do  not  fight 
against  drivers  or   messengers   or  unarmed   men.     But 


THE    HARPERS    OF   CAINBILE     197 

where  is  your  master  ? "  he  said.  "  He  is  out  before 
you  on  the  plain."  "  Go  to  him,  then,  and  give  him 
this  warning,  that  I  am  here,  and  that  if  we  meet,  he 
will  surely  get  his  death  from  me."  With  that  the 
young  man  went  to  look  for  his  master,  but  quick  as  he 
went,  Cuchulain  was  quicker,  and  as  soon  as  he  came 
up  with  Orlam  he  struck  off  his  head,  and  held  it  up 
and  shook  it  before  the  men  of  Ireland. 

After  that,  the  three  sons  of  Garach  came  out  and 
made  an  attack  on  him,  but  he  overcame  them,  and 
struck  off  their  heads,  and  he  killed  their  chariot- 
drivers  as  well,  that  they  had  armed  against  him. 
And  Lethan  and  his  chariot-driver  came  against  him, 
and  he  killed  them  in  the  same  way. 

At  that  time  the  harpers  of  Cainbile  came  to  Maeve's 
camp,  and  played  on  their  magic  harps  ;  but  the  men  of 
Ireland  thought  it  might  be  as  spies  they  came,  and  they 
drove  them  out  of  the  camp,  and  followed  after  them 
till  they  came  to  the  great  stone  of  Lecmore.  But  when 
they  thought  to  overtake  them  there,  the  harpers  took 
on  themselves  the  shape  of  wild  deer,  and  went  away. 
And  it  was  on  the  same  day  that  Cuchulain,  with  two 
casts  of  a  sling  stone,  killed  the  squirrel  and  the  pet  bird 
that  were  sitting  on  Maeve's  two  shoulders. 

Then  the  men  of  Ireland  came  into  Magh  Breagh  and 
Muirthemne,  and  carried  off  and  destroyed  all  before 
them.  And  Fergus  warned  them  that  Cuchulain  was 
not  far  off,  and  that  he  would  do  a  great  vengeance  on 
them,  since  they  had  spoiled  Muirthemne.  And  it  was 
at  that  time  Lugaid,  son  of  Nois,  that  had  gone  into 
Connaught  with  Fergus,  went  secretly  to  Cuchulain  and 
told  him  of  all  that  was  going  on  in  the  camp,  and  of  the 
dread  of  him  that  was  on  all  the  men  of  Ireland,  so  that 
they  did  not  dare  to  stir  out  alone,  and  that  he  himself 
was  true  to  him  yet. 

And   now   that   the   army   was   coming   so   near    to 


198    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

Cuailgne,  the  War-goddess,  the  Battle  Crow,  the  Morrigu, 
came  and  sat  on  a  pillar-stone  at  Teamhair,  and  gave  a 
warning  to  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  it  is  what 
she  said  :  "  Have  a  care,  and  keep  a  good  watch,  my  poor 
bull,  or  the  men  of  Ireland  will  come  on  you  and  will 
drive  you  away  to  their  camp."  And  when  the  bull 
heard  the  warning,  he  brought  fifty  of  his  heifers  with 
him,  and  went  away  to  a  valley  of  Slieve  Cuilinn. 

And  the  men  of  Ireland  came  on,  bringing  the  herds 
of  cattle  they  took  on  the  way,  where  there  was  no  one 
to  defend  them.  And  they  stopped  for  the  night  at 
Conaille  Muirthemne,  and  there  Maeve  bade  one  of  her 
women  go  down  to  the  stream  for  water.  And  the 
woman  was  wearing  Maeve's  golden  covering  on  her 
head,  and  Cuchulain  saw  her,  and  he  thought  it  was 
Maeve  herself  that  was  in  it,  and  he  made  a  cast  of  a 
stone  that  killed  her,  and  the  gold  covering  was  broken 
in  pieces. 

And  they  were  delayed  there  for  a  while,  for  the  river 
was  in  flood,  and  when  they  tried  to  cross  it,  the  chariots 
that  went  in  were  swept  away  to  the  sea  ;  and  one  of 
Maeve's  best  men,  Uala,  that  she  sent  to  try  the  depth  of 
it,  was  swept  away  along  with  them.  And  while  they 
were  stopping  there,  Cuchulain  killed  Raen  and  Rae, 
that  were  come  to  tell  the  story  of  the  war,  and  a  hundred 
men  along  with  them. 

Then  Maeve  said  :  "  Some  man  of  you  must  go  out  and 
stand  against  Cuchulain  to  save  the  army."  "  It  is  not  I 
that  will  go,"  said  one  of  them.  "  It  is  not  I,"  said  all  the 
others,  "  for  Cuchulain  is  no  easy  man  to  stand  against." 
Then  when  none  of  them  would  go  out,  Maeve  made 
them  cut  a  way  through  the  mountain  before  them,  that 
it  might  be  left  as  a  lasting  disgrace  to  Ulster.  So  they 
did  this,  and  it  is  called  Berna  Ulaid,  the  Gap  of  Ulster, 
to  this  day. 

Now,  when  they  were  setting  out  to  cross  the  moun- 


FERLOGA  199 

tain,  Maeve  gave  orders  that  the  army  was  to  be 
divided  in  two  parts,  each  with  its  own  share  of  cattle, 
and  of  all  other  things,  and  she  said  that  she  herself 
and  Fergus  would  go  with  the  one  part,  by  the  Gap  of 
Ulster,  and  that  Ailell  should  go  with  the  other  part, 
by  the  road  of  Midluachair. 

So  Ailell  set  out,  and  his  chariot-driver,  Ferloga,  with 
him,  and  that  was  the  same  Ferloga  that  made  a  bargain 
with  Conchubar,  the  High  King,  one  time ;  and  this  is 
the  way  it  happened.  It  was  at  the  time  Mac  Datho  of 
Leinster  had  stirred  up  a  fight  between  the  men  of 
Ulster  and  the  men  of  Connaught,  about  the  dividing 
of  a  pig  at  a  feast  he  made,  the  same  way  Bricriu  had 
stirred  up  a  fight  about  the  Championship,  and 
Conchubar  was  following  after  the  men  of  Connaught 
over  the  plain  ofFearbile;  and  all  of  a  sudden  Ferloga, 
that  had  been  left  behind  by  Ailell,  and  that  was 
hiding  himself,  made  a  leap  to  the  back  of  Conchubar's 
chariot,  and  took  a  hold  of  his  neck  between  his  two 
hands.  "  What  will  you  give  me  to  let  you  loose,  king  ?  " 
he  said.  "  What  is  it  you  are  asking  ?  "  said  Conchubar. 
"  Indeed  it  is  no  great  gift  I  am  asking,"  said  Ferloga, 
"but  only  you  to  bring  me  along  with  you  to  Emain 
Macha,  and  the  young  women  and  the  young  girls  of 
Ulster  to  sing  a  song  around  me  every  evening,  and 
every  one  of  them  to  say,  '  Ferloga  is  my  favourite.' " 
Conchubar  agreed  to  that,  and  Ferloga  went  with  him 
to  Emain  ;  but  at  the  end  of  a  year  they  sent  him  back, 
and  presents  with  him,  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve. 

At  that  time,  a  suspicion  came  on  Ailell,  that  there 
was  some  understanding  between  Maeve  and  Fergus, 
and  he  bade  Ferloga  to  keep  a  watch  on  them.  After  a 
while,  Ferloga  saw  that  Maeve  and  Fergus  had  stopped 
in  a  wood  behind  the  rest  of  the  army,  and  he  followed 
after  them  quietly,  the  way  they  would  not  hear  him, 
and  there  he  found  Fergus's  sword  lying  on  the  ground. 


200    WAR    FOR  BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

So  he  took  the  sword  out  of  the  sheath,  and  he  cut  a 
wooden  sword  and  shaped  it,  and  put  it  into  the  sheath 
in  its  place,  and  he  brought  Fergus's  sword  back  to 
Ailell,  and  told  him  how  he  had  found  it,  and  Ailell  bade 
him  hide  it  in  his  chariot.  When  Fergus  saw  that  his 
sword  was  gone  and  a  wooden  sword  was  put  in  its 
place,  there  was  great  confusion  on  him  ;  but  Ailell  said 
nothing  of  it  when  they  met,  but  asked  him  to  come 
and  play  a  game  of  chess  with  him.  And  at  the  game 
they  quarrelled,  and  Ailell  said  sharp  words  of  blame  to 
Fergus  and  to  Maeve,  and  they  answered  him  back,  and 
Fergus  bade  him  give  him  up  his  sword.  But  Ailell  said 
he  would  never  give  it  to  him  until  the  day  of  the  great 
battle  would  come,  between  the  men  of  Ireland  and  the 
men  of  Ulster. 

Then  Cuchulain  came  there  and  stood  on  a  height 
and  shook  his  spears  and  his  sword  before  them,  so  that 
great  dread  came  on  them. 

After  that,  Maeve  sent  Fiacha,  son  of  Flraba,  to  talk 
with  Cuchulain,  and  to  try  could  he  win  him  over. 
"  What  will  you  offer  him  ?  "  said  Fiacha.  "  I  will  give 
him  full  payment  for  all  that  has  been  spoiled  of  his 
goods,  and  a  good  place  for  himself  in  Cruachan  Ai, 
and  my  own  protection  and  Ailell's,  if  he  will  give  up 
Conchubar's  service  and  come  into  ours.  And  indeed 
that  would  be  better  for  him,"  she  said,  "  than  to  stop 
under  a  little  king  like  Conchubar." 

So  Fiacha  went  to  speak  with  Cuchulain,  and  he  gave 
him  a  good  welcome.  And  Fiacha  told  him  the  message 
he  had  brought  from  Maeve,  and  the  offer  she  had  made 
if  he  would  quit  Conchubar's  service.  "  I  will  not  do 
that,"  said  Cuchulain;  "I  will  not  betray  my  mother's 
brother  for  the  sake  of  any  strange  king.  But  I  will 
consent  to  go  myself  to-morrow,"  he  said,  "  to  speak  with 
Maeve  and  Ailell  and  with  Fergus."  So  Fiacha  bade 
him  farewell,  and  went  back  to  the  army. 


MAC    ROTH    THE    HERALD         201 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow  Cuchulain  went  to 
Glen  Ochain,  and  Maeve  and  Fergus  came  to  meet  him  ; 
and  Maeve  looked  at  him  and  she  said  :  "  Is  this  the  same 
Cuchulain  you  put  such  a  great  name  on,  Fergus  ?  I  see 
that  he  has  not  yet  grown  out  of  his  boyhood."  Then  she 
spoke  with  Cuchulain  and  made  her  offer  again,  and  he 
refused  it,  and  they  left  the  place  with  great  anger  on 
them  one  against  the  other.  And  that  night,  and  the 
two  nights  after  it,  the  men  of  Ireland  were  afraid  either 
to  eat  or  to  sleep  or  to  make  music  ;  for  Cuchulain  killed 
so  many  of  their  men  before  the  clear  light  of  every 
morning,  that  it  was  as  if  the  whole  army  was  melting 
away.  "  Some  one  must  go  and  make  him  another  offer," 
said  Maeve,  and  this  time  she  sent  Mac  Roth,  the  herald. 
"  Where  will  I  find  him  ? "  said  Mac  Roth.  "  It  is  likely," 
said  Fergus,  "he  will  be  between  Ochain  and  the  sea, 
letting  the  sun  shine  and  the  wind  blow  upon  him  after 
so  many  nights  spent  without  sleep." 

It  was  there  he  found  him  sure  enough,  and  Laeg 
keeping  a  watch  a  good  way  off  "  There  is  an  armed 
man  coming  towards  us,  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg.  "  What 
sort  of  a  man  is  he  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  A  brown-haired, 
broad-faced,  handsome  young  man  ;  a  fine  brown  cloak  on 
him  ;  a  bright  bronze  spear-like  brooch  fastening  his 
cloak  ;  a  well-fitting  shirt  next  his  skin  ;  two  strong  shoes 
between  his  feet  and  the  ground.  There  is  a  white  hazel 
rod  in  one  hand,  and  a  sword  with  a  sea-horse  tooth  for  a 
hilt  in  the  other."  "  Well,  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  let 
him  come,  for  these  are  the  tokens  of  a  herald." 

Mac  Roth  came  up  to  him  then  and  asked  :  "  Who 
are  you  serving  under,  young  man  ?  "  "  We  are  serving 
under  Conchubar,  High  King  of  Ulster."  "  Can  you  tell 
me  where  can  I  find  Cuchulain,  that  has  killed  so  many 
of  the  men  of  Ireland  ?  "  "  Whatever  you  would  say  to 
him,  you  may  say  it  to  me,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  Mac 
Roth  told  him  all  the  new  offers  he  had  brought  from 


202    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

Maeve,  and  Cuchulain  said :  "  I  am  Cuchulain  that  you 
are  looking  for,  and  I  refuse  all  your  offers."  So  Mac 
Roth  went  back  to  the  camp.  "  Did  you  find  Cuchulain  ?  " 
said  Maeve.  "  I  found,"  he  said,  "  an  angry  boy  between 
Ochain  and  the  sea,  and  I  do  not  know  if  it  was  Cuchulain." 
"  Did  he  take  your  offer  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  He  did  not," 
said  Mac  Roth.  "  It  is  Cuchulain  he  was  talking  to,"  said 
Fergus.  "  You  must  go  to  him  again,"  said  Maeve,  "  and 
make  new  offers."  So  Mac  Roth  went  out  again  to 
make  some  terms  with  Cuchulain,  but  he  refused  all  his 
offers.  "  And  another  thing,"  he  said,  "  I  would  never 
consent  to  give  in  to  a  woman,  or  to  be  under  a  woman's 
rule."  "Is  there  any  bargain  you  would  make?"  said 
Mac  Roth.  "If  there  is,"  said  Cuchulain,  "you  must 
find  it  out  for  yourselves,  and  there  is  one  in  the  camp 
can  tell  you  of  it,"  he  said  ;  "  and  if  he  himself  comes 
to  me,  I  will  speak  with  him,  but  if  any  other  man  comes 
to  me  again  with  offers,  that  will  be  the  last  day  of  his 
life." 

So  Mac  Roth  went  back  again  and  told  all  this  to 
Maeve.  "  And  I  will  not  go  near  him  again,  myself," 
he  said,  "  for  all  that  any  king  in  Ireland  could  give 
me."  Then  Maeve  said  to  Fergus :  "  Have  you  any 
knowledge  of  the  terms  Cuchulain  would  take?" 
"  I  have  not,"  said  Fergus.  But  after  she  had 
questioned  him  a  while,  he  said :  "  It  is  what  he  wants, 
that  one  man  of  the  men  of  Ireland  should  meet  him 
and  fight  alone  with  him  every  day.  And  while  that 
fight  is  going  on,  he  will  put  no  hindrance  on  the  rest  of 
the  army,  but  it  may  march  on.  But  so  soon  as  he  has 
killed  the  man  set  against  him,  the  army  must  stop, 
and  make  its  camp  until  the  morning  of  the  morrow." 
"  I  will  agree  to  that,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  it  is  better  to 
lose  one  man  every  day  than  a  hundred  every  night. 
And  who  will  go  and  make  this  agreement  with  him  ?  " 
"  Fergus    must    go,"   they    all    said.     "  I   will   not   go," 


FERGUS'S   VISIT  203 

said  Fergus.  "  Why  so  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  I  will  not  go," 
he  said,  "  unless  you  bind  yourselves  on  your  oath  to 
keep  to  your  agreement  with  him."  "  We  will  do  that," 
they  said  ;  and  so  Fergus  bound  them  on  their  oath,  and 
his  horses  were  yoked  to  his  chariot. 

Then  a  young  lad,  Etarcomal  by  name,  foster-son  of 
Maeve  and  of  Ailell,  made  ready  his  own  chariot. 
"  What  side  are  you  going,  Etarcomal  ? "  said  Fergus. 
"jl  am  going  with  you,"  he  said,  "  the  way  I  will  get  a 
sight  of  Cuchulain."  "  If  you  take  my  advice,  you  will 
not  make  that  journey,"  said  Fergus.  "  Why  so  ? " 
"  Because  if  your  pride  and  his  pride  meet  together,  some 
misfortune  will  surely  happen."  "  I  give  my  word  not 
to  anger  him  in  any  way,"  said  Etarcomal. 

They  went  on  then  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  between 
Ochain  and  the  sea,  and  himself  and  Laeg  were  play- 
ing a  game  with  their  casting  spears.  "  There  is  an 
armed  man  coming  to  us,"  said  Laeg.  "  What  sort  of 
man  is  he  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  He  is  large  and  proud, 
and  he  standing  in  a  high  chariot,  and  the  waving 
yellow  hair  about  his  head  gives  him  the  appearance 
of  the  top  of  a  tall  tree  that  stands  on  a  green  lawn," 
said  Laeg.  "  He  has  a  crimson  cloak  about  him  with  a 
deep  border  of  gold  thread,  and  an  inlaid  gold  brooch  in 
the  cloak  ;  a  broad  green  spear  in  his  hand ;  a  shield 
with  a  boss  of  red  gold  over  him ;  a  long  sword  in  a 
toothed  sheath  across  his  knees."  "It  is  Fergus  that  is 
in  it,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  Fergus  came  where  he  was 
and  got  out  of  his  chariot,  and  Cuchulain  gave  him  a 
great  welcome.  "  Do  you  welcome  me  indeed  ?  "  said 
Fergus.  "  I  do  surely,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  but  if  it  is  to 
look  for  a  feast  from  me  you  are  come,  the  white  birds 
are  on  the  side  of  the  cliffs,  and  the  fish  are  in  the 
stream,  and  the  wild  deer  on  the  hiils."  "  It  is  not  to 
look  for  a  feast  I  am  come,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  I  know 
well  it  is  not  easy  for  you  to  get  your  own  share  of  food. 


204    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

But  I  am  come  for  the  men  of  Ireland,  to  agree  to  your 
conditions.  And  from  this  out  they  will  send  one  of 
their  best  men  to  fight  with  you  alone  every  day."  "  I 
agree  to  keep  to  my  part  of  the  bargain,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  and  let  us  not  stop  talking  here  any  more,"  he  said, 
"  or  the  men  of  Ireland  will  be  thinking  you  are  doing 
some  treachery  on  them." 

So  Fergus  went  back  to  the  camp,  but  Etarcomal 
stopped  for  a  while  looking  at  Cuchulain.  "  What  are  you 
looking  at  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  looking  at  your- 
self," he  said.  "  Then  take  your  eyes  off  me,  and  go  after 
Fergus ;  and  maybe  you  think  yourself  a  better  fighting 
man  than  the  one  you  are  looking  at,"  said  Cuchulain. 
"  You  look  to  me  as  good  a  fighter  as  I  ever  saw  for  one 
of  your  age,"  said  Etarcomal,  "but  you  would  not  be 
thought  much  of  among  trained  fighters  and  grown 
men."  "  It  is  well  for  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  under 
Fergus's  protection  you  came,  or  I  swear,  by  the  gods 
my  people  swear  by,  you  would  not  go  back  safe  and 
sound  to  the  camp."  "  You  have  no  right  to  say  that," 
said  Etarcomal ;  "  and  what  you  want  of  the  men  of 
Ireland,  I  will  give  it  to  you,"  he  said,  "  for  you  ask  for 
one  champion  at  a  time  to  fight  with,  and  I  myself  will 
be  the  first  to  come  to  you  to-morrow."  "  Come,  then," 
said  Cuchulain,  "  and  however  early  you  may  come  in 
the  morning,  you  will  find  me  here  before  you." 

So  Etarcomal  set  out,  and  he  began  to  tell  his  chariot- 
driver  all  he  had  said,  and  how  he  had  promised  to  go 
out  and  fight  with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow.  "  Did  you 
make  that  promise?"  said  his  driver.  "I  did,"  said 
Etarcomal,  "  and  I  have  given  my  word  I  will  go  ;  and  I 
do  not  know,"  he  said,  "  would  it  be  better  for  me  to  wait 
till  to-morrow,  or  to  go  back  and  fight  with  him  to-day." 
"  You  will  not  get  the  better  of  him  to-morrow,"  said  his 
driver,  "  and  it  would  be  just  as  well  for  you  to  be  beaten 
to-night."     "  Turn  the  chariot  and  let  us  go  back,"  said 


ETARCOMAL'S   FOLLY  205 

Etarcomal,  "  for  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,  I  will 
not  go  back  to  the  camp  without  bringing  Cuchulain's 
head  in  my  hand."  So  they  turned  back  again  towards 
the  sea. 

Then  Laeg  said  :  "  That  chariot  that  was  here  a  while 
ago  has  turned  back  again  to  us,  Cuchulain."  "  It  is 
Etarcomal  coming  back  to  challenge  me,  and  it  is  not  I 
that  will  fall  in  this  fight,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  But  bring 
me  my  arms,"  he  said,  "  for  it  would  not  be  right  for  me 
not  to  be  ready  to  meet  him."  So  he  went  to  meet  him, 
and  took  his  sword  out  of  the  sheath,  and  said  :  "  What  are 
you  come  back  for?"  "  I  am  come  to  fight  with  you." 
"  I  am  loth  to  fight  with  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it 
was  under  the  protection  of  Fergus  you  came  here." 

And  with  that  he  gave  a  blow  of  his  sword  that  cut 
the  sod  clean  away  from  under  the  soles  of  Etarcomal's 
feet,  so  that  he  fell  on  his  back.  "  Go  back  now,"  he  said, 
"  for  you  have  had  a  warning."  "  I  will  not  go  back  until  I 
have  fought  with  you."  Then  Cuchulain  gave  another 
stroke  with  the  edge  of  his  sword  that  cut  the  hair  close 
off  his  head,  but  drew  no  blood.  "  You  may  go  back 
now,  at  least,"  he  said.  "  I  will  not  go,"  said  Etarcomal, 
"  until  I  have  made  an  end  of  you,  or  you  have  made  an 
end  of  me."  "Well,"  said  Cuchulain,  "if  you  are  set 
upon  that,  it  is  I  must  make  an  end  of  you."  With  that 
he  made  a  cross  blow  at  him  that  cut  him  through  and 
through,  so  that  he  fell  dead. 

Fergus,  now,  had  seen  nothing  of  all  this,  for  it  was 
his  custom,  when  he  was  travelling,  never  to  look  back, 
but  always  to  be  looking  before  him  ;  and  presently, 
Etarcomal's  chariot-driver  came  up  with  him,  and  he 
said  :  "  Where  have  you  left  your  master  ?  "  "  Cuchulain 
is  after  attacking  and  making  an  end  of  him  on  the 
plain,"  said  the  man.  "  It  was  not  right  of  him  to  do 
that,"  said  Fergus,  "to  any  one  that  came  under  my 
protection.      Turn    my   chariot    about   now"   he   said, 


2o6    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

"  until  I  go  back  and  talk  with  him."  And  when  he 
came  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  he  said  :  "  It  was  not  right 
of  you,  my  own  foster-son,  to  kill  one  that  came  under 
my  protection."  "  Ask  his  chariot-driver,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "  on  which  of  us  the  blame  should  be  laid." 
Then  the  chariot-driver  told  the  whole  story,  and  when 
Fergus  heard  it,  he  said  :  "  There  is  no  blame  on  you, 
Cuchulain."  Then  he  bound  the  body  of  Etarcomal  to 
his  chariot,  so  that  it  was  dragged  after  it  along  the 
road  and  through  the  camp  to  the  door  of  Ailell  and 
Maeve.  "  There  is  the  young  man  you  sent  out,"  he 
said,  "  and  this  is  the  treatment  Cuchulain  will  give  to 
every  other  man  that  goes  out  against  him."  And 
Maeve  came  out  of  the  door  and  spoke  high,  angry, 
loud  words  :  "  I  had  put  great  hopes  in  that  young  man," 
she  said,  "  and  I  did  not  think  it  was  under  bad 
protection  he  was  going,  when  he  went  under  the  pro- 
tection of  Fergus."  And  Fergus  said  :  "  What  business 
had  he  going  out  at  all,  to  meddle  with  Cuchulain  ? 
And  if  I  went  there  myself,"  he  said,  "  it  is  well  pleased 
I  was  to  get  back  again  safely." 

The  next  day,  the  men  of  Ireland  consulted  together 
as  to  who  should  go  against  Cuchulain,  and  they  agreed 
that  it  was  best  to  send  Natchrantal,  that  was  a  great 
fighting  man. 

So  he  set  out,  but  he  would  bring  no  arms  with  him 
but  three  times  nine  holly  rods,  and  they  having 
hardened  points. 

Cuchulain  was  at  that  time  following  after  a  flock  of  wild 
birds,  to  bring  some  of  them  down  for  the  evening's 
food,  and  he  took  no  notice  of  Natchrantal,  but  went  on 
following  after  the  birds.  But  Natchrantal  thought  it 
was  afraid  of  him  he  was,  and  he  went  back  to  the  door 
of  Maeve's  tent  and  gave  a  loud  shout,  and  he  said  :  "  That 
great  Cuchulain  there  is  so  much  talk  about,  is  running 
away  now  after  the  challenge  I  gave  him."     *'  I  would 


cue  HULA  I  N'S   ANGER  207 

hardly  believe  that,"  said  Maeve,  "for  he  has  stood 
against  many  good  fighting  men  before  now,  and  why 
would  he  not  stand  against  you  ?  "  Fergus  heard  what 
was  said,  and  it  vexed  him,  any  man  to  say  Cuchulain 
had  run  before  him ;  and  he  sent  Fiacha,  son  of 
Firaba,  to  reproach  him,  for  letting  such  a  thing  be  said, 
and  Cuchulain  bade  him  welcome.  "  I  am  come  from 
Fergus,"  said  Fiacha,  "  and  it  is  what  he  says,  that  it 
would  have  been  more  fitting  for  you  to  spill  the  blood 
of  the  man  that  was  sent  against  you,  than  to  run  from 
him."  "  Who  did  I  run  from  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  Tell 
me  who  makes  that  boast."  "  It  is  Natchrantal,"  said 
Fiacha.  "  What  would  Fergus  have  me  do  ? "  said 
Cuchulain  ;  ''  would  he  have  me  kill  an  unarmed  man  ? 
For  he  brought  nothing  with  him  but  wooden  rods,  and 
it  is  not  my  custom  to  wound  chariot-drivers  or 
messengers  or  unarmed  men.  But  let  him  come  out 
armed  to  meet  me,"  he  said,  "  on  the  morning  of  to- 
morrow." 

So  Fiacha  went  back  to  the  camp,  and  the  day  seemed 
long  to  Natchrantal  till  he  could  meet  Cuchulain.  But 
when  he  went  out  in  the  morning  and  came  to  the 
plain  he  said  to  Cormac  Conloingeas :  "  Where  is 
Cuchulain  ?  "  "  He  is  there  before  you,"  said  he.  "  That 
is  not  the  appearance  that  was  on  him  yesterday,"  said 
Natchrantal ;  for  Cuchulain's  anger  had  come  on  him 
so  that  the  appearance  he  had  was  changed,  and  he  was 
leaning  against  a  pillar-stone,  and  in  the  strength  of  his 
anger,  as  he  was  throwing  his  cloak  about  him,  he  broke 
off  the  pillar-stone,  and  he  never  noticed  that  it  was 
wrapped  between  the  cloak  and  himself ;  and  Natchrantal 
threw  his  sword  at  him,  and  it  broke  to  pieces  against 
the  pillar-stone,  and  then  Cuchulain  gave  him  a  blow 
over  the  top  of  his  shield  that  struck  off  his  head. 

While  this  fight  was  going  on,  Maeve,  having  a 
third   part  of  the  army  with   her,   set   out   Northward 


2o8    WAR    FOR   BULL    OF   CUAILGXE 

to  Dun-Sobairce,  to  look  for  the  Brown  Bull.  And 
Cuchulain  followed  after  her  for  a  while  ;  but  then  he 
turned  back  to  defend  his  own  countr}\  And  he  saw 
before  him  Buac,  son  of  Bainblai,  that  was  the  man 
Maeve  trusted  better  than  any  other,  and  twent)--four 
men  along  with  him,  and  they  dri\-ing  the  Bro\\'n  Bull 
before  them  and  fifteen  of  his  heifers,  that  they  had 
brought  out  of  Glen-na-masc  in  Slieve  Cuilinn.  "  Where 
are  you  bringing  these  cattle  from  ? "  said  Cuchulain. 
"  Out  of  that  mountain  beyond."  "  What  is  your  name  ?  " 
he  said.  *  If  I  tell  it,  it  is  not  either  through  love  of 
\-ou  or  through  fear  of  you,"  he  said.  "  I  am  Buac,  son  of 
Bainblai,  from  Ailell's  countr}-  and  Maeve's."  "Take 
this  from  me,  then,"  said  Cuchulain,  and  with  that  he 
threw  his  spear  at  him  so  that  it  went  through  his  body, 
and  he  fell  dead.  But  while  he  was  doing  this,  the  rest 
of  the  men  drove  away  the  Bull  with  great  haste  to  the 
camp  of  the  men  of  Ireland  ;  and  this  was  the  greatest 
affront  that  was  put  on  Cuchulain  through  the  whole  of 
the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 

Then  the  men  of  Ireland  began  saying  to  one  another 
that  Cuchulain  would  not  have  the  mastery  over  them 
but  for  the  bronze  spear  he  had,  and  that  there  must  be 
enchantment  on  it,  for  none  of  them  could  stand  against 
it.  And  they  said  to  Maeve  that  she  should  send  Rae, 
the  satirist,  to  ask  it  of  him,  for  he  could  not  refuse  a 
satirist ;  so  Rae  went  and  asked  it  of  him.  "  Give  me 
your  spear,"  he  said.  "  I  will  not  give  you  that  indeed," 
said  Cuchulain,  '•  but  I  will  give  you  other  things."  "  I 
will  not  take  any  other  thing,"  said  Rae,  "  and  I  will 
put  a  bad  name  on  you,  if  you  refuse  me  the  spear." 
"  Take  it,  then,"  said  Cuchulain,  and  with  that  he  threw 
it  with  all  his  force  at  his  head.  "That  is  a  weighty 
present,"  said  the  satirist,  and  he  dropped  dead. 

Then  Cur,  son  of  Daltach,  was  sent  out,  for  the  men  of 
Ireland    thought    he    would   be   able   ro  rid   them   of 


A    BLOOD-BOND  209 

Cuchulain.  But  it  was  hard  to  persuade  Cur,  because 
he  thought  it  was  not  worth  his  while  to  go  and  fight 
with  a  young  beardless  boy.  And  when  he  went  out  in 
the  morning,  Cuchulain  was  practising  all  his  feats  that 
he  had  learned,  and  Cur  was  for  a  while  trying  to  get 
near  enough  to  come  at  him  with  his  weapons,  but  he 
could  not ;  and  Cuchulain  was  so  taken  up  with  doing 
his  feats  that  he  never  noticed  him  at  all.  Then  Laeg 
saw  him  and  said  :  "  Have  a  care,  Cuchulain  ;  there  is  an 
armed  man  making  ready  to  attack  you."  Cuchulain 
was  doing  his  apple  feat  at  that  time,  keeping  nine 
apples,  and  his  shield,  and  his  sword  in  the  air,  that  none 
of  them  fell  to  the  ground.  And  when  he  saw  Cur,  he 
threw  the  apple  that  was  in  his  hand  straight  at  his 
forehead,  and  it  went  through,  and  brought  out  a  share 
of  his  brains  the  size  of  itself,  at  the  other  side. 

And  after  that,  other  fighting  men  were  sent  out  every 
day  through  a  week,  and  he  killed  them  all.  And  one 
day  he  said  :  "  Go,  Laeg,  to  the  camp,  to  my  friend 
Lugaid,  and  say  you  are  come  from  me,  and  ask  him 
which  of  the  men  of  Ireland  is  to  be  sent  against  me 
to-morrow."  So  Laeg  went,  and  when  he  came  back  he 
said :  "  It  is  your  own  comrade  and  fellow-pupil  with 
Scathach,  Ferbaeth,  your  blood-friend,  is  coming  against 
you  ;  for  he  has  only  lately  joined  the  army,  and  he  has 
brought  four-fifths  of  his  men  with  him,  and  Maeve  has 
promised  him  her  daughter  Findabair,  and  he  has  drunk 
from  her  cup,  and  been  fed  by  her  hand."  "  I  am  sorry 
to  hear  that,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  I  think  worse  of  a 
comrade  of  my  own  coming  against  me,  than  of  any 
other  man."  And  when  Ferbaeth  came  out  to  fight 
against  him  in  the  morning,  Cuchulain  did  his  best  to 
make  him  give  up  the  fight,  for  the  sake  of  the  old 
friendship  between  them,  but  Ferbaeth  would  not  listen 
to  him.  Cuchulain  turned  from  him  then  in  anger,  and 
to  loosen  the  blood-bond  between  them,  he  struck  the 

O 


2IO    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

sole  of  his  own  foot  with  a  spear,  that  it  drew  blood,  and 
then  he  threw  his  spear  at  Ferbaeth,  but  he  did  not  look 
to  see  did  it  hit  him  or  not.  But  the  spear  went  through 
his  head  and  out  of  his  mouth,  and  this  is  the  way 
Ferbaeth  came  to  his  death. 

Then  Ailell  made  up  a  plan  by  which  he  thought  to 
make  Cuchulain  give  up  the  stand  he  was  making 
against  the  army,  and  his  plan  was  to  offer  Findabair  to 
him  if  he  would  give  his  word  to  leave  off  attacking  the 
men  of  Ireland,  and  he  sent  Lugaid  to  make  the  offer  to 
him.  Cuchulain  was  not  very  well  pleased  with  the 
message,  and  he  thought  there  might  be  some  treachery 
in  it,  but  he  agreed  that  he  would  meet  Ailell  and 
Findabair,  and  speak  with  them.  But  when  the  time 
came,  Ailell  made  his  fool  put  on  his  clothes,  and  wear 
his  gold  circle  on  his  head,  and  go  with  Findabair ;  and 
he  bade  him  stop  as  far  back  as  he  could,  the  way 
Cuchulain  would  not  know  it  was  not  the  king  that  was 
in  it ;  and  then  Findabair  was  to  bind  him  over  to  their 
side,  not  to  fight  any  more  against  the  men  of  Ireland, 
and  when  that  was  done,  she  herself  and  the  fool  were 
to  hurry  back  to  the  camp  together.  But  when  Cuchulain 
saw  them,  he  knew  the  fool,  and  he  sent  a  stone  out  of 
his  sling  and  killed  him.  And  because  Findabair  had 
taken  a  share  in  the  treachery,  he  cut  off  her  two  plaits 
of  hair  and  took  them  away.  And  after  a  while  Ailell 
and  Maeve  came  to  see  what  had  happened  them,  and 
there  they  found  Findabair  beside  the  dead  body  of  the 
fool.  And  they  brought  her  home  and  said  nothing  of 
it,  but  all  the  same  the  story  was  talked  of  in  the  camp. 

Then  Cuchulain  sent  Laeg  into  the  camp  again  to 
ask  news  of  Lugaid.  And  it  is  what  Lugaid  told  him 
that  the  next  to  be  sent  against  him  was  his  own  brother 
Larine,  that  Maeve  had  persuaded  with  wine,  and  with 
the  promise  of  Findabair,  to  go  against  him.  "  And  it 
is  what  they  think,"   said  Lugaid,   "that   if  Cuchulain 


THE    MORRIGU  211 

should  kill  my  brother,  I  myself  would  have  to  go  and 
get  satisfaction  for  his  death  ;  and  tell  Cuchulain,"  he 
said,  "  not  to  make  an  end  of  Larine,  but  only  to  give 
him  some  punishment  he  will  not  forget."  So  when 
Larine  came  out,  at  the  breaking  of  the  day,  Cuchulain 
came  to  meet  him  without  any  weapons  ;  but  he  took  him 
in  his  two  hands  and  shook  him,  and  left  him  there  with 
the  life  still  in  him.  But  he  was  never  the  better  of  the 
shaking  he  got  to  the  end  of  his  life. 

As  Cuchulain  lay  in  his  sleep  one  night  a  great  cry 
from  the  North  came  to  him,  so  that  he  started  up  and 
fell  from  his  bed  to  the  ground  like  a  sack.  He  went 
out  of  his  tent,  and  there  he  saw  Laeg  yoking  the  horses 
to  the  chariot.  "  Why  are  you  doing  that  ? "  he  said. 
"  Because  of  a  great  cry  I  heard  from  the  plain  to  the 
north-west,"  said  Laeg.  "Let  us  go  there  then,"  said 
Cuchulain.  So  they  went  on  till  they  met  with  a 
chariot,  and  a  red  horse  yoked  to  it,  and  a  woman 
sitting  in  it,  with  red  eyebrows,  and  a  red  dress  on  her, 
and  a  long  red  cloak  that  fell  on  to  the  ground  between 
the  two  wheels  of  the  chariot,  and  on  her  back  she  had  a 
grey  spear.  "  What  is  your  name,  and  what  is  it  you  are 
wanting  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  the  daughter  of  King 
Buan,"  she  said,  "  and  what  I  am  come  for  is  to  find  you 
and  to  offer  you  my  love,  for  I  have  heard  of  all  the 
great  deeds  you  have  done."  "  It  is  a  bad  time  you  have 
chosen  for  coming,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  I  am  wasted 
and  worn  out  with  the  hardship  of  the  war,  and  I  have 
no  mind  to  be  speaking  with  women."  "  You  will  have 
my  help  in  everything  you  do,"  she  said,  "and  it  is 
protecting  you  I  was  up  to  this,  and  I  will  protect  you 
from  this  out."  "  It  is  not  trusting  to  a  woman's  pro- 
tection I  am  in  this  work  I  have  in  my  hands,"  said 
Cuchulain.  "  Then  if  you  will  not  take  my  help."  she  said, 
"  I  will  turn  it  against  you ;  and  at  the  time  when  you 
will  be  fighting  with  some  man  as  good  as  yourself,  I  will 


212    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

come  against  you  in  all  shapes,  by  water  and  by  land, 
till  you  are  beaten."  There  was  anger  on  Cuchulain 
then,  and  he  took  his  sword,  and  made  a  leap  at  the 
chariot.  But  on  the  moment,  the  chariot  and  the  horse 
and  the  woman  had  disappeared,  and  all  he  saw  was  a 
black  crow,  and  it  sitting  on  a  branch ;  and  by  that  he 
knew  it  was  the  Morrigu  had  been  talking  with  him. 

After  that,  Loch,  son  of  Mofebis,  was  sent  for  to 
Maeve,  and  she  asked  him  would  he  go  out  to  the  next 
day's  fight.  "  I  will  not  go,"  he  said,  "  for  it  would  not 
be  fitting  for  me  to  go  out  against  a  young  boy,  whose 
beard  is  not  grown  ;  but  I  have  one  to  meet  him,"  he 
said,  "  and  that  is  my  brother  Long,  son  of  Emonis,  and 
you  can  make  an  agreement  with  him."  So  then  Long 
was  sent  for,  and  Maeve  promised  him  a  great  reward, 
suits  of  armour  for  twelve  men,  and  a  chariot,  and 
Findabair  for  a  wife,  and  the  right  of  coming  to  every 
feast  at  Cruachan.  Then  Long  went  out  to  the  fight, 
but  Cuchulain  killed  him. 

Then  Maeve  said  to  her  women :  "  Go  now  to 
Cuchulain,  and  tell  him  to  put  some  likeness  of  a  beard 
on  himself,  and  say  to  him  there  is  no  good  warrior  in 
the  camp  thinks  it  fitting  to  go  out  and  fight  him,  he 
being  young  and  beardless." 

When  Cuchulain  heard  that,  he  took  blackberries  and 
smeared  the  juice  on  his  face,  the  way  he  would  have  the 
appearance  of  a  beard,  and  then  he  came  out  on  the  hill 
and  showed  himself  to  the  men  of  Ireland.  When  Loch, 
son  of  Mofebis,  saw  him,  he  said  :  "  Is  that  a  beard  on 
Cuchulain  ? "  "  That  is  certainly  what  I  see,"  said 
Maeve.  "  Then  I  will  go  out  and  meet  him,"  said  Loch. 
So  they  met  beside  the  ford,  where  Long  had  got  his 
death.  "  Come  to  the  ford  that  is  higher  up,"  said 
Loch,  for  he  would  not  fight  at  the  ford  where  his 
brother  died.  So  they  fought  at  the  upper  ford,  and 
while   they  were   fighting,   the   Morrigu   came   against 


CUCHULAIN'S   LONELINESS     213 

Cuchulain  with  the  appearance  of  a  white,  red-eared 
heifer,  and  fifty  other  heifers  along  with  her,  and  a  chain 
of  white  bronze  between  every  two  of  them,  and  they 
made  a  rush  into  the  ford.  But  Cuchulain  made  a  cast 
at  her,  and  wounded  one  of  her  eyes.  Then  she  came 
down  the  stream  in  the  shape  of  a  black  eel,  and  wound 
herself  about  Cuchulain's  legs  in  the  water ;  and  while  he 
was  getting  himself  free  of  her,  and  bruising  her  against 
a  green  stone  of  the  ford,  Loch  wounded  his  body. 
Then  she  took  the  appearance  of  a  grey  wolf,  and  took 
hold  of  his  right  arm,  and  while  he  was  getting  free  of 
her.  Loch  wounded  him  again.  Then  great  anger  came 
on  him,  and  he  took  the  spear  Aoife  had  given  him, 
the  Gae  Bulg,  and  gave  him  a  deadly  wound.  "  I  ask 
one  thing  for  the  sake  of  your  great  name,  Cuchulain," 
he  called  out.  "  What  thing  is  that  ?  "  "  It  is  not  to 
spare  my  life  I  am  asking  you,"  said  Loch,  "  but  let  me 
rise  up,  the  way  I  may  fall  on  my  face,  and  not  back- 
wards towards  the  men  of  Ireland,  so  that  none  of  them 
can  say  it  was  in  running  away  or  in  going  backward  I 
fell."  "  I  will  surely  give  that  leave,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  for  the  thing  you  ask  is  a  right  gift  for  a  fighting  man." 
And  after  that  he  went  back  to  his  own  camping-place. 

Now,  on  that  day  above  any  other,  a  very  downhearted 
feeling  came  on  Cuchulain,  he  to  be  fighting  alone 
against  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland.  And  he  bade 
Laeg  to  go  to  Conchubar  and  to  the  men  of  Ulster,  and 
to  say  to  them  that  he,  the  son  of  Dechtire,  was  tired 
with  fighting  every  day,  and  with  the  wounds  he  had 
got,  and  not  one  of  his  people  or  his  friends  coming  to 
help  him. 

After  that  Maeve  sent  out  six  all  together  against 
him,  three  men  and  three  women  that  understood  en- 
chantments ;  but  he  destroyed  them  all.  And  now  that 
Maeve  had  broken  her  agreement  with  him,  not  to  send 
more  than  one  against  him  at  a  time,  he  did  not  spare 


214    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

her  men  any  longer,  but  from  where  he  was  he  used  his 
sling  so  well  that  in  the  whole  army  there  was  neither 
dog,  horse,  or  man,  that  dared  turn  his  face  towards 
Cuchulain. 

It  was  one  day  at  that  time  the  Morrigu  came  to  try 
and  get  healing  of  her  wounds  from  him,  for  it  was  only 
by  his  own  hand  the  wounds  he  gave  could  be  healed. 
She  took  the  appearance  of  an  old  woman  on  her,  and 
she  milking  a  cow  with  three  teats.  Cuchulain  was 
passing  by,  and  there  was  thirst  on  him,  and  he  asked  a 
drink,  and  she  gave  him  the  milk  of  one  teat.  "  May 
this  be  to  the  good  of  the  giver,"  he  said,  and  with  that 
her  eye  that  was  wounded  was  healed.  Then  she  gave 
him  milk  from  another  teat,  and  he  said  the  same  words  ; 
then  she  gave  him  the  milk  from  the  third  teat.  "  The 
full  blessing  of  the  gods,  and  of  the  people  of  the  plough, 
on  you,"  he  said.  And  with  that,  all  the  wounds  of  the 
Great  Queen  were  healed. 

Then  the  men  of  the  four  great  provinces  of  Ireland 
made  their  camp,  and  put  up  walls  at  the  place  called 
the  Great  Breach,  on  the  plain  of  Muirthemne  ;  but  they 
sent  the  cattle  they  had  with  them  southward.  And 
Cuchulain  took  his  place  on  a  hill  ;  and  in  the  evening 
Laeg  made  a  fire  for  him  there,  and  the  flame  flashed 
on  the  bright  shining  weapons  of  the  men  of  Ireland. 
And  when  Cuchulain  saw  so  many  of  them,  and  they  so 
near  him,  great  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  took  his 
spears  and  his  shield  and  his  sword  and  shook  them,  and 
he  gave  out  his  loud  hero  cry,  and  it  was  such  a  great 
cry  he  gave  that  the  Bocanachs  and  Bananachs  and  the 
witches  of  the  valley  answered  it  from  all  parts. 

And  when  the  men  in  the  camp  heard  these  great 
cries,  they  thought  it  was  an  attack  that  was  being  made 
upon  them,  and  they  ran  against  one  another,  and  fought 
one  another  in  their  fright,  so  that  a  hundred  of  them 
were  killed  in  that  night. 


LUGH  OF  THE  LONG  HAND   215 

Then  Laeg  saw  a  man  coming  through  the  camp  from 
the  north-east.  "  There  is  a  man  coming  towards  us,  Httle 
Hound,"  he  said.  "  What  is  the  appearance  on  him  ?  " 
said  Cuchulain.  "  He  is  very  tall  and  handsome 
and  shining,  and  he  has  a  green  cloak  about  him, 
fastened  with  a  silver  brooch  ;  a  shirt  of  silk  that  is 
embroidered  with  red  gold,  falling  to  his  knees ;  a  black 
shield  in  his  hand,  with  a  border  of  white  bronze,  and  a 
spear  with  five  prongs.  And  it  is  a  strange  thing,"  he  said, 
"  that  no  one  in  the  whole  camp  seems  to  see  him  or  to 
take  any  heed  of  him."  "  That  is  so,"  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  and  the  men  of  Ireland  take  no  heed  of  him  because 
they  cannot  see  him  ;  and  I  know  well  it  is  one  of  my 
friends  among  the  Sidhe  that  is  coming  to  give  me  help 
and  relief;  for  they  know  it  is  hard  for  me  to  be  standing 
alone  against  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland." 

Then  the  man  of  the  Sidhe,  that  was  Lugh  of  the  Long 
Hand,  came  and  spoke  with  Cuchulain,  and  it  is  what  he 
said,  that  he  knew  he  was  tired  out  and  in  want  of  sleep. 
"  And  sleep  now,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  by  the  grave  in 
the  Lerga,  and  I  myself  will  keep  watch  over  you  till  the 
end  of  three  days  and  three  nights.  So  Cuchulain  fell 
asleep  there  and  then  by  the  grave  that  is  in  the  Lerga, 
and  no  wonder  in  that,  for  he  had  been  fighting  since 
before  the  feast  of  Samhain  without  sleep,  but  all  the 
while  killing  and  attacking  and  destroying  the  men  of 
Ireland — unless  he  might  sleep  a  little  while  beside  his 
spear  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  his  head  on  his  hand, 
and  his  hand  on  his  spear,  and  his  spear  on  his  knee. 
And  while  he  was  lying  in  his  heavy  sleep,  the  man  of 
the  Sidhe  put  Druid  herbs  on  his  wounds,  so  that  they 
were  all  healed.  So  he  slept  for  three  days  and  three 
nights,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  rose  up  and  passed 
his  hand  over  his  face,  and  he  blushed  red  from  head  to 
foot  with  the  strengthening  of  his  courage  that  he  felt  in 
him,  and  he  would  have  been  ready  to  go  there  and  then 


2i6    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

into  any  great  gathering  or  feasting  hall  in  all  Ireland. 
"  How  long  have  I  been  in  my  sleep  ? "  he  asked  the 
man.  "  Three  days  and  three  nights."  "  Then  you  have 
done  me  a  bad  turn  indeed,"  he  said,  "for  the  men  of 
Ireland  have  been  left  in  quiet  all  that  time."  "  They 
were  not  indeed,"  said  the  man.  "  Who  was  it  stood  up  to 
them  then  ? "  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  was  the  boy  troop 
came  from  the  North,  from  Emain  Macha,"  he  said ; 
"  three  times  fifty  sons  of  the  chief  men  of  Ulster,  and 
they  attacked  the  army  three  times,  and  they  killed  three 
times  their  own  number,  but  they  themselves  were  all 
killed  in  the  end.  And  Follaman,  son  of  Conchubar,  was 
leading  them,  and  he  had  made  a  boast  that  he  would 
never  go  home  again  unless  he  could  bring  Ailell's  head 
along  with  him,  and  the  gold  crown  that  was  on  it.  But 
two  foster-sons  of  Ailell,  the  two  sons  of  Betchach,  son  of 
Baen,  fell  on  him  and  wounded  him,  so  that  he  got  his 
death."  "  My  grief,  and  oh !  my  grief  that  I  was  not 
there,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  for  if  I  had  been  in  it,  the  boy 
troop  would  never  have  been  destroyed,  and  Conchubar's 
son  would  not  have  come  to  his  death."  "  Do  not  be 
fretting,  little  Hound,  "  said  the  strange  man  ;  "  there  is  no 
reproach  on  your  name  by  it."  "  Stop  here  with  me 
to-night,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  the  two  of  us  together 
will  avenge  the  boy  troop."  "  I  will  not  indeed,"  said  he  ; 
"  but  let  you  yourself  play  the  game  out  now  with  the 
men  of  Ireland,  for  it  is  not  they  that  have  power  over 
your  life  at  this  time." 

With  that  he  went  away,  and  Cuchulain  said  to  Laeg, 
"  Yoke  the  scythed  chariot  for  me  now,  if  you  have  the 
things  belonging  to  it."  Then  Laeg  rose  up  and  got 
ready  the  chariot,  and  he  put  on  his  light  dress  of  deer- 
skins, that  was  spotted  and  striped  and  close-fitting,  so 
that  his  arms  were  left  free.  And  over  that  he  put  his 
raven-black  cloak,  and  his  shining  helmet  on  his  head  ; 
and  on  his  forehead  he  put  the  narrow  band  of  gold  that 


DUBTHACH'S  JEALOUSY  217 

chariot-drivers  were  used  to  wear.  And  then  he  threw 
over  the  horses  the  cloths  that  covered  them  all  over, 
and  that  were  studded  with  little  blades,  and  spikes, 
and  points,  so  that  every  time  the  chariot  moved,  it 
brought  some  sharp  point  against  those  that  were  near 
it,  the  way  every  point  and  every  head  of  the  chariot 
would  cut  its  sure  path ;  and  he  gathered  the  reins  in 
his  hand,  and  the  goad,  and  the  long  whip. 

And  then  Cuchulain  put  on  his  armour,  and  took  his 
spears,  and  his  sword,  and  his  shield  that  had  a  rim  so 
sharp  it  would  cut  a  hair  against  the  stream,  and  his 
cloak  that  was  made  of  the  precious  fleeces  of  the  land 
of  the  Sidhe,  that  had  been  brought  to  him  by  Manannan 
from  the  King  of  Sorcha.  He  went  out  then  against 
the  men  of  Ireland,  and  attacked  them,  and  his  anger 
came  on  him,  so  that  it  was  not  his  own  appearance  he 
had  on  him,  but  the  appearance  of  a  god.  And  after  that 
he  turned  back  and  left  them,  and  there  was  no  wound 
on  himself,  or  on  the  horses,  or  on  Laeg  that  day.  And 
he  made  a  round  of  the  whole  army,  mowing  men  down 
on  every  side,  in  revenge  for  the  boy  troop  of  Emain. 

But  the  next  day  he  was  standing  on  the  hill,  young, 
and  comely,  and  shining,  and  the  cloud  of  his  anger  had 
gone  from  him.  Then  the  women  and  the  young  girls 
in  the  camp,  and  the  poets  and  the  singers,  came  out  to 
look  at  him  ;  but  Maeve  hid  her  face  behind  a  shelter  of 
shields,  thinking  he  might  make  a  cast  at  her  with  his 
sling.  And  there  was  wonder  on  these  women  to  see 
him  so  quiet  and  so  gentle  to-day,  and  he  such  a  terror 
to  the  whole  army  yesterday;  and  they  bade  the  men 
lift  them  up  on  their  shields  to  the  height  of  their 
shoulders,  the  way  they  could  have  a  good  sight  of  him. 

But  Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  saw  his  own  wife 
climbing  up  with  the  other  women  to  look  at  Cuchulain, 
and  great  anger  and  jealousy  came  on  him  ;  and  he  said 
to  the  chief  men  of  the  army  that  it  would  be  best  for 


2i8    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

them  to  surround  Cuchulain  secretly  on  all  sides,  and 
then  to  let  on  to  be  fighting  among  themselves,  so  as  to 
lead  him  down  where  he  could  not  escape  them.  But 
when  Fergus  was  told  this,  he  gave  a  great  kick  of  his 
foot  to  Dubthach,  that  sent  him  from  where  he  was. 
And  he  spoke  angr>^  words  against  Dubthach,  and  he 
told  him  he  would  be  well  paid  for  the  harm  he  had 
planned,  whenever  the  men  of  Ulster  would  get  up  from 
their  weakness,  and  come  out  to  help  Cuchulain. 

And  that  night  the  army  of  Ireland  made  their  camp 
at  the  great  stone  in  the  country  of  Ross  ;  and  then 
Maeve  asked  which  of  them  would  go  out  and  fight  with 
Cuchulain  on  the  morrow.  But  every  one  of  the  men  of 
Ireland  said  :  "  It  is  not  I  that  will  go."  "  It  is  not  one 
of  my  family  that  should  be  sent  to  his  death."  Then 
Maeve  asked  Fergus  to  go  out  and  fight  him.  "  It  is 
not  right  for  you,"  said  Fergus,  "  to  ask  me  to  go  against 
a  young  boy,  and  he  my  own  pupil  and  my  foster-son." 
But  Maeve  pressed  him  so  hard  that  he  could  not  but 
take  the  work  in  hand  ;  and  early  in  the  morning  he  went 
out  to  the  ford  of  fighting  where  Cuchulain  was.  When 
Cuchulain  saw  him  coming  he  said  :  "  Truly,  my  master, 
it  is  not  safe  for  you  to  come  and  fight,  and  you  without 
a  sword,"  for  Ailell  had  not  given  him  back  his  own 
sword  yet.  "  It  is  no  matter,"  he  said,  "for  if  I  had  a 
sword  in  my  sheath,  it  is  not  on  you  I  would  use  it. 
And  now,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  for  the  sake  of  all  I  did 
for  you,  and  all  Conchubar  and  the  whole  of  Ulster  did 
for  you  in  your  bringing-up,  let  you  give  way  before  me 
to-day,  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  Ireland."  "Indeed  I 
am  loth  to  give  way  before  any  man  in  this  war,"  said 
Cuchulain.  "You  need  not  mind  that,"  said  Fergus, 
"  for  I  will  do  the  same  for  you  when  the  great  last 
battle  of  this  war  is  fought ;  it  is  then  I  will  turn  and  run 
before  you,  when  you  are  covered  with  wounds  and  with 
blood.     And  if  I  run  then,"  he  said,  "  all  the  men  of 


THE   OUTLAWS  219 

Ireland  will  run  along  with  me."  So  Cuchulain  agreed 
to  do  that,  because  it  would  be  for  the  profit  of  Ulster. 
And  he  bade  Laeg  make  ready  his  chariot ;  and 
presently,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten  by  Fergus,  he  gave 
way  to  him  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  Ireland.  When 
they  saw  it,  they  called  out :  "  He  is  running  before  you, 
Fergus."  And  Maeve  called  out :  "  Follow  him,  Fergus — 
make  haste,  the  way  he  will  not  escape  you."  "  I  will 
not  indeed,"  said  Fergus,  "  I  will  follow  him  no  farther  ; 
and  if  you  think  I  did  not  make  him  run  far  enough," 
he  said,  "  I  did  more  than  all  the  rest  of  the  men  that 
went  against  him  up  to  this  ;  and  I  will  make  no  other 
attack  on  him,"  he  said,  "  until  all  the  men  of  Ireland 
have  fought  with  him,  one  by  one." 

So  that  was  the  end  of  the  fight  between  Fergus  and 
Cuchulain. 

There  was  a  man  of  Connaught  at  that  time  whose 
name  was  Ferchu,  and  he  had  been  at  war  with  Ailell 
and  Maeve  from  the  time  they  got  the  kingdom,  and 
he  used  to  be  robbing  the  country  and  destroying  it,  so 
that  he  was  made  an  outlaw.  And  some  of  his  men 
heard  that  the  whole  army  of  Connaught  was  being 
vexed  and  hindered  by  one  man ;  and  when  they  told  it 
to  Ferchu,  he  said  :  "  It  would  be  a  good  chance  for  us 
to  go  and  attack  that  man,  and  to  bring  his  head  with 
us  to  Ailell  and  Maeve,  for  if  we  do  that,"  he  said, 
"  they  will  forgive  us  all  the  harm  we  have  done  their 
country." 

So  he  himself  and  his  twelve  men  went  forward  to 
where  Cuchulain  was,  and  they  attacked  him  all 
together.  But  Cuchulain  was  not  long  in  making  an 
end  of  them,  and  he  struck  off  their  heads,  and  put  them 
on  twelve  stones  ;  and  he  put  Ferchu's  head  on  a  stone 
by  itself. 

Then  the  men  of  Ireland  consulted  together  again 
who  they  would  send  out  to  fight  on  the  next  day  ;  and 


220    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

it  is  what  they  all  said,  that  it  was  Calatin  and  his 
twenty-seven  sons  and  his  sister's  son,  Glas,  son  of 
Delga,  should  go  out.  Now  it  is  the  way  they  were, 
every  man  of  them  had  poison  in  himself  and  in  his 
weapons ;  and  there  was  not  one  of  them  ever  made  a 
cast  of  a  spear  or  a  stone  that  missed,  and  there  was  no 
one  that  would  be  wounded  by  them  but  he  would  die, 
either  on  the  spot  or  within  the  week.  So  great  rewards 
were  promised  them,  if  they  would  go  out  against 
Cuchulain.  And  Fergus  was  there  at  the  time  the 
business  was  knotted.  "  And  surely,"  every  one  said, 
"  they  are  only  one  man,  for  they  are  all  members  of 
Calatin's  body."  After  that,  Fergus  went  into  his  tent, 
to  his  people,  and  he  gave  a  deep  groan  of  trouble,  and 
he  said  :  "  My  grief  for  the  thing  that  is  to  be  done  to- 
morrow." "  What  thing  is  that  ? "  said  they  all. 
''  Cuchulain  to  be  killed,"  he  said.  "  Who  would  kill 
him  ?  "  said  they.  "  Calatin  and  his  sons,"  he  said,  "  and 
if  there  is  any  one  of  you  would  go  and  watch  the  fight 
and  bring  me  word  what  happens,  I  would  give  him  a 
good  reward,  and  my  blessing."  "  I  will  go,"  said 
Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba. 

So  in  the  morning  Calatin,  with  his  sons  and  his 
sister's  son,  rose  up  and  went  to  where  Cuchulain  was, 
and  Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba,  went  along  with  them.  And 
as  soon  as  they  came  near  him,  they  threw  their  twenty- 
nine  spears  at  him  all  together,  in  one  cast,  and  not  one 
of  them  drew  blood,  for  he  caught  them  all  on  his 
shield.  Then  Cuchulain  drew  his  sword  from  the  sheath 
to  hack  off  the  spears  and  to  lighten  his  shield  ;  but 
while  he  was  doing  that,  they  all  ran  at  him  as  one  man 
and  put  their  twenty-nine  right  hands  on  his  head,  and 
forced  his  face  down  to  the  gravel  and  the  sand  of  the 
ford.  And  he  gave  out  his  great  hero  cry,  and  the  cry 
of  a  man  in  unequal  fight,  and  there  was  not  a  man  in 
the  camp,  and  he  not  dead  or  asleep,  but  heard  it. 


FIACHA,   A    DEBT  221 

Then  Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba,  came  up,  and  when  he 
saw  what  had  happened,  the  love  of  his  own  countryman 
came  over  him,  and  he  pulled  out  his  sword  and  hit  the 
nine-and-twenty  hands  off  Calatin  and  his  sons,  with 
one  blow.  Cuchulain  raised  up  his  head  then,  and  gave 
a  deep  sigh  of  relief,  and  he  saw  who  it  was  had  come 
to  his  help.  "  That  was  done  quiet  and  easy,  my  good 
comrade,"  he  said.  "  You  may  think  it  is  quiet  and 
easy  I  was,"  said  Fiacha,  "  but  if  what  I  did  is  heard  of 
in  the  camp,  the  reward  that  will  fall  on  me  will  not  be 
quiet  and  easy.  For  if  the  men  of  the  children  of 
Rudraige  should  hear  of  the  stroke  I  made  for  you,  it  is 
with  sword  and  spear  my  reward  will  be  paid."  "  I  give 
you  my  word,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  that  now  I  have  lifted 
my  head  and  got  my  breath  again,  unless  you  tell  tales 
on  yourself,  none  of  these  men  will  tell  tales  on  you." 

With  that  he  made  an  attack  on  Calatin  and  his  sons, 
and  he  began  to  hack  and  to  cut  at  them  till  there  was 
nothing  left  of  them  but  limbs  and  little  pieces  eastward 
and  westward  over  the  whole  face  of  the  ford.  Only 
one  man  of  them,  Glas,  son  of  Delga,  got  away  and  ran, 
but  Cuchulain  rushed  after  him  and  gave  him  a  great 
blow.  But  he  got  as  far  as  Ailell  and  Maeve's  tent,  and 
all  he  could  say  was,  "  Fiacha !  Fiacha ! "  before  he  fell 
dead. 

Fergus  and  Maeve  said  :  "  What  debts  are  those  he 
called  out  about  ?  " — for  Fiacha  is  the  word  for  a  debt  in 
Irish.  "  I  do  not  know  indeed,"  said  Fergus,  "  unless 
it  might  be  that  some  one  in  the  camp  owed  him  a  debt, 
and  that  it  was  on  his  mind."  "  That  must  have  been 
so,"  said  Ailell.  "  By  my  word,"  said  Fergus,  "  however 
it  was,  all  his  debts  are  paid  now." 

And  at  the  ford  where  Calatin  and  his  sons  got  their 
death,  there  is  a  stone  with  the  marks  of  their  sword- 
hilts,  and  the  butt-ends  of  their  spears  on  it  to  this  day. 

Then  it  was  settled  by  the  men  of  Ireland  that  it  was 


222    WAR   FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

Ferdiad,  son  of  Daire,  the  great  champion  of  the  men 
of  Domnand,  should  go  out  and  meet  Cuchulain  the 
next  day.  For  they  had  the  same  way  of  fighting,  and 
it  was  with  the  same  teachers  they  had  learned  the 
knowledge  of  arms,  with  Scathach  and  with  Uathach 
and  with  Aoife ;  and  neither  of  them  had  an  advantage 
over  the  other,  except  that  Cuchulain  had  the  feat  of 
the  Gae  Bulg.  But  Ferdiad  had  good  armour  to  pro- 
tect him  against  any  man  he  would  fight  with. 

So  they  sent  messengers  to  bring  Ferdiad,  but  he 
refused  and  would  not  come,  for  he  knew  it  was  what 
they  wanted  of  him,  to  fight  against  his  friend,  his 
companion  and  his  fellow  pupil,  Cuchulain. 

Then  Maeve  sent  the  Druids  and  the  satirists  to  him, 
that  they  might  make  three  hurtful  satires  and  three  hill- 
top satires  on  him,  if  he  would  not  come  with  them,  that 
would  raise  three  blisters  on  his  face.  Shame  and  Blemish 
and  Reproach,  so  that  if  he  did  not  die  on  the  moment, 
he  would  be  dead  before  the  end  of  nine  days. 

Then  Ferdiad  came  with  them  for  the  sake  of  his 
good  name,  for  he  thought  it  better  to  fall  by  spears 
than  by  satires.  And  when  he  came  he  was  received 
with  honour  and  attendance,  and  he  was  served  with 
pleasant  drinks,  so  that  he  grew  merry,  and  his  mind 
was  confused.  And  great  rewards  were  offered  him  if 
he  would  go  out  against  Cuchulain ;  clothes  of  all 
colours  for  his  men,  and  speckled  satins,  and  silver 
and  gold,  and  the  equal  of  his  own  lands  of  the  level 
plains  of  Magh  Ai,  without  rent  or  disturbance,  secure 
to  his  son  and  to  his  grandson  and  to  their  children  to 
the  end  of  life  and  time. 

And  it  is  what  Maeve  said  :  "  It  is  a  great  reward  I  am 
giving  you,  Ferdiad,  and  why  would  you  not  accept  it  ? " 
And  Ferdiad  was  making  excuses.  "  I  will  not  take 
your  reward  without  good  pledges,"  he  said,  "  for  it  is  a 
heavy   fight  is   before   me ;  he   that   has   the   name  of 


MAEVE   AND    FERDIAD  223 

Cuchulain  is  surely  a  good  Hound."  "  I  will  give  you 
a  champion's  pledge,"  said  Maeve ;  "  you  will  not  be 
bound  to  come  to  our  gatherings,  you  will  get  horses 
and  bridles ;  I  will  call  you  my  friend  above  all  other 
men."  "  I  will  not  go  to  this  fight,"  said  Ferdiad, 
"  without  some  other  securities,  for  this  is  a  fight  will 
be  heard  of  till  the  end  of  life  and  time."  "  Take  all 
you  want,"  said  Maeve.  "  There  is  no  delay  except  with 
yourself  Bind  us  till  you  are  satisfied  by  the  right 
hand  of  kings  and  of  princes ;  there  is  nothing  I  will 
refuse  you."  "  I  must  have  six  securities  and  no  less," 
said  Ferdiad,  "  before  I  will  go  out  and  be  destroyed  by 
Cuchulain,  and  all  the  whole  army  looking  on."  "  I  will 
give  you  whatever  securities  you  want,"  said  Maeve, 
"  however  hard  it  may  be  to  come  at  them  ;  Domnall 
in  his  chariot ;  Niaman  of  the  Slaughter,  both  of  them 
protectors  of  bards ;  bind  Morann  if  you  want  sure 
payment ;  bind  Carpre  Min  of  Manand,  he  that  has  a 
string  of  knowledge  in  his  harp ;  bind  our  own  two 
sons."  "  O  Maeve,  it  is  a  bitter  woman  you  are,"  said 
Ferdiad.  "  And  it  is  not  a  gentle  wife  to  a  husband  you 
are,  but  it  is  a  fit  queen  you  are  for  Cruachan  of  the 
Swords,  with  your  high  talk  and  your  fierce  strength. 
But  in  spite  of  all  the  words  you  are  stirring  me  up 
with,"  he  said,  "if  you  would  offer  me  the  land  and 
the  sea,  I  would  not  take  them,  without  the  sun  and  the 
moon  along  with  them."  "You  need  not  wait  longer 
than  to-day  and  to-morrow,"  said  Maeve,  "  before  you 
will  get  your  fill  of  all  sorts  of  the  jewels  of  the 
earth.  And  here  is  my  brooch  with  its  hooked  pin," 
she  said  ;  "  and  more  than  all  that,  Ferdiad,  so  soon  as 
you  have  killed  this  Hound  of  feats,  I  will  give  you 
Findabair  of  the  champions,  queen  of  the  west  of 
Elga."  ^ 

Ferdiad  gave  in  to  her  then,  and  he  bound  her  on  the 
sureties   of  the   aforesaid   six  for  the  fulfilment  of  her 


224    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

promises   of  the  reward  ;  and  she  bound  him  to  fight 
with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow. 

Then  Fergus  got  his  horses  harnessed  and  his  chariot 
yoked,  and  he  went  out  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  to  tell 
him  of  all  that  had  happened.  "  My  welcome  before 
you,  my  master  Fergus,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  glad 
of  that  welcome,  my  pupil,"  said  Fergus.  "  But  what  I 
am  come  for  is  to  tell  you  who  it  is  that  is  coming  to 
fight  at  the  early  hour  of  the  morning  of  to-morrow." 
"  I  will  listen  to  that,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Your  own 
friend  and  companion,  and  fellow-pupil,  the  man  that 
learned  the  use  of  arms  with  you,  Ferdiad,  son  of  Daire, 
the  hero  of  the  men  of  Domnand."  "  I  give  my  word," 
said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  not  my  wish,  my  friend  to  come 
out  against  me."  "  And  now,"  said  Fergus,  "  you  must 
be  careful  and  ready  more  than  any  other  time,  for  there 
was  not  the  like  of  Ferdiad  among  any  of  the  men  who 
have  fought  you  up  to  this."  "  I  am  here,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "  hindering  and  delaying  the  four  great 
provinces  of  Ireland,  from  the  beginning  of  the  winter 
to  the  beginning  of  spring,  and  I  have  not  drawn  back 
one  foot  before  any  man  in  that  time,  and  I  think  it 
likely  I  will  not  draw  back  before  him."  "  Neither  has 
Ferdiad  any  fear  on  him  before  you,  now  his  anger  is 
stirred  up,"  said  Fergus,  "  and  besides  that,  he  has  good 
armour  to  protect  him."  "  Be  quiet  now,  Fergus,  and 
do  not  let  me  hear  any  more  of  that  story,"  said 
Cuchulain.  "  I  was  always  well  able  to  stand  against 
him  in  any  place,  or  on  any  ground."  "It  is  not  easy  to 
get  the  better  of  him,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  he  is  fierce  in 
fighting,  and  he  has  the  strength  of  a  hundred."  "  There 
will  be  a  sharp  fight  when  myself  and  Ferdiad  come  to 
the  ford,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  it  will  not  be  without  being 
told  in  stories."  "  O  Cuchulain  of  the  red  sword,"  said 
Fergus,  "  it  would  be  better  to  me  than  a  great  reward, 
you   to   carry  proud  Ferdiad's  purple  cloak  eastward." 


FERDIAD    AND    HIS    DRIVER      225 

"  I  give  my  word  and  my  oath,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  I 
myself  will  get  the  victory  over  Ferdiad."  Then  Fergus 
went  back  to  the  encampment. 

At  the  same  time  Ferdiad  went  to  his  tent  and  to  his 
people,  and  told  them  how  he  was  bound  by  Maeve  to 
fight  with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow,  and  he  told  how  he 
had  bound  Maeve  by  six  sureties  for  the  fulfilment  of 
her  promises,  if  Cuchulain  should  fall  by  him. 

It  is  not  happy  in  their  minds  the  people  of  Ferdiad's 
tent  were  that  night,  but  gloomy  and  heavy-hearted  ;  for 
they  were  sure  that  wherever  Cuchulain  and  Ferdiad 
would  meet,  it  was  there  one  of  them  would  get  his 
death,  and  they  were  sure  that  one  would  be  their  own 
master ;  for  no  one  at  all  had  been  able  to  stand  against 
Cuchulain  since  the  beginning  of  the  war. 

Ferdiad  slept  through  the  early  part  of  the  night  very 
heavily,  and  when  the  latter  end  of  the  night  came,  his 
sleep  went  from  him,  and  his  drunkenness  had  passed 
away,  and  the  thought  of  the  fight  was  pressing  on  him. 
And  he  bade  his  driver  to  harness  the  horses,  and  to 
yoke  his  chariot.  But  the  driver  tried  to  turn  him  from  it. 
"  It  would  be  better  for  you  to  stop  here  than  to  go,"  he 
said,  "  for  my  liking  of  it  is  not  more  than  my  disliking." 

"  Be  silent,  boy,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  for  I  will  not  be 
turned  from  this  journey  by  any  young  lad ;  but  I  will 
go  to  the  ford,  a  ford  the  ravens  will  be  croaking  over ; 
I  will  fight  with  Cuchulain  till  I  wound  his  strong  body, 
till  I  crush  the  courage  out  of  him  the  way  that  he  will 
die." 

"  It  would  be  better  for  you  to  stop  here,"  said  the 
driver,  "  for  it  is  not  gentle  your  threats  are  ;  your  parting 
will  be  sorrowful ;  there  is  one  to  whom  it  will  be  a 
sickness  ;  grief  will  come  of  that  meeting  with  Cuchulain  ; 
it  is  long  it  will  be  remembered  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  him  who 
goes  that  journey."  "  It  is  not  right  what  you  are 
saying,"  said   Ferdiad  ;  "  it  is  not  for  a   brave  man  to 

P 


226    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

refuse — it  is  not  in  our  race.  I  will  delay  no  longer, 
courage  is  better  than  fear ;  let  us  set  out  now  to  the 
ford." 

Then  Ferdiad's  horses  were  harnessed,  and  his  chariot 
was  yoked,  and  he  went  forward  to  the  ford,  and  the  day 
with  its  full  light  came  upon  him  there.  "  Now,  boy," 
he  said,  "  spread  out  the  skins  and  the  cushions  of  my 
chariot  under  me  here,  until  I  get  some  sleep  and  rest, 
for  I  got  no  sleep  at  the  end  of  the  night,  with  the  care 
of  the  fight  upon  me." 

So  his  servant  unharnessed  the  horses,  and  settled  the 
skins  and  cushions  of  the  chariot  under  him,  and  the 
hea\y  rest  of  sleep  came  upon  him. 

But  as  to  Cuchulain,  he  did  not  rise  up  at  all  till  the 
day  had  come  with  its  full  light,  the  way  the  men  of 
Ireland  would  not  say  it  was  fear  that  was  on  him  that 
made  him  rise.  And  when  the  day  came  :  "  It  would  be 
as  well,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  to  yoke  the  chariot,  for  it  is  an 
early-rising  man  that  is  coming  to  meet  us  to-day." 

"  The  horses  are  harnessed,  and  the  chariot  is  yoked," 
said  Laeg ;  "  let  you  get  into  it,  and  there  will  be  no 
hindrance  to  your  courage." 

With  that  the  ready-handed,  battle-winning  son  of 
Sualtim  leaped  into  the  chariot,  and  there  shouted 
around  him  the  Bocanachs  and  Bananachs,  and  witches 
of  the  valley.  For  the  Sidhe  were  used  to  set  up  their 
shouts  around  him,  the  way  the  fear  and  the  wonder 
would  be  great  before  him  in  every  fight  he  would  go 
into. 

And  it  was  not  long  until  Ferdiad's  driver  heard  the 
noise  coming  near,  the  straining  of  the  harness,  the 
creaking  of  the  chariot,  the  ringing  of  the  armour  and 
of  the  shield,  the  trampling  of  the  horses,  the  joyful 
coming  of  Cuchulain  to  the  ford. 

The  driver  came  and  laid  his  hand  on  his  master. 
"  Good  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  rise  up  ;  here  they  are  coming. 


THE   COMING   OF   CUCHULAIN     227 

"  For  I  hear,"  he  said,  "  the  creaking  of  a  chariot ;  it 
has  come  over  Breg  Ross,  over  Braine ;  it  has  come  over 
the  highway  by  the  foot  of  Baile-in-Bile ;  he  is  a  mighty 
Hound  that  urges  it ;  he  is  a  good  driver  that  yokes  it  ; 
he  is  a  free  hawk  that  hurries  his  horses  towards  the 
south.  It  is  not  he  that  will  be  slow  in  the  fight.  It  is 
a  pity  for  him  that  is  on  the  height  waiting  for  the 
Hound  of  valour.  It  is  a  year  ago  I  foretold  there  would 
come  a  Hound,  the  Hound  of  Emain,  a  Hound  with  all 
colours  about  him — the  Hound  of  Ulster,  the  Hound  of 
Battle ;  I  hear  him — I  have  heard  him  coming." 

"  Good  servant,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  why  is  it  you  have 
been  praising  that  man  ever  since  you  came  out  from 
the  house  ?  It  is  likely  you  are  not  without  wages  for 
your  great  praise  of  him.  Yet  it  has  been  foretold  to  me 
by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve,  it  is  he  that  will  fall  by  me. 
And  it  is  a  time  to  help  me,"  he  said  ;  "  and  let  you  be 
silent,  and  give  up  praising  him,  that  your  foretelling 
may  not  come  true.  It  is  not  for  you  to  give  up  on  the 
brink  of  the  fight ;  surely  I  will  soon  have  the  reward." 

And  the  driver  said  :  "  He  is  coming,  not  slowly,  but 
quick  as  the  wind,  or  as  water  from  a  high  cliff,  or  like 
swift  thunder."  "  Surely  you  have  taken  wages  for  these 
great  praises  you  put  upon  him,"  said  Ferdiad  ;  "  it  is  not 
against  him  you  are,  but  praising  him,  and  putting  a 
great  name  on  him." 

It  was  not  long  then  until  Ferdiad  saw  Cuchulain 
coming  towards  him  in  his  chariot,  and  it  is  how  his  two 
horses  were  going,  like  a  hawk  sweeping  from  a  cliff  on 
a  day  of  hard  wind,  or  like  a  sweeping  gust  of  the  spring 
wind  on  a  March  day  over  a  smooth  plain,  or  like  the  swift- 
ness of  a  wild  stag  when  he  is  first  started  by  the  hounds 
in  his  first  field  ;  as  if  they  were  on  fiery  flagstones,  so  that 
the  earth  was  shaking  and  trembling  with  the  quickness 
of  their  going. 

So  Cuchulain  reached  the  ford,  and  Ferdiad  came  to 


228    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

the  south  side,  and  Cuchulain  drew  up  on  the  north  side, 
and  Ferdiad  bade  Cuchulain  welcome.  "  I  am  happy  at 
your  coming,  Cuchulain,"  he  said.  "  I  would  have  been 
glad  of  that  welcome  up  to  this  time,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  but  to-day  I  do  not  take  it  as  the  welcome  of  a  friend. 
And  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  it  would  be  fitter  for  me  to 
welcome  you  than  for  you  to  welcome  me,  for  it  is  you 
have  come  to  me  in  the  country  and  province  where  I 
am,  and  it  is  not  right  for  you  to  come  to  fight  with  me, 
but  it  is  I  should  go  to  fight  with  you,  for  it  is  out  before 
you  are  the  women  and  the  children,  the  young  men  and 
the  horses,  the  flocks,  the  herds,  and  the  cattle  of  the 
province  of  Ulster." 

"Good  Cuchulain,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  what  has  brought 
you  to  fight  with  me  at  all  ?  For  when  we  were  with 
Scathach  and  with  Uathach  and  with  Aoife,  you  were 
my  serving-boy,  to  tie  up  my  spears  and  to  make  ready 
my  bed."  "  That  is  true  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  but 
it  was  as  less  in  age  than  you  I  was  used  to  do  so ;  but 
that  is  not  the  story  that  will  be  told  of  us  after  this  day, 
for  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  whole  world  I  would  not 
fight  to-day." 

And  it  is  then  each  of  them  spoke  sharp,  unfriendly 
words  against  the  other ;  and  it  is  what  Ferdiad  said  : 
"  What  has  brought  you,  O  Hound,  to  fight  with  a  strong 
fighter?  It  is  red  your  blood  will  be,  flowing  over  the 
harness  of  your  horses  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  your  journey  ;  it 
is  long  it  will  be  spoken  of;  you  will  be  in  much  want  of 
healing  if  you  ever  get  back  to  your  own  house,"  he  said. 

"  I  have  fought  with  heroes,  with  chiefs  of  armies,  with 
troops,  with  hundreds  before  now,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  and  what  I  have  to  do  to-day  is  to  make  an  end  of  you, 
to  bring  you  down  in  our  first  path  of  battle." 

"  You  have  met  now  with  a  man  that  will  put  re- 
proach on  you,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  for  it  is  I  myself  will  do 
that.     It  is  well  the  loss  of  the  men  of  Ulster  will  be 


BEFORE   THE    FIGHT  229 

remembered,"  he  said,  "  their  champion  to  be  put  down, 
and  they  looking  on." 

"  What  way  shall  we  meet  one  another  ? "  said 
Cuchulain.  "  Is  it  in  our  chariots  we  had  best  fight,  or 
is  it  with  my  sword  and  spear  I  am  to  overthrow  you,  if 
the  time  has  come  ?  "  And  Ferdiad  said  :  "  Before  the 
setting  of  the  sun  to-night,  you  will  be  fighting  as  if  with 
a  mountain,  and  it  is  not  white  that  battle  will  be.  The 
men  of  Ulster  will  be  shouting  for  you,"  he  said,  "  till  you 
grow  overbold  ;  but  it  is  sorrowful  they  will  be,  when  your 
ghost  passes  over  them  and  through  them."  "  You  are 
fallen  into  the  gap  of  danger,  Ferdiad,"  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  the  end  of  your  life  has  come,  not  by  treachery,  but  by 
sharp  weapons.  You  may  think  much  of  yourself  till 
we  meet  one  another,  but  you  will  never  fight  in  a  battle 
again,  from  this  day  to  the  end  of  time."  "  Leave  off 
now  from  your  boastings,"  said  Ferdiad ;  "  it  is  you  are 
the  greatest  boaster  in  the  world.  I  know  well  you  are 
no  fighter  at  all,  you  heart  of  a  bird  in  a  cage ;  you  are 
but  a  giggling  fellow,  without  courage,  without  strength." 
But  Cuchulain  said :  "  When  we  were  together  with 
Scathach,  we  used  to  be  practising  together,  we  used  to 
go  to  every  battle  together,  because  of  our  bravery  that 
was  equal.  You  were  my  heart  companion,  you  were 
my  people,  you  were  my  family — I  never  found  one  was 
dearer ;  it  is  sorrowful  your  death  would  be  to  me." 

"  Where  is  the  use  of  all  this  talk  ?  "  said  Ferdiad  ;  "  your 
great  name  will  be  lost,  your  head  will  be  on  a  stake 
before  the  crowing  of  the  cock.  Madness  and  grief  are 
taking  hold  of  you,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  and  it  is  bad 
treatment  you  will  get  from  me,  because  it  is  on  your- 
self the  fault  is." 

"  Good  Ferdiad,"  Cuchulain  said  then,  "  it  was  not  right 
for  you  to  come  out  against  me,  through  the  stirring  up 
and  the  meddling  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve  ;  and  none  of 
those  who  came  before  you  got  victory  or  success,  but 


230    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

they  all  fell  by  me,  and  you  will  fall  along  with  them. 
And,  O  Ferdiad,  strong  fighter,"  he  said,  "do  not 
come  against  me ;  the  meeting  will  bring  sorrow  to 
many,  and  what  is  worse  than  sorrow  to  you.  Have 
you  not  been  bought  with  many  presents  ?  A  purple 
belt,  a  suit  of  armour  ?  But,  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  the 
woman  for  whom  you  are  come  to  this  fight,  Findabair, 
daughter  of  Maeve,  however  comely  she  may  be,  will 
never  be  given  to  you  ;  for  she  has  been  offered  to  many 
before  you,"  he  said,  "  and  many  like  you  have  been 
wounded  for  her  sake. 

"  Do  not  break  your  oath  not  to  fight  with  me  ;  do  not 
break  friendship.  Do  not  break  the  word  you  gave  me, 
do  not  come  against  me. 

"  The  woman  has  been  promised  to  fifty  others  ;  it 
was  a  heavy  gift  for  them  ;  it  is  by  me  they  were  sent 
to  their  grave ;  it  is  by  me  they  got  the  end  that  was 
fitting  for  them. 

"  Though  Ferbaeth  was  boastful,  he  who  had  a  house- 
ful of  brave  men,  it  is  short  the  time  was  till  I  quieted 
his  rage  ;  I  killed  him  by  the  one  cast. 

"  The  striking  down  of  Srub  Daire's  courage  was 
bitter  to  him ;  it  is  he  held  the  secrets  of  a  hundred 
women  ;  he  had  a  great  name  at  one  time  ;  it  is  not 
silver  thread  but  gold  thread  was  in  his  clothes. 

"  If  it  were  to  me  the  woman  was  promised  on  whom 
the  kings  of  the  fair  province  smile,  I  would  not  bring 
the  red  blood  on  your  body  for  it,  south  or  north,  east 
or  west. 

"  And  good  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  this  is  why  it  is  not 
right  for  you  to  come  to  this  fight.  When  we  were  with 
Scathach,  it  is  together  we  used  to  go  to  every  battle, 
to  every  wild  place,  through  every  darkness  and  every 
hardship.  We  were  heart  companions  ;  we  were  com- 
rades in  gatherings ;  we  shared  the  one  bed  where  we 
used  to  sleep   sound    sleep.     We   used   to   practise  to- 


THE    FIGHT   WITH    FERDIAD      231 

gether,  in  many  far  countries ;  we  used  to  go  to  hard 
fights ;  we  used  to  go  through  every  forest  together." 

"  O  Cuchulain  of  the  wonderful  feats,"  said  Ferdiad, 
"  although  we  learned  knowledge  together,  and  although 
I  know  the  bonds  friendship  put  upon  us,  it  is  I  that 
will  give  you  your  first  wounds  ;  do  not  be  remembering 
our  companionship,  for  it  will  not  protect  you.  And  it 
is  too  long  we  are  delaying  like  this,"  he  said  ;  "  and 
what  arms  shall  we  use  to-day,  Cuchulain  ?  " 

"  It  is  you  have  the  choice  of  arms  to-day,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  you  were  the  first  to  reach  the 
ford."  "Do  you  remember  at  all,"  said  Ferdiad,  "the 
casting  spears  we  used  to  practise  with  Scathach  and 
with  Uacthach  and  with  Aoife  ?  "  "I  remember  them 
indeed,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  If  you  remember,  let  us 
begin  with  them,"  said  Ferdiad. 

So  they  began  with  their  casting  weapons,  and  they 
took  their  protecting  shields,  and  their  round-handled 
spears,  and  their  little  quill  spears,  and  their  ivory- 
hilted  knives,  and  their  ivory-hafted  spears,  eight  of 
each  of  them  they  had.  And  these  were  flying  from 
them  and  to  them  like  bees  on  the  wing  on  a  fine 
summer  day ;  there  was  no  cast  that  did  not  hit,  and 
each  one  went  on  shooting  at  the  other  with  those 
weapons  from  the  twilight  of  the  early  morning  to  the 
full  midday,  until  all  their  weapons  were  blunted  against 
the  faces  and  the  bosses  of  the  shields.  And  as  good 
as  the  throwing  was,  the  defence  was  so  good  that  neither 
of  them  drew  blood  from  the  other  through  that  time. 

"  Let  us  leave  these  weapons  now,  Cuchulain,"  said 
Ferdiad,  "  for  it  is  not  by  the  like  of  them  our  fight  will 
be  settled."  "  Let  us  leave  them  indeed  if  the  time  is 
come,"  said  Cuchulain. 

They  stopped  then,  and  threw  their  darts  into  the 
hands  of  their  chariot-drivers.  "  What  weapons  shall 
we  use  now,  Cuchulain  ?  "  said  Ferdiad.     "  The  choice  of 


232    WARFORBULLOFCUAILGNE 

weapons  is  yours  till  night,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Let  us, 
then,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  take  to  our  straight  spears,  with 
the  flaxen  strings  in  them."  "  Let  us  now  indeed,"  said 
Cuchulain.  And  then  they  took  two  stout  shields,  and 
they  took  to  their  spears. 

Each  of  them  went  on  throwing  at  the  other  with 
the  spears  from  the  middle  of  mid-day  until  the  fall  of 
evening.  And  good  as  the  defence  was,  yet  the 
throwing  was  so  good  that  each  of  them  wounded  the 
other  in  that  time. 

"  Let  us  leave  this  now,"  said  Ferdiad.  "  Let  us  leave 
it  indeed  if  the  time  has  come,"  said  Cuchulain. 

So  they  left  off,  and  they  threw  their  spears  away 
from  them  into  the  hands  of  their  chariot-drivers.  Each 
of  them  came  to  the  other  then,  and  each  put  his  hands 
round  the  neck  of  the  other,  and  gave  him  three  kisses. 
Their  horses  were  in  the  one  enclosure  that  night,  and 
their  chariot-drivers  at  the  one  fire ;  and  their  chariot- 
drivers  spread  beds  of  green  rushes  for  them,  with 
wounded  men's  pillows  on  them.  The  men  that  had 
knowledge  of  healing  came  then,  and  put  herbs  of  heal- 
ing to  their  wounds.  And  of  every  herb  and  plant  that 
was  put  to  Cuchulain's  wounds,  he  would  send  an  equal 
share  from  him  westward  over  the  ford  to  Ferdiad,  the 
way  the  men  of  Ireland  might  not  say  if  Ferdiad  should 
fall  by  him,  that  it  was  by  better  means  of  cure  he  was 
able  to  overcome  him. 

And  of  every  kind  of  food  and  of  drink  that  was  sent 
by  the  men  of  Ireland  to  Ferdiad,  he  would  send  a  fair 
share  over  the  ford  northward  to  Cuchulain  ;  because  the 
providers  of  Ferdiad  were  more  than  the  providers  of 
Cuchulain.  All  the  men  of  Ireland  were  providers  to 
Ferdiad  for  beating  off  Cuchulain  from  them,  but  only 
the  Bregians  were  providers  to  Cuchulain.  They  used 
to  come  and  to  be  talking  with  him  at  the  dusk  of  every 
night. 


THESECONDDAY  233 

They  rested  there  that  night,  and  they  rose  up  early 
on  the  morrow,  and  came  forward  to  the  ford  of  battle. 

"  What  weapons  shall  we  use  to-day,  Ferdiad  ? " 
said  Cuchulain.  "  It  is  you  have  the  choice  of  weapons 
until  night,"  said  Ferdiad,  "because  I  had  my  choice 
of  them  the  last  day."  "  Let  us  then,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  take  to  our  great  broad  spears  to-day  ;  for  we  shall  be 
nearer  to  the  end  of  our  battle  by  the  thrusting  to-day 
than  we  were  by  the  throwing  yesterday." 

Each  of  them  continued  to  cut,  and  to  wound,  and  to 
redden  the  other,  from  the  twilight  of  the  early  morning 
till  the  fall  of  the  evening.  If  it  were  the  custom  for 
birds  in  their  flight  to  pass  through  the  bodies  of  men, 
they  could  have  passed  through  their  bodies  on  that 
day,  and  they  could  have  carried  pieces  of  flesh  and 
blood  through  their  stabs  and  cuts,  into  the  clouds  and 
the  sky  all  around.  And  when  the  fall  of  evening  came, 
their  horses  were  tired,  and  their  chariot-drivers  were 
down-hearted,  and  they  were  tired  themselves  as  well. 

"  Let  us  stop  from  this  now,  Ferdiad,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"for  our  horses  are  tired,  and  our  chariot-drivers  are 
down-hearted  ;  and  when  they  are  tired,  why  would  not 
we  be  tired  as  well  ?  And  we  are  not  bound  to  go  on 
for  ever,"  he  said,  "  as  is  the  custom  with  the  Fomor. 
Let  us  put  the  quarrel  away  for  a  while,  now  the  noise 
of  the  fighting  is  over."  "  Let  us  leave  off  indeed  if  the 
time  is  come,"  said  Ferdiad. 

They  threw  their  spears  from  them  then  into  the 
hands  of  their  chariot-drivers,  and  each  of  them  came 
towards  the  other.  Each  of  them  put  his  hand  round 
the  neck  of  the  other  and  gave  him  three  kisses.  Their 
horses  were  in  the  one  enclosure  that  night,  and  their 
chariot-drivers  at  the  one  fire. 

Their  chariot-drivers  made  beds  of  green  rushes  for 
them,  with  wounded  men's  pillows  on  them,  and  the  men 
that  had  knowledge  of  healing  came  to  examine  them 


234    WAR    FOR    BULL    OF   CUAILGNE 

that  night,  but  they  could  do  nothing  more  for  them, 
because  of  the  deepness  of  their  many  wounds,  but  to 
use  charms  and  spells  on  them,  to  staunch  their 
blood.  Every  charm  and  every  spell  that  was  used 
on  the  wounds  of  Cuchulain,  he  sent  a  full  share  of 
them  over  the  ford  westward  to  Ferdiad.  And  of  every 
sort  of  food  and  of  drink  that  was  sent  to  Ferdiad,  he 
sent  a  share  of  them  over  the  ford  northward  to 
Cuchulain. 

They  rested  there  that  night,  and  they  rose  up  early 
on  the  morrow,  and  they  came  forward  to  the  ford  of 
battle.  Cuchulain  saw  a  sort  of  a  dark  look  on  Ferdiad 
that  day.  "  It  is  bad  you  are  looking  to-day,  Ferdiad," 
he  said ;  "  there  is  a  darkness  on  your  face,  and  a  heavi- 
ness on  your  eyes,  and  your  own  appearance  is  gone 
from  you."  "  It  is  not  from  fear  or  dread  of  you  I  am 
like  this  to-day,"  said  Ferdiad ;  "  for  there  is  not  a 
champion  in  Ireland  to-day  I  could  not  put  down." 
And  Cuchulain  was  fretted  to  see  him  that  way,  and 
it  is  what  he  said  :  "  O  Ferdiad,  if  it  is  you  yourself,  I  am 
sure  you  are  a  miserable  man,  to  have  come  at  the 
bidding  of  a  woman  to  fight  against  your  own  com- 
panion." But  Ferdiad  said :  "  O  Cuchulain,  giver  of 
wounds,  true  hero,  every  man  must  come  in  the  end  to 
the  sod  where  his  last  grave  shall  be." 

"  As  to  Findabair,  daughter  of  Maeve,"  said  Cuchulain, 
"  whatever  her  beauty  may  be,  it  is  not  for  love  of  you 
she  was  given  to  you,  but  only  for  the  sake  of  your  great 
strength."  "  O  Hound  of  the  gentle  sway,"  said  Ferdiad, 
"  it  is  long  ago  my  strength  was  tried  ;  but  I  never  heard 
of  any  man  braver  in  fight  than  yourself;  I  never  met  so 
brave  a  man  until  to-day."  "  It  is  your  own  fault  what 
has  happened,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  you  to  have  come  at 
the  bidding  of  a  woman  to  try  your  sword  against  your 
fellow."  "If  I  had  gone  back,"  said  Ferdiad,  "without 
doing   battle  with  you,  it  is   little   my    name   and    my 


THE   THIRD   DAY  235 

word  would  be  thought  of  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve  of 
Cruachan."  "  No  one  has  ever  put  food  to  his  lips,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "  and  no  one  has  ever  been  born  in  honour  of 
a  king  or  queen,  for  whose  sake  I  would  have  harmed 
you."  "  O  Cuchulain,  winner  of  battles,"  said  Ferdiad  ; 
"  it  was  not  you  but  Maeve  that  betrayed  me  ;  let  you 
take  the  victory  and  the  fame,  for  it  is  not  on  you  the 
blame  is." 

And  Cuchulain  said :  "  My  faithful  heart  is  like  a  clot 
of  blood ;  my  life  is  nearly  gone  from  me ;  I  have  no 
strength  for  high  deeds,  fighting  with  you,  Ferdiad." 
"  Much  as  you  are  complaining  over  me  now,"  said 
Ferdiad,  "  what  arms  shall  we  use  to-day  ?  "  "  It  is  you 
have  the  choice  to-day,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  because  it  was 
I  had  it  yesterday."  "  Let  us  then,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  take 
to  our  swords  to-day,  for  we  will  be  nearer  the  end  of 
our  battle  by  the  hewing  to-day,  than  we  were  by  the 
thrusting  yesterday."  "  Let  us  do  so  indeed,"  said 
Cuchulain. 

And  then  they  put  two  long  wide  shields  on  them, 
and  they  took  to  their  swords,  and  each  of  them 
continued  to  hack  at  the  other,  from  the  dawn  of  the 
early  morning  till  the  time  of  the  fall  of  evening.  "  Let 
us  leave  off  from  this  now,"  said  Cuchulain.  So  they 
left  off. 

They  threw  their  swords  from  them  into  the  hands  of 
their  chariot-drivers,  and  it  was  the  parting,  mournful, 
sorrowful,  downhearted,  of  two  men  that  night. 

Their  horses  were  not  in  the  one  enclosure  that  night, 
their  chariot-drivers  were  not  at  the  one  fire.  They 
rested  that  night  there. 

And  Ferdiad  rose  up  early  next  morning,  and  went 
forward  by  himself  to  the  ford.  For  he  knew  that  day 
would  decide  the  fight,  and  he  knew  one  of  them  would 
fall  on  that  day  there,  or  they  would  both  fall. 

And  then  he  put  on  his  battle  suit,  before  the  coming 


236    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

of  Cuchulain  to  him.  He  put  on  his  shirt  of  striped 
silk,  with  its  border  of  speckled  gold,  next  his  white 
skin.  He  put  on  his  coat  of  brown  leather,  well  sewed, 
over  the  outside.  He  put  on  his  apron  of  purified  iron, 
through  dread  of  the  Gae  Bulg  that  day.  He  put  his 
crested  helmet  of  battle  on  his  head,  on  which  were 
forty  gems,  carbuncles,  in  each  division,  and  it  was 
studded  with  crystal  and  with  shining  rubies  of  the 
eastern  world.  He  took  his  strong  spear  into  his  right 
hand,  and  his  curved  sword  upon  his  left  side,  with  its 
golden  hilt,  and  its  knobs  of  red  gold,  and  his  great, 
large,  bossed  shield  on  his  back. 

And  then  he  began  to  show  off  many  changing,  wonder- 
ful feats,  that  he  had  never  learned  with  any  other  person, 
neither  with  nurse  or  with  tutor,  or  with  Scathach  or  with 
Uacthach,  or  with  Aoife,  but  that  were  made  up  that  day 
by  himself  against  Cuchulain. 

Then  Cuchulain  came  to  the  ford,  and  when  he  saw 
all  Ferdiad  was  doing :  "  I  see,  my  friend  Laeg,"  he  said, 
"  all  those  feats  will  be  tried  on  me  one  after  another ; 
and  because  of  that,"  he  said,  "  if  it  is  I  that  begin  to 
give  in  to-day,  it  is  for  you  to  reproach  me,  and  to  speak 
hard  words  to  me,  the  way  that  the  strength  of  my 
anger  may  grow  the  more  on  me.  But  if  I  am  getting 
the  better  of  him,  then  you  are  to  praise  me,  and  make 
much  of  me,  that  my  courage  may  be  the  greater."  "  I 
will  do  that  indeed,  my  master  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg. 

And  then  Cuchulain  put  on  his  battle  suit,  and  he 
said  :  "  What  arms  shall  we  take  to-day,  Ferdiad  ? " 
"  The  choice  is  yours  to-day,"  said  F'erdiad.  "  Let  us 
try  the  ford  feat  then,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Let  us  in- 
deed," said  Ferdiad.  But  though  Ferdiad  agreed  to  it, 
it  is  sorry  he  was  to  say  those  words,  for  he  knew 
Cuchulain  was  used  to  put  an  end  to  every  fighter  that 
was  against  him  in  the  feat  of  the  ford. 

It  was  great  work,  now,  that  was  done  on  that  day  at 


LAEG'S   TAUNTS  237 

the  ford  ;  the  two  champions  of  western  Europe,  the 
two  gift-giving  and  wage-giving  hands  of  the  north- 
west of  the  world ;  the  two  pillars  and  the  two  keys  of 
the  courage  of  the  Gael ;  to  be  brought  from  far  off,  to 
fight  one  against  the  other,  through  the  stirring  up  and 
the  meddling  of  Aileli  and  Maeve.  Each  of  them  began 
to  throw  his  weapons  at  the  other,  from  the  dawn  of 
early  morning  to  the  middle  of  mid-day.  And  when 
mid-day  came,  the  anger  of  the  men  grew  hotter,  and 
each  of  them  drew  nearer  to  the  other.  And  then  it 
was  that  Cuchulain  leaped  on  to  the  boss  of  Ferdiad's 
shield,  to  strike  at  his  head  over  the  rim  of  the  shield. 
But  Ferdiad  gave  the  shield  a  blow  of  the  left  elbow,  and 
threw  Cuchulain  from  him  like  a  bird  on  the  brink  of 
the  ford.  Cuchulain  leaped  up  again  to  the  boss  of  the 
shield,  but  Ferdiad  gave  it  a  stroke  of  his  left  knee,  and 
threw  Cuchulain  from  him  like  a  little  child. 

Laeg  saw  that  done.  "  My  grief  indeed,"  he  said, 
"  the  fighter  that  is  against  you,  Cuchulain,  casts  you 
away  as  a  light  woman  would  cast  her  child.  He  throws 
you  as  foam  is  thrown  by  the  river  ;  he  grinds  you  as  a 
mill  would  grind  fresh  malt ;  he  cuts  through  you  as  the 
axe  cuts  through  the  oak  ;  he  binds  you  as  the  woodbine 
binds  the  tree ;  he  darts  on  you  as  the  hawk  darts  on 
little  birds  ;  and  from  this  out,  you  have  no  call  nor  claim 
to  courage  or  a  brave  name  to  the  end  of  life  and  time, 
you  little  fairy  fighter,"  said  Laeg. 

It  is  then  Cuchulain  leaped  up  with  the  quickness  of 
the  wind,  and  with  the  readiness  of  the  swallow,  and 
with  the  fierceness  of  the  lion,  towards  the  troubled 
clouds  of  the  air  the  third  time,  until  he  lit  on  the  boss 
of  Ferdiad's  shield,  to  strike  at  his  head  from  above. 
And  Ferdiad  gave  his  shield  a  shake  and  cast  Cuchulain 
from  him,  the  same  as  if  he  had  never  been  cast  off 
before  at  all. 

And  it  is  then  Cuchulain's  anger  came  on  him,  and 


238    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

the  flames  of  the  hero  light  began  to  shine  about  his 
head,  hke  a  red-thorn  bush  in  a  gap,  or  like  the  sparks 
of  a  fire,  and  he  lost  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  what 
was  on  him  was  the  appearance  of  a  god. 

So  close  was  the  fight  they  made  now,  that  their  heads 
met  above  and  their  feet  below,  and  their  hands  in  the 
middle,  over  the  rims  and  bosses  of  their  shields.  So 
close  was  the  fight,  that  they  broke  and  loosened  their 
shields  from  the  rim  to  the  middle.  So  close  was  the 
fight,  that  they  turned  and  bent  and  shattered  their 
spears  from  the  points  to  the  hilts.  So  close  was  the 
fight,  that  the  Bocanachs  and  Bananachs  and  the  witches 
of  the  valley  screamed  from  the  rims  of  their  shields  and 
from  the  hilts  of  their  swords,  and  from  the  handles  of 
their  spears.  So  close  was  the  fight,  that  they  drove  the 
river  out  of  its  bed  and  out  of  its  course,  so  that  it  might 
have  been  a  place  for  a  king  or  a  queen  to  rest  in,  so 
that  there  was  not  a  drop  of  water  in  it,  unless  it  dropped 
into  it  by  the  trampling  and  the  hewing  the  two 
champions  made  in  the  middle  of  the  ford. 

So  great  was  the  fight,  that  the  horses  of  the  men  of 
Ireland  broke  away  in  fright  and  shyness,  with  fury  and 
madness,  breaking  their  chains  and  their  yokes,  their 
ropes  and  their  traces ;  and  the  women  and  the  young 
lads  and  the  children  and  the  followers  of  the  men  of 
Ireland  broke  out  of  the  camp  to  the  south-west. 

They  were  using  the  edge  of  their  swords  through 
that  time ;  and  it  was  then  Ferdiad  found  a  time  when 
Cuchulain  was  off  his  guard,  and  he  gave  him  a  stroke  of 
the  sword,  and  hid  it  in  his  body,  and  the  ford  was  red- 
dened with  Cuchulain's  blood,  and  Ferdiad  kept  on 
making  great  strokes  at  him.  And  Cuchulain  could  not 
bear  with  this,  and  he  called  to  Laeg  for  the  Gae  Bulg, 
and  it  was  sent  down  the  stream  to  him,  and  he  caught 
it  with  his  foot.  And  when  Ferdiad  heard  the  name  of 
the  Gae  Bulg,  he  made  a  stroke  of  his  shield  down  to 


FERDIAD'S   DEATH  239 

protect  his  body.  But  Cuchulain  made  a  straight  cast  of 
the  spear,  the  Gae  Bulg,  off  the  middle  of  his  hand,  over 
the  rim  of  the  shield,  and  it  passed  through  his  armour 
and  went  out  through  his  body,  so  that  its  sharp  end 
could  be  seen. 

Ferdiad  gave  a  stroke  of  his  shield  up  to  protect  the 
upper  part  of  his  body,  though  it  was  "  the  relief  after 
danger,"  as  the  saying  is.  "  That  is  enough,"  said 
Ferdiad  ;  "  I  die  by  that.  And  I  may  say,  indeed,  you 
have  left  me  sick  after  you,  and  it  was  not  right  that 
I  should  fall  by  your  hand.  O  Hound  of  the  beautiful 
feats,  it  was  not  right,  you  to  kill  me ;  the  fault  of  my 
death  is  yours,  it  is  on  you  my  blood  is.  A  foolish  man 
does  not  escape  when  he  goes  into  the  gap  of  danger ; 
my  grief!  I  am  going  away,  my  end  is  come.  My  ribs 
will  not  hold  my  heart,  my  heart  is  all  turned  to  blood. 
I  have  not  done  well  in  the  battle ;  you  have  killed  me, 
Cuchulain." 

Cuchulain  ran  towards  him  after  that,  and  put  his 
two  arms  about  him,  and  lifted  him  across  the  ford 
northwards,  so  that  his  body  should  be  by  the  ford  on 
the  north,  and  not  on  the  west  of  the  ford  with  the  men 
of  Ireland. 

He  laid  him  down  then,  and  a  cloud  and  a  weakness 
came  on  him  as  he  stood  over  Ferdiad.  Laeg  saw  that, 
and  he  saw  that  all  the  men  of  Ireland  were  rising  up  to 
come  towards  him.  "  Good  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg,  "  rise 
up  now,  for  the  men  of  Ireland  are  coming  towards  us, 
and  it  is  not  one  man  they  will  put  to  fight  against  us, 
now  that  Ferdiad  has  fallen  by  you."  "  What  use  is  it 
to  me  to  rise  up  now,  and  he  after  falling  by  me  ?  "  said 
Cuchulain.  But  Laeg  said  :  "  Rise  up,  O  chained  Hound 
of  Emain  ;  it  is  glad  and  shouting  you  have  a  right  to 
be  now,  since  Ferdiad  of  the  hosts  has  fallen  by  you." 
"  What  are  joy  and  shouting  to  me  now  ?  "  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  it    is   to    madness    and   to   grief    I    am    driven    after 


240    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

the  thing  I  have  done,  and  the  body  I  wounded  so 
hard."  "  It  is  not  right  for  }-ou  to  be  lamenting  him," 
said  Laeg.  ''  It  is  making  rejoicings  over  him  you 
should  be.  It  was  at  you  he  aimed  his  spears."  But 
Cuchulain  said  :  "  Even  if  he  had  cut  one  arm  and  one 
leg  from  me,  it  is  my  grief  Ferdiad  not  to  be  riding 
his  horses  through  the  long  days  of  his  lifetime."  And 
Laeg  said  :  "  It  is  better  pleased  the  women  of  the  Red 
Branch  will  be,  he  to  have  died  and  you  to  be  living. 
They  know  it  is  not  few  but  many  you  have  sent  away 
for  ever ;  for  from  the  day  you  came  out  of  Cuailgne  to 
meet  Maeve  of  the  great  name,  it  is  a  grief  to  her  all  you 
have  killed  of  her  people  and  of  her  fighting  men.  You 
have  not  taken  quiet  sleep  since  the  spoiling  of  your 
country  began  ;  though  there  were  few  along  with  you, 
many  were  the  mornings  you  rose  up  early." 

Then  Cuchulain  began  to  keen  and  to  lament  for 
Ferdiad  there,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  Well,  Ferdiad, 
it  is  a  pity  for  you  it  was  not  one  of  the  men  that  knew 
my  courage  you  asked  an  advice  of  before  }'ou  came  to 
meet  me  in  the  fight  that  was  too  hard  for  you.  It  is  a 
pity  it  was  not  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  you  asked  how 
we  stood  one  to  another.  It  is  a  pity  you  did  not  ask 
a  true  advice  of  Fergus.  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  pleasant 
comely  Conall  you  asked  which  of  us  would  put  down 
the  other. 

"  And  these  men  know  well,"  he  said,  "  there  will 
never  be  born  one  among  the  men  of  Connaught  who 
will  do  deeds  equal  to  yours,  to  the  end  of  life  and  time. 
And  they  know  that  if  they  looked  among  the  places, 
the  gatherings,  the  swearings,  the  false  promises  of  the 
fair-haired  women  of  Connaught,  or  in  the  playing  with 
targets  and  shields,  the  playing  with  shields  and  swords, 
the  playing  backgammon  and  chess,  the  playing  with 
horses  and  chariots,  there  will  not  be  found  the  hand  of 
a  man  that  will  wound  like  Ferdiad's  hand,  or  a  man  to 


CUCHULAIN'S    LAMENTS  241 

bring  the  red-mouthed  birds  croaking  over  the  speckled 
battle,  nor  one  that  will  fight  for  Cruachan,  that  will  be 
your  equal  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,  O  red-cheeked 
son  of  Daman."  And  then  he  rose  up  and  stood  over 
Ferdiad.  "  Well,  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  it  is  great  wrong 
and  treachery  was  played  on  you  by  the  men  of  Ireland, 
to  bring  you  out  to  fight  with  me.  For  it  has  not  been 
easy  to  stand  against  me  in  the  war  for  the  Bull  of 
Cuailgne."     And  he  made  this  complaint : — 

"  O  Ferdiad,  you  were  betrayed  to  your  death  ;  your 
last  end  was  sorrowful ;  you  to  die,  I  to  be  living ;  our 
parting  for  ever  is  a  grief  for  ever. 

"  When  we  were  far  away,  with  Scathach  the 
victorious,  we  gave  our  word  that  to  the  end  of  time 
we  would  never  go  against  one  another. 

"  Dear  to  me  was  your  beautiful  ruddiness ;  dear  to 
me  your  comely  form  ;  dear  to  me  your  clear  grey  eye ; 
dear  to  me  your  wisdom  and  your  talk. 

"  There  has  not  come  to  the  battle,  there  has  not  been 
made  angry  in  the  fight,  there  has  not  held  up  shield 
on  the  field  of  spears,  the  like  of  you,  O  red  son  of 
Daman. 

"  Findabair,  the  daughter  of  Maeve,  with  all  her  great 
beauty,  it  was  putting  a  gad  on  the  sand,  or  on  the  sun, 
for  you  to  think  to  get  her,  Ferdiad." 

Then  Cuchulain  was  still  looking  down  on  Ferdiad, 
"  Well,  my  friend  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  strip  Ferdiad  now, 
and  take  his  armour  and  his  clothes  off  him,  until  I 
see  the  brooch  for  the  sake  of  which  he  undertook  the 

fight." 

Laeg  stripped  Ferdiad  then,  and  when  Cuchulain  saw 
the  brooch,  he  began  to  lament  and  complain  over  him 
again,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"  My  grief,  O  gold  brooch !  O  Ferdiad  of  the  poets, 
O  strong  striker  of  many  blows,  it  is  brave  your  arm 
was. 

Q 


242    WAR   FOR    BULL    OF   CUAILGNE 

"  Your  yellow  hair,  curled,  well-loved ;  your  soft,  leaf- 
like belt  about  you  until  death. 

"  Dear  was  our  fellowship,  dear  the  brightness  of 
your  eyes ;  your  shield  with  its  rim  of  gold ;  your 
chessboard  that  was  worth  riches. 

"It  was  not  right,  you  to  fall  by  my  hand  ;  it  was 
not  a  friendly  ending.  My  grief,  O  gold  brooch,  my 
grief! 

"  Well,  my  friend  Laeg,"  he  said  then,  "  come  now  and 
take  the  Gae  Bulg  out  of  him,  for  I  cannot  afford  to  be 
without  my  spear."  So  Laeg  took  the  Gae  Bulg  out  of 
him,  and  when  Cuchulain  saw  his  reddened  spear  lying 
beside  Ferdiad,  he  said  :  "  O  Ferdiad,  it  is  a  sorrowful 
story  to  me,  that  I  should  see  you  so  red  and  so  pale,  I 
with  my  spear  reddened,  and  you  in  a  bed  of  blood. 

"  When  we  were  over  in  the  east  with  Scathach,  there 
would  not  have  been  angry  words  between  us,  or  destroy- 
ing weapons. 

"  Scathach  spoke  fiery  words  to  us,  '  Go  all  of  you  to 
the  battle  that  will  be  fought  by  Germain  the  terrible.' 

"  I  said  to  Ferdiad  and  to  Lugaid,  the  always  generous, 
and  to  the  son  of  Baetan  the  fair,  '  Let  us  all  go  against 
Germain.' 

"  We  all  of  us  came  to  the  battle-ground  on  the  shore 
of  the  lake  of  Lind  Formait ;  we  brought  four  hundred 
out  with  us  from  the  islands  of  the  Athisech. 

"  As  I  and  brave  Ferdiad  were  together  in  the  door  of 
Germain's  dun,  I  killed  Rind,  the  son  of  Niul,  I  killed 
Ruad,  son  of  Finnial. 

"  Ferdiad  killed  upon  the  shore  Blath,  son  of  Calba  of 
the  red  swords.  Lugaid  killed  Mugarne  of  the  Torrian 
Sea,  a  surly,  fierce  man. 

"  We  spoiled  the  dun  of  Germain  the  crafty ;  we 
brought  him  with  us  alive  over  the  wide  sea  of  speckled 
waters ;  we  brought  him  to  Scathach  of  the  broad 
shield. 


CUCHULAIN'S    LAMENTS  243 

"  She,  our  teacher,  whose  name  was  well  known,  bound 
us  to  friendship  together,  the  way  our  anger  would  not 
turn  against  one  another  among  the  fair  tribes  of 
Elga. 

"  Sorrowful  the  morning  when  the  strength  was  taken 
from  the  son  of  Daman.  My  grief!  I  loved  the  friend 
to  whom  I  have  given  a  drink  of  red  blood. 

"  It  is  a  sorrowful  thing  has  happened  to  us  the  pupils 
of  Scathach — I  myself  red  and  wounded  ;  you  yourself 
not  driving  your  chariot. 

"  It  is  a  sorrowful  thing  has  happened  to  us  the  pupils 
of  Scathach — I  myself  hard  with  blood  ;  you  yourself 
entirely  dead. 

"  It  is  a  sorrowful  thing  has  happened  to  us  the  pupils 
of  Scathach — yourself  to  have  died,  myself  to  be  alive 
and  strong  ;  it  is  angry  we  were  in  the  battle." 

"  Good  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg,  "  let  us  leave  this  ford 
now  ;  it  is  too  long  we  are  here."  "  Let  us  leave  it  now 
indeed,  my  friend  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  But  every 
other  fight  I  ever  made  was  as  a  game  and  a  sport 
beside  the  fight  with  Ferdiad."  And  it  is  what  he 
said  : 

"  Each  fight  was  a  game,  each  one  was  a  sport,  until 
Ferdiad  came  to  the  ford  ;  we  got  the  same  teaching,  we 
got  the  same  rewards  ;  our  teacher  was  kind  to  us  both 
alike,  setting  us  both  above  all  the  others. 

"  Each  was  as  a  game,  each  was  as  a  sport,  until 
Ferdiad  came  to  the  ford ;  we  had  the  same  ways, 
we  used  to  do  the  same  deeds ;  it  was  at  the  one 
time  Scathach  gave  a  shield  to  me,  and  a  shield  to 
Ferdiad. 

"  Each  was  a  game,  each  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad 
came  to  the  ford  ;  dear  to  me  was  the  pillar  of  gold  that 
I  broke  down  on  the  ford  ;  he  who,  when  he  attacked 
the  tribes,  was  braver  than  any  other. 

"  Each  was  a  game,  each  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad 


244    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

came  to  the  ford,  like  a  proud  swelling  wave,  threaten- 
ing to  destroy  all  before  him. 

"  Each  was  a  game,  each  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad 
came  to  the  ford  ;  this  thing  will  hang  over  me  for  ever. 
Yesterday  he  was  larger  than  a  mountain  ;  to-day  there 
is  nothing  of  him  but  a  shadow." 


XII 

THE    AWAKENING    OF    ULSTER 

TTHEN  some  of  the  men  of  Ulster  came  to  comfort 
Cuchulain,  and  among  them  were  Senoll  Uathach 
and  the  two  sons  of  Gege,  Muredach  and  Cotreb.  They 
brought  him  away  to  the  five  streams  of  Conaille 
Muirthemne,  to  wash  his  hurts  in  them.  And  the 
Sidhe  threw  all  sorts  of  herbs  and  plants  into  the  streams 
for  his  healing,  so  that  they  were  all  strewed  over  with 
green  leaves. 

Then  when  Ailell  and  Maeve  heard  there  were  men 
beginning  to  come  from  Ulster,  they  sent  Mac  Roth,  the 
herald,  to  watch  at  Slieve  Fuad,  and  to  warn  them  if  he 
could  see  any  one  coming.  And  after  a  while  he  came 
back,  and  Ailell  asked  news  of  him.  "  I  saw,"  he  said, 
"  one  chariot  only,  to  the  north  of  Slieve  Fuad,  and  it 
coming  straight  on,  and  the  man  that  was  in  it  naked, 
and  without  armour  or  weapons,  but  only  an  iron  spit  in 
his  hand,  and  he  goading  on  the  horses  as  if  he  would 
never  get  to  the  army  alive."  "  Who  do  you  think 
was  that  man,  Fergus  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  I  think,"  said 
Fergus,  "  it  was  Cethern,  son  of  Fintan,  from  the  North, 
and  he  will  soon  be  upon  us."  With  that,  Cethern 
came  bursting  into  the  camp,  and  he  attacked  every- 
one he  met  with  his  spit,  and  he  himself  got  many 
wounds  back  again,  so  that  he  had  to  hold  up  the  board 
of  the  chariot  to  his  body  to  keep  his  bowels  from  falling 

245 


246     THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

out ;  and  at  last  he  made  his  escape,  and  came  to  the 
place  where  Cuchulain  was  lying.  Then  Cuchulain 
said  to  Laeg :  "  Rise  up  now,  and  go  into  the  camp, 
and  bring  some  of  Ailell's  physicians  to  cure  Cethern  ; 
for  I  give  my  word,  if  they  do  not  come  before  this 
time  to-morrow,  I  will  bring  death  and  destruction  on 
them."'  So  Laeg  went,  and  he  brought  back  the 
physicians  with  him,  and  it  was  only  the  dread  of 
Cuchulain  that  made  them  come.  Then  Cethern 
showed  the  first  one  of  them  his  wounds,  and  it  is 
what  he  said,  that  he  could  not  be  cured.  Then 
Cethern  gave  him  a  blow  that  sent  him  out  of  the 
house.  And  the  same  thing  happened  with  all  the 
rest,  fifteen  there  were  of  them  altogether.  Then  he 
asked  Cuchulain  would  he  get  him  another  physician, 
for  those  of  the  men  of  Ireland  had  done  him  no  good. 
"  Rise  up,  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  go  to  Slieve  Fuad, 
to  Fingan,  the  Druid  physician  of  Conchubar,  and  bid 
him  to  come  here  and  to  heal  Cethern."  Now,  Fingan 
was  the  greatest  physician  in  all  Ireland,  and  it  was 
said  of  him  that  he  could  tell  what  a  person's  sickness 
was  by  looking  at  the  smoke  of  the  house  he  was  in  ; 
and  he  knew  by  looking  at  a  wound  what  sort  the 
person  was  that  gave  it  Then  he  came,  and  Cethern 
showed  him  his  wounds.  "  Look  at  this  wound  for 
me,  good  Fingan,"  he  said.  ".There  came  at  me  two 
young  men,  with  clear  noble  looks,  with  strange  foreign 
clothes  on  them,  and  each  of  them  threw  a  spear  into 
me,  and  I  threw  my  spear  into  each  of  them.  "  I 
know  those  two  very  well,"  said  Cuchulain;  "they  are 
two  choice  men  of  Norway,  and  they  were  sent  against 
you  by  Ailell  and  ]\Iaeve."  "  Look  at  this  wound  for 
me,  Fingan,"  said  Cethern.  Fingan  looked  at  it 
"  That  is  the  work  of  two  brothers,"  he  said.  ''  That 
is  true  indeed,"  said  Cethern.  "  Two  young  men  came  at 
me,  and  they  were  like  one  another  ;  but  one  had  curling 


MAEVE'S   APPEARANCE  247 

brown  hair,  and  the  other  had  curHng  yellow  hair. 
Two  green  cloaks  about  them,  with  brooches  of  bright 
silver ;  two  soft  shirts  of  yellow  silk  ;  bright  swords  in 
their  belts  they  had,  and  shields  with  bright  silver 
fastenings,  and  spears  with  veins  of  silver  on  their 
handles."  "  I  know  those  two  very  well,"  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  they  are  Maine  Athremail  and  Maine  Mathremail,  two 
sons  of  Ailell  and  Maeve." 

"  Look  at  this  wound  for  me,  good  Fingan,"  said 
Cethern.  Fingan  looked  at  the  wound,  and  he  said  :  "  It 
was  a  father  and  a  son  made  that  together."  "  That  is 
true,"  said  Cethern  ;  "  there  came  at  me  two  large  men 
with  flaming  eyes,  and  they  having  gold  bands  on  their 
heads,  and  the  dress  of  kings,  and  gold  swords  at  their 
sides."  "  I  know  those  two  very  well,"  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  it  was  Ailell  and  his  son  Maine  Andoe  that  gave  you 
that  wound."  "  Look  at  this  wound,  good  Fingan,"  said 
Cethern.  Fingan  looked  at  the  wound.  "  That  is  the 
work  of  a  proud  woman,"  he  said.  "  That  is  true,"  said 
Cethern  ;  "  there  came  at  me  a  beautiful,  pale,  long-faced 
woman,  with  long,  flowing  yellow  hair  on  her,  a  crimson 
cloak  with  a  brooch  of  gold  over  her  breast,  and  a 
straight  spear  shining  red  in  her  hand.  It  was  she  gave 
me  that  wound,  and  she  got  a  little  wound  from  me." 
*'  I  know  that  woman  well,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  She  is 
Maeve,  daughter  of  the  High  King  of  Ireland,  and  Queen 
of  Connaught.  She  would  have  thought  it  a  great 
victory  and  a  great  triumph,  you  to  have  fallen  by  her 
hand."  "  Good  Fingan,"  said  Cethern  then,  "  tell  me 
now,  what  do  you  think  of  the  way  I  am,  and  what  can 
you  do  for  me  ?  "  "  It  is  what  I  think,"  said  Fingan, 
"you  will  hardly  see  the  calves  that  are  following 
your  cows  at  this  time  grow  to  be  yearlings  ;  or  if  you 
do  itself,"  he  said,  "  it  will  not  be  much  use  your  life  will 
be  to  you."  "  That  is  what  all  the  others  said  to  me," 
said  Cethern,  "  and  it  is  not  much  profit  or  credit  they  got 


248     THE   AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

by  it,  and  it  is  not  much  you  yourself  will  get "  ;  and 
with  that  he  made  a  kick  at  him,  to  drive  him  out  of  the 
house.  But  in  spite  of  that  treatment,  Fingan  gave  him 
his  choice  of  two  things  :  the  first  to  be  a  long  time  on 
his  bed,  so  that  he  would  see  the  men  of  Ulster  coming 
in  the  end  to  avenge  him  ;  or  to  be  made  well  enough  at 
the  end  of  three  days  to  go  out  himself  and  spend  what 
he  had  of  strength  on  his  enemies. 

"  I  will  choose  that,"  he  said,  "  for  I  would  not  like  to 
leave  my  enemies  after  me ;  and  who  is  there  better  than 
myself  to  get  satisfaction  from  them  ? "  So  then  Fingan 
bade  Cuchulain  to  make  a  healing  bath  that  would  ease 
Cethern.  So  Cuchulain  went  down  to  the  camp,  and  he 
brought  away  with  him  all  that  he  met  of  the  cattle  of  the 
men  of  Ireland.  Then  their  flesh  was  cut  up  with  their 
bones  and  their  skins  to  make  a  Druid  bath,  and  Cethern 
was  put  in  it  for  the  length  of  three  days  and  three 
nights.  And  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  rose  up  and 
got  into  his  chariot,  to  do  vengeance  on  the  men  of 
Ireland.  And  his  wife  londa,  daughter  of  Eochaid, 
came  to  him  from  the  North,  and  brought  him  his  sword 
that  he  had  forgotten  in  his  hurry  at  his  first  setting 
out. 

But  it  happened  that  one  of  the  physicians  he  had 
driven  out  with  a  blow  had  fallen  down  outside  the 
tent,  and  lay  there,  not  able  to  stir  from  that.  But  when 
Cethern  was  making  ready  to  set  out,  he  rose  up  and 
made  his  way  back  to  the  camp,  and  he  said  to  the  men 
of  Ireland  :  "  Cethern  is  after  being  cured  by  Fingan,  the 
Druid,  and  he  is  coming  at  you  now,  and  do  you  lay 
some  trap  for  him."  So  it  is  what  they  did  :  they  took 
Ailell's  cloak  and  his  shirt,  and  they  put  them  about  the 
pillar-stone,  at  the  boundary  of  Ross,  and  his  crown  on 
top  of  it,  and  left  them  there.  Cethern  came  rushing  on 
them,  and  when  he  saw  the  pillar-stone,  he  thought  it 
was  Ailell  was  standing  there,  and  he  made  at  it,  and 


FI  ND  ABA  I  R'S   SECRET  249 

gave  a  great  blow  of  his  sword,  that  it  broke  in  pieces 
against  the  stone. 

Then  he  saw  what  it  was,  and  he  said  :  "  This  is  some 
trick  they  have  played  on  me.  And  by  the  oath  of  my 
people,"  he  said,  "  I  will  not  stop  my  hand  from  killing, 
until  such  time  as  I  have  killed  some  man  having  a 
dress  like  this." 

When  Maine  Andoe  heard  that,  he  put  on  his  father's 
armour,  and  came  out  to  meet  him.  And  Cethern  saw 
him,  and  made  for  him,  and  threw  his  shield  at  him,  so 
that  he  was  cut  through  and  through  the  body  by  the 
rim  of  the  shield. 

And  when  the  men  of  Ireland  saw  that,  they  pressed 
on  Cethern  from  all  sides  and  made  an  end  of  him. 
And  his  wife  londa,  daughter  of  Eochaid,  came  and  cried 
over  him  there. 

And  then  Fintan,  Cethern's  father,  came  with  three 
times  fifty  men  to  get  satisfaction  for  his  son,  and  he 
made  three  attacks  on  the  army,  and  killed  a  great 
many  of  Ailell's  men  ;  but  Fintan  lost  a  good  many  of 
his  own  men,  and  his  son  Crimthan  was  made  prisoner. 
And  the  men  of  Ireland  were  afraid  their  army  would 
be  too  much  weakened  by  little  fights  of  this  sort  before 
the  great  last  battle  that  was  foretold  would  come,  and 
they  made  an  agreement  with  Fintan  to  give  him  back 
his  son,  and  to  fall  back  themselves  a  day's  march  ;  and  he 
gave  his  word  not  to  vex  them  again  until  the  time  of  the 
last  battle.  And  they  found,  where  the  fight  had  been, 
one  of  Fintan's  men  and  one  of  Ailell's  men  lying  dead 
together,  and  they  with  their  teeth  fixed  into  one  another. 
And  it  is  from  this  the  fight  was  given  the  name  of 
Fintan's  Tooth-fight. 

Then  Rochad,  son  of  Fatheman,  came  to  help 
Cuchulain,  and  three  times  fifty  men  with  him.  Now 
Findabair  loved  him,  and  when  she  heard  he  was  coming, 
she  told  her  secret,  and  she  said  to  her  mother  :  "  That  is 


250     THE    AWAKENING  OF  ULSTER 

my  love  and  my  choice  out  of  all  the  men  of  Ireland." 
And  when  Maeve  heard  that,  sht  made  a  plan  to  draw 
him  ofi^  and  she  said  to  Findabair  :  *^  Go  now  and  meet 
him  secretly,  and  bid  him  to  go  back  with  his  men  unto 
the  day  of  the  great  battle,  and  I  give  you  my  leave  to 
be  his  wife."  So  Findabair  went  and  gave  him  the 
message,  and  g^ve  herself  to  him,  and -he  went  back  to 
the  North-  But  this  was  heard  of  in  the  camp,  and  the 
ti^elve  kings  of  Munster  that  were  in  Maeve's  army 
began  speaking  with  one  another ;  and  it  is  what  they 
all  said,  that  Maeve  had  secretly  promised  Findabair 
as  a  ^^i{e  to  each  one  of  them  as  a  reward,  if  he  would 
join  in  the  war.  "  And  the  best  thing  we  can  do  now," 
they  said,  "^is  to  go  and  avenge  ourselves  on  Maeve's 
men,  and  on  Rochad,  for  the  treacherj^  that  was  done 
on  us.*' 

So  they  went  out  and  made  an  attack  on  them,  and 
Ailcll  and  Maeve's  men  and  Rochad  made  ready  to 
defend  themselves ;  but  Fergus  went  out  and  tried  to 
make  them  leave  off,  and  to  make  peace  betw^een  them, 
and  before  he  could  do  that  seven  hundred  men  had  got 
their  death. 

And  it  was  told  to  Findabair  how  these  seven  hundred 
men  had  got  their  death  on  account  of  her,  and  how 
Maeve  had  promised  her  in  marriage  to  every  one  of 
the  twelve  kings  of  Munster.  And  when  she  heard 
that,  her  heart  broke  wnth  the  shame  and  the  pity  that 
came  on  her,  and  she  fell  dead  there  and  then,  and  they 
buried  her. 

Now  at  that  time  Iliach,  son  of  Cas,  of  the  race  of 
Rudraige,  was  living  in  the  North  with  his  son's  son, 
Laegaire  Buadach.  And  it  was  told  him  how  the  four 
provinces  of  Ireland  were  plimdering  and  destroj-ing 
the  people  of  Ulster  since  the  day  before  Samhain,  and 
driving  off  their  cattle  and  their  goods,  and  all  that  they 
had.     So  he  consulted  \i-ith  his  people,  and  it  is  what  he 


ILIACH'S    STONE   FIGHT  251 

said,  that  he  would  go  out  himself  and  make  an  attack 
on  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  let  loose  his  strength  on 
them,  and  destroy  what  he  could  of  them,  and  do  what 
he  could  for  Ulster.  "  For  as  to  myself,"  he  said,  "  if 
I  come  out  of  it,  or  do  not  come  out  of  it,  is  all  one  to 
me."  Then  his  two  old  spent  horses,  that  had  been  let 
loose  for  life,  were  brought  from  where  they  were  on  the 
shore  by  the  dun,  and  yoked  to  his  old  chariot,  that  had 
neither  cushions  nor  skins  in  it.  And  he  took  his  rough, 
dark,  iron  shield,  with  its  hard  rim  of  silver,  over  his 
shoulder,  and  his  rough,  grey,  heavy  sword  at  his  left 
side.  And  he  put  in  the  chariot  his  two  rusty,  blunt 
spears,  and  his  people  gave  him  a  store  of  stones  and 
bits  of  rocks  in  a  heap  about  him  ;  and  that  is  the  way  he 
went  out  against  the  army,  and  no  armour  on  him  at  all. 

When  the  men  of  Ireland  saw  him  coming  that  way, 
they  began  mocking  and  laughing  at  him,  but  it  is  what 
Maeve  said :  "  I  would  be  glad  indeed  all  the  men  of 
Ulster  to  come  and  meet  us  like  that."  Then  Doche, 
son  of  Magach,  chanced  to  meet  him,  and  bade  him 
welcome.  "  Who  is  it  bids  me  welcome  ?  "  said  Iliach. 
"  The  comrade  and  friend  of  Laegaire  Buadach,"  said  he  ; 
"  Doche,  son  of  Magach."  "  I  am  glad  of  that  welcome," 
said  Iliach,  "  and  for  the  sake  of  it,  let  you  come  to  me 
when  I  have  spent  my  rage  on  the  army,  and  when  my 
strength  is  going,  and  when  my  hand  is  tired,  and  let 
you,  and  no  other  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  make  an  end  of 
me.  And  keep  my  sword,"  he  said,  "  for  your  friend, 
Laegaire  Buadach." 

Then  he  made  an  attack  on  the  men  of  Ireland,  and 
when  his  spears  were  all  broken  in  pieces,  he  began 
hitting  and  throwing  with  the  stones  he  had.  And  when 
they  were  out,  he  attacked  the  men  that  were  near  him 
with  the  strength  of  his  own  hands,  so  that  he  made  an 
end  of  some  of  them.  And  when  all  he  could  do  was 
done,  he  saw  Doche,  son  of  Magach,  near  him,  and  he 


252     THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

said  :  ''  Come  to  me  now,  Doche,  and  strike  my  head  off, 
and  take  charge  of  my  sword  for  Laegaire  Buadach." 
And  Doche  did  as  he  bade  him,  but  he  brought  his 
head  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve. 

At  this  time  Sualtim,  son  of  Roig,  was  told  that 
Cuchulain  had  fought  with  Calatin  and  his  sons,  and 
with  Ferdiad,  and  of  the  hard  fight  he  had  made,  and 
the  wounds  he  had  got.  And  it  is  what  Sualtim  said  : 
"  Is  it  the  sky  bursting  I  hear,  or  is  it  the  sea  going 
backward,  or  the  earth  breaking  up,  or  is  it  the  groaning 
of  my  son  in  his  weakness  ?  "  With  that  he  set  out  to 
visit  him,  and  he  found  him  covered  with  hurts  and 
wounds,  and  he  began  to  cry  over  him.  But  that  did 
not  please  Cuchulain,  and  he  knew  Sualtim  would  do 
no  good  by  stopping  there,  for  he  was  not  the  man  to 
avenge  him,  for  he  was  no  great  hero  ;  not  that  he  was  a 
coward,  but  just  like  any  other  good  fighting  man.  And 
Cuchulain  said  to  him  :  "  Well,  Sualtim,  stop  your  crying 
over  me,  and  rise  up  and  go  to  Emain,  and  tell  the  men 
of  Ulster  they  must  come  themselves  and  follow  on  with 
the  war  from  this  out,  for  I  am  not  able  to  defend  them 
any  more  ;  for  after  all  I  went  through,  not  one  of  them 
comes  to  help  me  or  to  comfort  me.  And  tell  them,"  he 
said,  "  what  way  you  found  me,  that  I  cannot  bear  to 
have  my  clothing  next  my  skin,  but  it  is  with  crooks  of 
hazel  I  have  to  hold  it  off  me,  and  it  is  grass  that  is  laid 
over  my  wounds  ;  for  there  is  not  the  place  of  the  point 
of  a  needle  on  me  from  head  to  foot  but  has  some  hurt 
on  it,  except  my  left  hand  that  was  holding  my  shield  ; 
and  tell  them  to  make  no  delay  in  coming,"  he  said. 

Then  Sualtim  set  out  on  the  Grey  of  IMacha  to  give 
his  message ;  and  when  he  got  close  to  Emain  he  called 
out :  ''  Men  are  being  killed,  women  brought  away,  cattle 
driven  off  in  Ulster,"  but  he  got  no  word  of  answer. 
Then  he  went  up  to  the  very  wall,  and  he  cried  again  : 
"  Men    are   being  killed,  women    brought    away,  cattle 


SUALTIM'S    MESSAGE  253 

brought  away  in  Ulster " ;  but  the  second  time  he  got 
no  answer.  Then  he  went  on  to  the  Stone  of  the 
Hostages  at  Emain,  and  he  called  out  the  same  words 
the  third  time.  Then  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  asked  :  "  Who 
are  taken,  and  who  is  it  is  taking  them  ?  "  "  It  is  Ailell 
and  Maeve  that  are  robbing  you  and  destroying  you," 
said  Sualtim  ;  "  they  are  bringing  away  your  women, 
your  little  boys,  your  cattle  and  your  horses,  and  there 
is  only  Cuchulain  to  delay  and  to  hinder  the  four  great 
provinces  of  Ireland  in  the  gaps  and  the  passes  of 
Conaille  Muirthemne."  But  Cathbad  was  vexed  at 
being  waked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  said  :  "  Any  man 
that  comes  to  scold  at  the  king  this  way  has  a  right  to 
be  put  to  death."  But  Conchubar,  the  king,  said  :  "  It  is 
true  what  Sualtim  is  saying."  *'  It  is  true  indeed,"  said 
all  the  men  of  Ulster. 

Then  anger  came  on  Sualtim  that  he  got  no  better 
answer  than  that,  and  he  turned  sharply,  and  the  Grey 
of  Macha  reared  up,  the  way  the  sharp  edge  of  Sualtim's 
shield  came  against  his  own  head,  and  cut  it  clean  off. 
Then  the  Grey  turned  again  to  Emain,  and  the  shield 
dragged  after  him  by  its  thongs,  and  Sualtim's  head  in 
the  hollow  of  it,  and  the  head  said  the  same  words  as 
before :  "  Men  are  being  killed,  women  brought  away, 
cattle  brought  away  in  Ulster."  Then  Conchubar  said  : 
"  The  sky  is  over  our  heads,  the  earth  is  under  our  feet, 
the  sea  is  round  about  us  ;  and  unless  the  sky  with  all 
its  shower  of  stars  comes  down  on  earth,  or  the  earth 
breaks  open  under  our  feet,  or  the  blue  sea  goes  over  the 
whole  face  of  the  world,  I  swear  that  I  will  bring  back 
every  cow  to  its  own  shed,  and  every  woman  to  her  own 
dwelling-house." 

Then  he  called  to  one  of  his  messengers,  Finnched 
son  of  Troiglethan,  that  chanced  to  be  there,  and  he 
bade  him  to  go  and  to  call  out  the  men  of  Ulster.  But 
with  the  sleep  that  was  on  him  still,  and  the  weakness, 


254     THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

he  bade  him  go  and  call   those  of  his  people  that  were 
dead,  as  well  as  those  that  were  living. 

It  was  easy  work  Finn  died  had  to  do  now,  for  the 
men  of  Ulster  were  rising  from  out  of  their  weakness,  and 
they  all  made  ready  to  come  out  with  Conchubar,  and 
as  for  those  that  were  to  the  south  and  to  the  west  of 
Emain,  they  did  not  wait  for  Conchubar  at  all,  but  set 
out  on  the  track  of  the  army  of  Ireland. 

Then  Conchubar  and  his  men  set  out  from  Emain, 
and  the  first  day  they  went  as  far  as  Irard  Cuillenn,  and 
there  they  made  a  halt.  "  What  are  we  stopping  here 
for  ? "  said  Conchubar.  "  We  are  waiting  for  your  own 
two  sons,"  his  men  said,  "  Fiachna  and  Fiacha,  that  are 
gone  to  meet  your  grandson  Ere,  son  of  Fedelm,  and 
of  Cairbre,  king  of  Teamhair,  to  bring  him  with  us." 
"  By  my  word,"  said  Conchubar,  "  I  will  not  make  any 
more  delay  here,  for  fear  the  men  of  Ireland  might  hear 
I  am  risen  from  my  weakness  ;  for  they  do  not  know  it 
up  to  this,"    he  said,  "  or  even  if  I  am  alive  at  all." 

So  he  himself  and  Celthair,  and  thirty  hundred  fierce 
chariot-fighters,  went  on,  and  it  was  not  long  before 
they  came  on  eight  times  twenty  strong  men  belonging 
to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve,  and  each  of  them  bringing  away 
a  woman  of  the  women  of  Ulster  with  him.  And 
Conchubar  and  Celthair  struck  their  heads  off,  and  set 
the  women  free ;  and  then  they  went  back  to  Irard 
Cuillenn. 

Now,  as  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  they  spent  that  night  at 
Sleamhain  of  Meath.  And  in  the  night  Cormac  Conloin- 
geas  started  up  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  called  out  that 
there  had  a  warning  dream  come  to  him,  and  that  there 
was  a  terrible  battle  before  them.  And  after  a  while 
Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  started  up  out  of  his  sleep, 
and  called  out  the  same  thing,  that  there  had  a  warning 
dream  come  to  him,  and  that  it  would  not  be  long  till 
there  would  be  a  great  clashing  of  shields.     And  with 


MARCH    OF   MEN    OF   ULSTER     255 

these  dreams  and  foretellings,  great  fear  came  on  the 
men  of  Ireland,  and  it  was  an  uneasy  night  they  spent 
at  Sleamhain  that  time. 

And  in  the  morning  Ailell  said  :  "  We  have  been  harry- 
ing Ulster  and  Cuailgne  this  long  time,  and  we  have 
taken  the  women  and  the  cattle  and  the  goods  of  the 
men  of  Ulster,  and  we  have  cut  down  hills  behind  us  ; 
and  now,"  he  said,  "  it  is  time  for  us  to  turn  back  to 
Magh  Ai,  and  they  can  follow  us  and  fight  with  us  there 
if  they  have  a  mind  to.  But  before  that,"  he  said,  "  I  will 
send  a  messenger  to  look  out  across  the  great  plain  of 
Meath,  to  see  if  any  of  them  are  coming  against  us  ;  and 
if  they  are,"  he  said,  "  I  will  not  go  from  this  without 
giving  battle  to  them,  for  he  would  not  be  a  good  king 
that  would  be  good  at  running  away." 

So  he  sent  out  Mac  Roth,  the  herald.  And  he  had  not 
long  to  wait  before  he  heard  a  noise  that  was  like  the 
falling  of  the  sky,  or  the  breaking  in  of  the  sea  over  the 
land,  or  the  falling  of  trees  on  one  another  in  a  great 
storm.  And  he  saw  the  plain  covered  with  wild  creatures 
that  had  broken  away  out  of  the  woods.  Then  he  went 
back  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve,  and  told  them  his  story,  and 
they  asked  him  what  had  he  seen  ;  and  he  said  :  "  I 
thought  I  saw  a  grey  mist  far  away  across  the  plain,  and 
then  I  saw  something  like  falling  snow,  and  then  through 
the  mist  I  saw  something  shining  like  sparks  from  a  fire, 
or  like  the  stars  on  a  very  frosty  night."  "  What  was  it 
he  saw,  Fergus  ?  "  said  Ailell.  And  Fergus  said  :  "  The 
mist  he  saw  was  the  dust  that  went  up  from  the  march 
of  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  the  flakes  of  snow  were  the 
foam  flakes  from  the  bits  of  their  horses  ;  and  what  he 
saw  shining  like  sparks  from  the  fire,  or  like  stars  on  a 
frosty  night,  was  the  angry  light  of  their  eyes  shining 
under  their  helmets." 

"  It  is  little  I  care  for  that,"  said  Maeve ;  "  we  have 
good  fighting  men  to  meet  them."     "  It  is  a  pity  for  you 


256     THE    AWAKEN  I  XG   OF    ULSTER 

to  think  that,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  for  there  is  neither  in  Alban 
nor  in  Ireland  an  army  that  can  put  down  the  men  of 
Ulster  when  once  their  weakness  is  gone  from  them  and 
their  anger  is  kindled." 

That  night  the  men  of  Ireland  made  their  camp  in 
Clartha,  and  they  put  Mac  Roth  and  another  man  to 
keep  a  good  watch,  the  way  the  men  of  Ulster  would 
not  fall  on  them  without  warning.  Now  Conchubar  and 
Celtchair,  with  their  thirty  hundred  men,  had  followed 
them  to  Slieve  Sleamhain,  and  when  they  found  them 
gone  from  there  they  followed  on  to  Clartha,  for  they 
thought  to  get  the  start  of  the  rest  of  Ulster  in  red- 
dening their  hands  upon  the  men  of  Ireland.  So  Mac 
Roth  was  not  long  waiting  when  he  saw  men  and  horses 
coming  from  the  north-east,  and  he  went  back  into 
the  camp.  "  Well,  Mac  Roth,"  said  Ailell, "  have  }'ou  seen 
any  of  the  men  of  Ulster  on  our  track  ? "  "I  saw  men 
and  horses  coming,"  he  said.  What  is  the  number  of 
them  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  Not  less  than  thirty  hundred 
chariots."  "  Those  are  the  men  of  Ulster  coming  with 
Conchubar,"  said  Ailell ;  "  and  what  did  you  mean  a  while 
ago,  Fergus,  threatening  us  with  the  dust  of  a  great  army 
in  the  plain,  when  a  little  troop  like  that  is  all  that  can 
be  brought  against  us  ? "  "  You  are  too  quick  in 
complaining  of  that,"  said  Fergus,  "  and  you  will  soon 
know  what  their  number  is." 

"  Let  us  make  some  good  plan  now,"  said  Maeve,  "  for 
I  am  sure  it  is  that  hot,  rude  man,  Conchubar,  king  of 
Ulster,  that  is  coming  to  attack  us.  Let  us  make  a  pen 
before  him,"  she  said,  "  of  all  the  army  standing  round 
on  three  sides,  and  thirty  hundred  men  ready  to  shut 
the  mouth  of  it  on  him  when  he  comes  in.  For  we  must 
take  these  fellows  alive  and  not  kill  them,  for  it  would 
be  unworthy  of  our  name  to  do  more  than  make 
prisoners  of  them,  and  they  so  few."  Now  this  was  one 
of  the  most  laughable  things  that  was  said  in  the  whole 


MAEVE'S    PEN  257 

course  of  the  war,  Conchubar  and  his  thirty  hundred  of 
the  best  men  of  Ulster  to  be  taken  ah've.  And  when 
Conchubar's  son,  Cormac  Conloingeas,  heard  this,  there 
was  great  anger  on  him,  and  it  is  what  he  thought :  "  If  I 
do  not  get  satisfaction  now  at  once  from  Maeve  for  this 
boast  of  hers,  1  will  never  get  it  again."  So  he  rose  up 
with  his  three  thousand  men  to  make  an  attack  on  her, 
and  on  Ailell ;  and  they  rose  up  as  well,  and  their  sons 
the  Maines  along  with  them,  and  the  sons  of  Magach. 
But  then  the  Gailiana,  and  the  men  of  Munster,  and  of 
Teamhair,  came  between  them,  and  made  peace,  and 
persuaded  them  to  lay  down  their  arms.  But  for  all 
that,  Maeve  did  make  a  pen  of  the  army  of  Ireland  to 
shut  up  Conchubar,  and  she  had  men  ready  to  close  it 
up  when  once  he  would  be  in.  But  it  is  what  Conchubar 
did,  he  never  so  much  as  looked  for  an  opening,  but 
when  he  saw  the  army  before  him,  he  went  straight 
through  it,  and  he  broke  open  a  gap  of  two  hundred  on 
the  right  hand,  and  a  gap  of  two  hundred  on  the  left, 
and  went  through  them  all,  and  cut  them  down  in  the 
very  middle,  so  that  eight  hundred  men  of  them  were 
killed. 

And  then  he  went  away  from  them,  back  to  Slieve 
Sleamhain,  to  join  the  army  of  Ulster. 

Then  the  men  of  Ulster  began  to  gather  upon  the 
plain  in  their  full  strength,  and  when  Ailell  heard  it,  he 
said  :  "  Let  some  one  go  up  and  watch  them  coming,  and 
bring  us  a  report  of  the  appearance  that  is  on  them,  and 
of  the  chief  men  that  are  leading  them."  "  Let  Mac  Roth 
go,"  said  Fergus. 

So  Mac  Roth  went  out  and  took  a  post  on  the  plain 
from  the  early  light  of  the  morning  till  the  fall  of 
evening,  and  through  all  that  time  the  men  of  Ulster 
were  coming,  so  that  the  ground  was  not  naked  under 
them,  every  division  under  its  own  chief  man,  and  every 
troop  under  its  own  lord,  and  each  one  of  them  apart 

R 


258    THE   AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

from  the  others,  and  they  came  on  till  they  had  covered 
the  Hill  of  Sleamhain. 

And  when  evening  came,  Mac  Roth  came  back  to 
Ailell  and  to  Maeve,  and  they  questioned  him  and  said  : 
"  What  sort  were  the  men  of  Ulster  as  they  came  across 
the  plain  ?  "  And  Mac  Roth  said  :  "  The  first  troop  I  saw 
coming  had  three  thousand  men  in  it,  and  as  soon  as 
they  got  to  the  hill,  they  took  their  armour  off,  and  they 
began  to  dig  and  to  make  a  seat  of  sods  and  of  earth  on 
the  highest  part  of  the  hill,  for  their  leader  to  sit  on  until 
the  rest  of  the  army  would  come. 

"  He  had  the  appearance  of  a  tall,  proud  man,  used  to 
giving  orders  ;  and  he  had  yellow,  curling  hair  on  him, 
aud  a  yellow  forked  beard,  and  a  red,  pleasant  face,  and 
blue  eyes  you  would  be  afraid  of.  A  five-folded  crimson 
cloak  he  had  on  him,  and  a  gold  pin  over  his  breast,  and 
a  white  shirt  with  threads  of  gold  woven  into  it  next  his 
body."  "  Who  was  that  man,  Fergus  ? "  said  Ailell. 
"  He  was  Conchubar,  son  of  Fachtna  and  of  Ness,  High- 
King  of  Ulster."  "  There  was  a  man  stood  beside  him," 
said  Mac  Roth,  "  with  scattered  white  hair,  and  a  purple 
cloak,  and  a  shield  with  bosses  of  red  brass,  and  a  long 
iron  sword  of  foreign  make.  And  he  looked  up  to  the 
sky,  and  threw  his  hand  upwards,  and  with  that  the 
clouds  seemed  like  as  if  they  were  rushing  at  one 
another,  and  fire  came  from  them  towards  the  men  of 
Ireland."  "  That  was  Cathbad  the  Druid,"  said  Fergus, 
"  and  he  trying  by  his  enchantments  to  know  how  the 
battle  would  go  to-morrow. 

"  I  saw  another  man  with  Conchubar,"  said  Mac 
Roth,  "  and  he  having  a  smooth,  dark  face,  and  white 
eyes  in  his  head  ;  a  long  bronze  rod  in  his  hand,  and  a 
little  bell  beside  him,  and  when  he  touched  it  with  his 
rod,  all  the  people  near  him  began  to  laugh."  "  Who  is 
that  man  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  It  is  easy  to  know  that,"  said 
Fergus ;  "  that  is  Rocmid,  the  king's  fool.     There  was 


MAC    ROTH'S    REPORT  259 

never  trouble  or  tiredness  on  any  man  of  Ulster  that  he 
would  not  forget  if  he  saw  Rocmid."  "There  came 
another  troop  then,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "and  it  is  what  I 
thought,  that  the  leader  they  had  was  the  handsomest 
and  the  most  comely  of  all  the  men  of  Ireland,  tall  and 
well  formed.  Deep  red-yellow  hair  he  had,  his  face 
wide  at  the  top  and  narrow  below;  thin,  red  lips,  and 
grey  eyes  that  were  laughing.  A  red  and  white  cloak 
on  him,  that  the  wind  stirred  as  he  walked,  a  white 
shield  with  gold  fastenings  at  his  shoulder,  a  long,  dark 
green  spear  in  his  hand."  "  Who  was  that  man,  Fergus  ?  " 
said  Ailell.  "  That  man  is  himself  half  an  army, 
Rochad,  son  of  Fatheman,  from  Rachlainn,  in  the 
North,"  said  Fergus.  Now  this  was  the  same  Rochad 
that  Findabair  had  loved.  "There  was  another  troop 
came  then,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "and  a  quiet,  grey-haired 
man  at  the  head  of  it.  A  dark-green,  long-woolled  cloak 
he  had  about  him,  and  a  white  shirt,  and  a  silver  belt 
around  his  waist,  and  a  bell  branch  at  his  shoulder.  He 
sat  before  King  Conchubar  when  he  came  to  the  hill, 
and  his  whole  company  sat  about  him.  And  the  sound 
of  his  voice  when  he  spoke  before  the  king,  and  when 
he  was  advising  him,  was  sweeter  than  a  three-cornered 
harp  in  the  player's  hand."  "Who  was  that  man, 
Fergus  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  That  was  Sencha,  the  orator, 
the  best-spoken  of  all  the  men  of  the  whole  world,  and 
the  peace-maker  of  the  army  of  Ulster,"  said  Fergus  ; 
"  and  the  whole  of  the  men  of  the  world,  from  the  rising 
to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  he  would  pacify  with  his  three 
fair  words.  But  by  my  word,  it  is  no  cowardly  or  no 
peaceful  counsel  that  man  will  give  his  king  to-day,  but 
counsel  of  courage,  and  of  strength,  and  of  battle." 

"  There  came  another  troop,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  and 
a  man  at  the  head  of  them,  and  it  would  not  be  easy 
to  find  a  man  with  a  better  appearance,  or  with  hair 
more  like  gold  than  what  he  has.     There  was  a  sword 


26o     THE    AWAKENING    OF   ULSTER 

with  an  ivory  hilt  in  his  hand,  and  he  throwing  it  up 
and  catching  it  in  his  hand  again,  just  when  it  was 
coming  on  the  heads  of  the  people  near  him."  "  That 
is  Aithirne,  the  poet  and  satirist,"  said  Fergus.  "  Covet- 
ous he  is,  and  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  would  ask  the 
one-eyed  man  for  his  one  eye,  and  that  the  rivers  and 
the  lakes  go  back  before  him  when  he  makes  a  satire 
on  them,  and  rise  when  he  praises  them.  And  one 
time  when  the  men  of  Ulster  were  fighting  to  protect 
him  against  the  men  of  Leinster,  that  he  had  stirred  up, 
and  were  shut  up  in  Beinn  Etair,  he  had  plenty  of  cows 
himself  in  the  fort,  but  he  would  not  give  a  drop  of 
milk  to  man  or  boy,  or  to  a  wounded  man  itself,  but 
left  them  without  food  and  without  drink,  unless  they 
would  eat  the  clay  or  drink  the  salt  water  of  the  sea." 

"  I  saw  another  troop  coming,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  wild- 
looking,  and  in  the  middle  of  it  a  young  little  lad,  red 
and  freckled.  He  had  a  silk  shirt  on  him  with  a  border  of 
red  gold,  and  a  shield  faced  with  gold,  with  a  golden  rim, 
and  a  little  bright  gold  sword  at  his  side."  "  Who  is 
that,  Fergus?"  said  Ailell.  "  I  do  not  remember  leaving 
any  such  boy  as  that  when  I  left  Ulster,"  said  Fergus  ; 
"  but  it  is  likely  it  may  be  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre,  that  has 
come  without  leave  of  his  father  to  help  his  grandfather, 
Conchubar ;  and  the  men  of  Teamhair  with  him.  And 
if  what  I  think  is  true,"  he  said,  "you  will  find  that 
troop  to  be  a  drowning  sea,  and  it  is  by  that  troop  and 
by  that  little  boy  the  battle  will  be  won  against  you." 

Now  that  was  the  same  Ere  that  fought  afterwards 
in  the  last  battle  against  Cuchulain  at  Muirthemne,  and 
some  said  it  was  he  that  made  an  end  of  Cuchulain,  but 
others  said  it  was  only  the  Grey  of  Macha  he  made  an 
end  of.  And  Conall  Cearnach  killed  him  afterwards 
in  his  red  vengeance ;  and  his  sister  Acaill  came  to 
Teamhair  where  he  was  buried,  and  cried  for  him 
through  nine  days,  till  her  heart  broke  like  a  nut  inside 


MAC   ROTH'S   REPORT  261 

her,  and  she  desired  that  her  grave  and  her  mound 
should  be  made  in  a  place  where  the  grave  and  the 
mound  of  Ere  could  be  seen  from  it.  And  it  was  made 
in  the  place  that  used  to  be  called  the  place  of  the  poet 
Maine,  but  that  is  called  now  the  place  of  Acaill. 

"  I  saw  another  company,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  having 
at  its  head  a  tall,  large  man,  with  high  looks,  with  soft 
brown  hair  in  thin  smooth  locks  on  his  forehead  ;  a 
deep  grey  cloak  wrapped  around  him,  having  a  silver 
brooch  in  it ;  a  soft  white  shirt  next  his  skin."  "  I 
know  that  man,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  he  is  Eoghan,  son  of 
Durthact,  king  of  Fernmaige,  one  of  the  twelve  chief 
heroes  of  the  Red  Branch." 

"  I  saw  another  company  coming,"  said  Mac  Roth, 
"  and  a  great  many  in  it ;  and  they  red  with  the  fire  of 
their  anger,  strong  and  eager  and  destroying.  At  their 
head  an  angry  man,  dreadful  to  look  at,  long-nosed, 
large-eared,  with  coarse  grey  hair ;  a  striped  cloak  on 
him,  an  iron  skewer  in  place  of  a  brooch,  a  coarse 
striped  shirt  next  his  skin,  a  great  spear  in  his  hand." 

"  I  know  that  man,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  Celthair,  son  of 
Uthecar ;  a  head  of  battle  in  Ulster.  And  the  spear 
in  his  hand  is  the  great  spear,  the  Luin,  that  was 
brought  back  from  the  East  by  the  three  sons  of 
Tuireann." 

"  I  saw  the  troop  that  came  last,"  said  Mac  Roth, 
"and  it  without  a  leader.  There  were  thirty  hundred  in 
it,  of  proud,  clean,  ruddy  men  ;  long  fair  hair  they  had, 
and  shining  eyes,  and  long  shining  cloaks  with  good 
brooches,  blue  shining  spears,  good  coverings  on  their 
heads,  and  shirts  of  striped  silk.  But  they  seemed  to 
have  some  great  trouble  on  them,  and  to  be  very 
down-hearted."  "  What  men  are  those,  Fergus  ?  "  said 
Ailell.  "  I  know  them  well,"  said  Fergus.  "  It  is  well 
for  those  on  whose  side  they  are,  and  it  is  a  pity  for 
those  they  are  against ;  for  they  are  able  by  themselves," 


262    THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

he  said,  "to  fight  the  whole  army  of  Ireland  ;  for  they 
are  Cuchulain's  men  from  Muirthemne." 

Now  all  this  time  Cuchulain  was  lying  on  his  bed, 
with  the  dint  of  his  wounds.  But  when  he  knew  by  the 
noise  on  the  plain  that  the  men  of  Ulster  were  gathering 
for  the  battle,  he  used  all  his  strength  and  tried  to  rise 
up ;  and  he  gave  a  great  shout,  that  all  his  own  troop 
heard  it,  and  all  the  whole  army.  But  his  people  that 
were  about  him  laid  him  down  on  the  bed  again  by 
force,  and  put  ropes  and  fastenings  over  him,  the  way 
he  could  not  move  from  it  to  open  his  wounds  again. 
And  as  he  was  lying  there,  two  mocking  women  came 
from  Ailell's  camp,  and  stood  beside  his  bed,  and  let  on 
to  be  crying  and  lamenting ;  and  it  is  what  they  told 
him,  that  the  men  of  Ulster  were  beaten,  and  that 
Conchubar  was  killed,  and  that  Fergus  was  killed 
along  with  him.  And  in  the  night  the  Morrigu  came 
like  a  lean,  grey-haired  hag,  shrieking  from  the  one 
army  to  the  other,  hopping  over  the  points  of  their 
weapons,  to  stir  up  anger  between  them,  and  she  called 
out  that  ravens  would  be  picking  men's  necks  on  the 
morrow.  And  with  all  this  outcry,  Cuchulain  could  not 
sleep,  and  when  the  day  began  to  break  he  said  to 
Laeg :  "  Look  out  now,  and  bring  me  word  of  every- 
thing that  happens  on  this  day."  So  Laeg  looked  out, 
and  he  said :  "  I  see  a  little  herd  of  cattle  breaking  out 
from  the  west  of  Ailell's  camp,  and  there  are  lads 
following  after  them  and  trying  to  bring  them  back  ;  and 
I  see  more  lads  coming  out  from  the  army  of  Ulster 
to  attack  them."  "  That  little  herd  on  the  plain  is  the 
beginning  of  a  great  battle,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is 
the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne  and  his  heifers  are  in  it,  and 
now  the  young  men  of  the  east  and  of  the  west  will 
come  out  against  one  another.  And  go  now,  Laeg," 
he  said,  "  for  I  cannot  go  out  myself,  and  call  to  the 


THE   GREAT   BATTLE  263 

men  of  Ulster,  and  stir  them  up  to  the  battle."  So 
Laeg  went  out  and  called  to  them  in  Cuchulain's  name 
to  get  themselves  ready  and  to  come  out  to  the 
battle. 

When  the  men  of  Ulster  heard  that  message  from 
Cuchulain,  they  rose  up,  and  rushed  out  without 
stopping  to  put  on  their  clothing,  but  only  taking 
their  weapons  in  their  hands  ;  and  such  of  them  as 
had  the  door  of  their  tents  facing  eastwards  did  not 
wait  to  go  through  it,  but  broke  out  to  the  west. 

But  Conchubar  was  not  in  such  haste  to  bring  his 
own  men  out,  but  he  said  to  Sencha :  "  Keep  them  back 
till  the  right  time  will  have  come,  when  the  sun  will 
have  lighted  all  the  valleys  and  the  hills." 

Then  Laeg  went  to  look  out  again,  and  he  saw  the 
army  of  Ireland  coming  out  to  meet  the  men  of  Ulster, 
and  there  began  a  great  fight  between  them,  and  it  went 
on  a  good  while  without  one  side  getting  the  better  of 
the  other.  And  when  Cuchulain  heard  it  he  said  :  "  My 
grief!  I  not  to  be  able  to  go  among  them  !  " 

Now  as  to  Maeve,  she  was  sending  out  her  men,  the 
three  Conaires  from  Slieve  Lis,  the  three  red  Luachras, 
the  three  nimble  Suibhnes,  the  three  sky-like  Eochaids, 
the  three  bards  from  Lough  Riach,  the  three  Fachtnas 
from  the  woods  of  Navan,  the  three  sad-faced  Murroughs, 
the  three  boiling  Laegaires,  the  three  dove-like  Conalls, 
the  three  sons  of  Driscoll  that  fought  together,  the  three 
Fintans  from  beside  the  sea.  And  some  say  that  besides 
these  there  were  three  young  men  of  the  Sidhe  in 
shining  armour,  that  mixed  through  the  army  to  stir  up 
courage,  and  that  none  of  the  men  of  the  army  could 
see  among  them,  Delbhaeth,  son  of  Eithlin,  and  Cermat 
Honey-mouth,  and  Angus  Og,  son  of  the  Dagda. 

But  when  Maeve  saw  the  battle  going  on,  and  neither 
side  getting  the  victory,  she  called  to  Fergus,  and  she 
said  :  "  It  is  time  for  you,  Fergus,  to  go  out  and  avenge 


264    THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

yourself  on  your  enemy  Conchubar  ;  and  besides  that," 
she  said,  "  it  is  right  for  you  to  go  and  to  fight  for  us 
now,  after  all  the  good  treatment  you  got  from  us  in 
Connaught."  "  I  would  go  out  willingly,"  said  Fergus, 
"  if  I  had  my  own  sword  again,  the  Caladcholg,  the 
sword  that  Leite  brought  from  the  country  of  the 
Sidhe."  Then  Ailell  said  to  his  chariot  -  driver, 
Ferloga :  "  Go  now  and  bring  Fergus's  sword  that  I 
bade  you  to  hide  away."  So  Ferloga  brought  the 
sword,  and  put  it  in  Fergus's  hand,  and  Fergus  gave  it 
a  great  welcome.  "  Come  out  now  into  the  battle, 
Fergus,"  said  Maeve,  •'  and  spare  no  one  to-day,  unless 
it  might  be  some  very  dear  friend." 

Then  Fergus  and  Maeve  and  Ailell  went  out  into  the 
battle,  and  three  times  they  made  the  army  of  Ulster  go 
back  before  them.  And  when  Conchubar  heard  his 
people  were  being  driven  back,  he  called  out  to  the 
household  of  the  Red  Branch  :  "  Let  you  hold  the  place  I 
am  in  now,  till  I  go  see  who  has  turned  back  our  men 
against  us  three  times  on  the  north  side." 

And  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch  called  back  to  him  : 
"  We  will  do  that,  and  unless  the  sky  should  fall  on  us, 
or  the  earth  give  way  under  us,  we  will  not  give  up  one 
inch  of  ground  before  the  men  of  Ireland  till  you  come 
to  us  again,  or  till  we  get  our  death." 

Then  Conchubar  went  to  see  who  it  v/as  that  was 
driving  back  his  army,  and  it  was  Fergus  he  found  before 
him  ;  and  Fergus  struck  three  great  blows  on  Conchubar's 
shield,  the  Ochain,  so  that  the  shield  screamed  out  loud, 
and  all  the  shields  of  the  army  of  Ulster  screamed  with 
it,  and  the  three  great  waves  of  Ireland  answered  it. 

Then  Fergus  said  :  "  Who  is  it  is  holding  his  shield 
against  me  ? "  And  Conchubar  knew  then  who  was 
before  him,  and  he  cried  out :  "  It  is  the  man,  Fergus,  that 
is  greater  and  more  comely  and  younger  and  better  than 
yourself,  the  man  whose  father  and  mother  were  better 


FERGUS'S  THREE  BLOWS    265 

than  your  own  ;  the  man  that  put  to  death  the  three 
great  candles  of  the  valour  of  the  Gael,  the  three  pros- 
perous sons  of  Usnach,  in  spite  of  your  guarantee  and 
your  protection  ;  the  man  that  banished  you  out  of  your 
own  country  ;  the  man  that  made  your  house  a  dwelling- 
place  for  deer  and  foxes  ;  the  man  that  never  left  you  so 
much  as  the  breadth  of  your  foot  of  land  in  Ulster ;  the 
man  that  drove  you  to  the  entertainment  of  a  woman ; 
and  the  man  that  will  drive  you  back  to-day  in  the 
presence  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  Conchubar,  son  of 
Fachtna  Fathach,  High  King  of  Ulster,  the  High  King 
of  Ireland." 

When  Fergus  heard  that,  he  took  his  sword,  the 
Caladcholg,  in  his  two  hands,  and  he  was  swinging  it  over 
his  head,  that  it  seemed  to  have  the  size  and  appearance 
of  a  rainbow,  and  he  was  about  to  give  his  three  great 
strokes  on  the  men  of  Ulster. 

But  Conchubar's  son,  Cormac  Conloingeas,  saw  what  he 
was  doing,  and  he  made  a  rush  at  Fergus,  and  put  his  arms 
about  his  knees,  and  he  said  :  "  Do  not  put  out  your  great 
strength,  my  master  Fergus,  to  destroy  the  whole  army 
of  Ulster."  "  Let  me  go,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  I  will  not 
live  through  the  day  unless  I  strike  my  three  blows  on 
the  men  of  Ulster."  But  Cormac  Conloingeas  would  not 
leave  off  from  asking  him,  and  then  he  said :  "  Tell 
Conchubar  to  go  back  to  his  own  place  in  the  battle, 
and  I  will  spare  the  army."  So  Conchubar  went  back, 
and  then  Fergus  struck  his  three  blows  on  three  little 
hills  that  were  near  him,  and  cut  their  tops  off,  and  they 
are  called  "the  three  bare  hills  of  Meath"  to  this  day. 

But  when  Cuchulain  heard  the  scream  of  Conchubar's 
shield  the  time  Fergus  struck  it,  he  called  out  to  Laeg : 
"Who  has  dared  to  strike  those  three  blows  upon  the 
Ochain,  and  I  still  living?"  "  It  is  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh, 
struck  them,"  said  Laeg.  "  Where  is  the  battle  going  on 
now  ? "  said  Cuchulain.     "  The  armies  are  come  as  far 


266    THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

as  Gairech,"  said  Laeg.  "  By  my  hand  of  valour,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "they  will  not  have  reached  to  Ilgairech  be- 
fore I  will  be  with  them."  With  that  he  put  out  all  his 
strength,  and  he  broke  the  ropes  that  were  about  him, 
and  threw  them  off,  and  he  scattered  the  grass  that  was 
on  his  wounds  into  the  high  air.  And  the  two  mocking 
women  were  there  yet,  and  he  dashed  them  one  against 
the  other,  and  left  them  there  on  the  ground.  And  he 
looked  for  his  arms,  but  he  could  see  none  of  them  ;  but 
only  his  chariot,  that  was  broken,  was  lying  there.  And 
he  took  hold  of  a  shaft  of  it,  and  rushed,  with  all  his 
wounds,  straight  into  the  battle,  till  he  found  Fergus, 
and  he  called  to  him  to  go  back  before  him  now,  as  he 
had  promised  he  would  do.  But  Fergus  gave  him  no 
answer.  Then  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Go  back,  now,  Fergus, 
or  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  he  said,  "  I  will  grind  you 
to  pieces  as  a  mill  grinds  the  malt."  Then  Fergus  said  : 
"  Do  not  be  giving  out  threats  to  me,  for  my  army  is 
well  able  for  the  army  of  Ulster."  "  You  gave  me  your 
promise,  Fergus,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  to  go  back  before  me 
when  we  would  meet  in  the  great  battle,  and  when  I 
would  be  covered  with  wounds.  You  bound  yourself  to 
that  the  time  I  went  back  before  you,  and  you  without 
your  sword." 

Then  Fergus,  when  he  heard  that,  went  back  three 
steps,  and  then  he  turned,  and  his  men  with  him,  and 
gave  way  before  Cuchulain.  And  all  the  men  of  Ireland 
turned  when  they  saw  that,  and  broke  out  of  their  ranks, 
and  ran  over  the  hill  westward,  and  Cuchulain  and  the 
men  of  Ulster  followed  after  them,  making  a  great 
slaughter.  And  Cuchulain  came  up  with  Maeve,  and 
she  called  out :  "  A  gift  to  me,  Cuchulain."  "  What  is  it 
you  are  asking  of  me  ?  "  he  said.  "  Take  what  is  left  of 
my  army  under  your  protection,  and  let  it  pass  over  the 
great  ford  westward."  So  he  agreed  to  do  that,  and 
what  was  left  of  the  army  of  Ireland  went  over  the  great 


THEENDOFTHEWAR  267 

ford  of  the  Sionnan  at  Athluain,  and  Maeve  and  Ailell 
and  Fergus,  and  the  Maines,  and  the  sons  of  Magach 
stopped  to  the  last,  and  drew  their  shields  of  protection 
behind  the  men  of  Ireland,  till  they  had  got  back  to 
Cruachan  in  Connaught,  the  place  they  set  out  from. 

It  was  mid-day  when  Cuchulain  came  into  the  battle, 
and  the  sun  was  setting  when  the  last  of  them  went  over 
the  ford.  And  then  Cuchulain  took  his  sword  that  Laeg 
had  brought  him,  for  he  had  but  a  few  splinters  left  of 
the  shaft  of  the  chariot  he  had  used  in  the  fight,  and  he 
made  three  blows  at  three  rocks,  and  cut  the  tops  off 
them,  for  an  insult  to  Connaught  for  ever,  the  way  if 
any  one  should  speak  of  the  three  bare  hills  of  Meath, 
the  three  bare  rocks  of  Athluain  would  be  there  to  give 
the  answer. 

And  Fergus  was  watching  the  army  of  Ireland  going 
back  over  the  ford,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  This  army  is 
swept  away  to-day  ;  it  is  wandering  and  going  astray 
like  a  mare  among  her  foals  that  goes  astray  in  a  strange 
place,  not  knowing  what  path  to  take.  And  it  is  follow- 
ing the  lead  of  a  woman,"  he  said,  "  has  brought  it  into 
this  distress." 

This  then  was  the  end  of  the  battle  of  Gairech  and 
Ilgairech,  and  the  end  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of 
Cuailgne. 


XIII 

THE  TWO  BULLS 

'T'HIS,  now,  is  the  story  of  the  two  bulls,  the  Brown  of 
Cuailgne,  and  the  White-horned  of  Cruachan  Ai, 
and  this  is  the  way  it  was  with  them — for  they  were  not 
right  bulls,  but  there  was  enchantment  on  them.  In 
the  time  long-  ag-o  Bodb  was  king-  of  the  Sidhe  of 
Munster,  and  it  is  in  Femen,  of  Slieve-na-man  he  was,  and 
Ochall  Ochne  was  king  of  the  Sidhe  of  Connaught,  and 
it  is  in  Cruachan  he  used  to  be.  They  used  at  one  time 
to  be  fighting  one  against  the  other,  but  afterwards  they 
made  peace,  and  were  good  friends.  Now  Bodb  had  a 
swineherd,  whose  name  was  Friuch,  and  Ochall  had  a 
swineherd  whose  name  was  Rucht,  and  they  were 
friendly  with  one  another  the  same  as  their  masters. 
And  they  had  the  knowledge  of  enchantments,  and  could 
turn  themselves  to  every  shape.  And  when  there  was  a 
great  plenty  of  mast  in  Munster,  the  swineherd  from 
Connaught  would  bring  his  lean  swine  to  the  south,  and 
in  the  same  way,  when  mast  was  plentiful  in  Connaught, 
the  swineherd  would  bring  his  swine  northward,  and 
would  bring  them  home  again  fat. 

But  after  a  while  some  bad  feeling  rose  up  between 
the  two,  for  the  men  of  Connaught  and  the  men  of 
Munster  began  to  set  them  one  against  the  other.  So 
one  year  when  there  was  great  mast  in  Munster,  and 
Rucht  brought  his  herd  from  Connaught,  so  soon  as  his 
comrade  Friuch  had  bade  him  welcome,  he  said  :  '*  The 


THE   TWO    SWINEHERDS  269 

people  are  all  saying  your  power  is  greater  than  mine." 
"  It  is  no  less  any  way,"  said  Ochall's  herd.  "  We  will 
soon  know  that,"  said  Friuch.  "  I  will  put  an  enchant- 
ment on  your  swine,  and  even  though  they  eat  their 
share  of  mast,  they  will  not  be  fat,  like  mine  will  be." 
And  so  it  happened,  he  put  an  enchantment  on  the 
Connaught  swine,  and  when  Rucht  went  home  with 
them  they  could  hardly  walk  at  all,  they  were  so  thin 
and  so  weak,  and  all  the  people  were  laughing  at  the 
state  they  were  in.  *'  It  was  a  bad  day  for  you,  you  went 
to  the  South,"  they  said,  "  for  your  comrade  has  greater 
power  than  what  you  have."  "  That  is  not  so,"  said  he. 
"  Wait  till  it  is  our  turn  to  have  mast,  and  I  will  play 
the  same  trick  on  him." 

So  the  next  year  he  did  as  he  had  said,  and  the 
Munster  swine  pined  away,  so  that  every  one  said  their 
power  was  the  same.  And  when  Bodb's  swineherd 
went  back  home  to  Munster  with  his  lean  swine,  his 
master  put  him  out  of  the  place.  And  Ochall  put  his 
herd  out  of  his  place  as  well,  because  of  the  swine 
coming  back  in  so  bad  a  state  from  Munster. 

One  day,  two  full  years  after  that,  the  men  of  Munster 
were  gathered  together  near  Femen,  and  they  took 
notice  of  two  ravens  that  were  making  a  great  cawing. 
"  What  a  noise  those  birds  have  been  making  all  through 
the  year  !  "  they  said.  "  They  never  stop  scolding  at  one 
another."  Just  then  Findell,  Ochall's  steward  from 
Cruachan,  came  towards  them  on  the  hill,  and  they  bade 
him  welcome.  "  What  a  noise  those  birds  are  making  !  " 
he  said ;  "  any  one  would  think  them  to  be  the  same 
two  birds  we  had  in  Cruachan  last  year."  With  that, 
they  saw  the  two  ravens  change  into  the  shape  of  men, 
and  they  knew  them  to  be  the  two  swineherds,  and 
they  bade  them  welcome.  "  It  is  not  right  you  to 
welcome  us,"  said  Bodb's  swineherd,  "  for  there  will  be 
many   dead   bodies   of    friends,   and    much   crying    on 


270  THETWOBULLS 

account  of  us  two."  What  has  happened  you  all 
through  this  time  ?  "  they  asked.  "  Nothing  good,"  he  said. 
"  Since  we  went  from  you  we  have  been  all  the  time  in 
the  shape  of  birds,  and  you  saw  the  way  we  were  scold- 
ing at  one  another  all  through  this  year.  And  we  were 
quarrelling  in  the  same  way  the  whole  of  last  year  at 
Cruachan,  and  the  men  of  the  North  and  of  the  South 
have  seen  what  our  power  is.  And  now,"  he  said,  "  we 
will  go  into  the  shape  of  water  beasts,  and  be  under  the 
water  for  the  length  of  two  years."  And  with  that  one 
of  them  went  into  the  Sionnan,  and  the  other  into  the 
Suir,  and  they  were  seen  for  a  year  in  the  Suir,  and  for 
a  year  in  the  Sionnan,  and  they  devouring  one  another. 
And  one  day  the  men  of  Connaught  had  a  great 
gathering  at  Ednecha,  on  the  Sionnan,  and  they  saw  these 
two  beasts  in  the  river  ;  each  one  of  them  looked  to  be 
as  big  as  the  top  of  a  hill,  and  they  made  such  a  furious 
attack  on  one  another  that  fiery  swords  seemed  to  be 
coming  from  their  jaws,  and  the  people  came  round 
them  on  every  side.  They  came  out  of  the  Sionnan 
then,  and  as  soon  as  they  touched  the  shore,  they 
changed  again  into  the  shape  of  the  two  swineherds. 
Ochall  bade  them  welcome.  "  Where  have  you  been 
wandering?"  he  asked  them.  "Indeed  it  is  tired  we 
are  with  our  wanderings,"  they  said.  "  You  saw  what  we 
were  doing  before  your  eyes,  and  that  is  what  we  were 
doing  through  these  two  years,  under  seas  and  waters. 
And  now  we  must  take  new  shapes  on  us,  till  we  try 
one  another's  strength  again."  And  with  that  they 
went  away. 

It  happened  a  good  while  after  that  there  was  a  great 
gathering  of  the  men  of  Connaught  at  Loch  Riach,  for 
Bodb  was  coming  on  a  friendly  visit  to  Ochall.  And 
Bodb  brought  a  great  troop  with  him,  the  most  splendid 
ever  seen  ;  speckled  horses  they  had,  and  green  cloaks 
with  silver  brooches,  and  shoes  with  clasps  of  red  bronze. 


THE   TWO   CHAMPIONS  271 

and  every  one  of  them  had  a  collar  of  gold,  with  a  stone 
worth  a  newly-calved  cow  set  in  it.  When  Ochall  saw 
what  grand  clothes  and  horses  they  had,  he  called  to  his 
people  secretly,  and  asked  could  they  match  Bodb's 
people  in  dress  and  in  horses  and  arms,  and  they  said 
they  could  not.  Then  Ochall  said  :  "  That  is  a  pity,  and 
our  great  name  is  lost."  But  just  then  a  troop  of  men 
were  seen  coming  from  the  North,  and  black  horses  with 
them,  that  you  would  think  had  been  cast  up  by  the  sea, 
and  bridle-bits  of  gold  in  their  mouths.  And  the  men 
had  black-grey  cloaks,  and  a  gold  brooch  at  the  breast  of 
each,  and  a  white  tunic  with  crimson  stripes,  and  fifty 
coils  of  bright  gold  round  every  man.  And  every  man 
of  them  had  black  hair,  as  smooth  as  if  a  cow  had  licked 
it.  And  they  stopped  a  little  way  off,  and  then  the  men 
of  Connaught  stood  up  and  gave  up  their  place  to  them. 
There  was  a  Druid  from  Britain  there,  and  when  he  saw 
them  make  way  he  said  :  "  From  this  out,  to  the  end  of 
life  and  time,  the  Connaught  men  will  be  under  the 
yoke,  attending  on  hounds  and  on  sons  of  kings  and 
queens  for  ever." 

Then  after  they  had  been  feasting  for  a  while,  Bodb 
asked  could  any  Connaught  man  be  found  that  would 
fight  against  his  champion  Rinn,  that  was  with  him,  and 
that  had  a  great  name,  but  no  one  knew  where  he  came 
from.  And  at  first  there  could  no  one  be  found,  but 
then  a  strange  champion  came  out  from  among  the  men 
of  Connaught,  and  he  said,  "  I  will  go  against  him." 
"  That  is  no  welcome  news,"  said  Rinn.  Then  they 
fought  against  one  another  for  three  days  and  three 
nights,  and  before  the  end  of  that  time  the  two  armies 
began  to  join  into  the  fight,  and  a  troop  came  from 
Leinster  and  joined  with  Bodb,  and  another  troop 
came  from  Meath  and  joined  with  Ochall.  And  four 
kings  were  killed  there,  and  Ochall  among  them,  and 
then  Bodb  went  back  to  Slieve-na-man.     But  as  to  the 


272  THETWOBULLS 

two  champions,  they  were  seen  no  more,  and  it  was 
known  they  were  the  two  swineherds.  After  that  they 
were  for  two  years  with  the  appearance  of  shadows, 
threatening  one  another,  the  way  that  many  people  died 
of  fright  after  seeing  them. 

And  after  that,  they  were  in  the  shape  of  eels,  and 
one  went  into  the  river  Cruind,  in  Cuailgne ;  and  after  a 
while  a  cow  belonging  to  Daire,  son  of  Fachna,  drank  it 
down.  And  the  other  went  into  the  Spring  of  Uaran 
Garad,  in  Connaught  ;  and  one  day  Maeve  went  out  to 
the  spring,  and  a  small  bronze  vessel  in  her  hand,  and 
she  dipped  it  in  the  water,  and  the  little  eel  went  into  it, 
and  every  colour  was  to  be  seen  on  him.  And  she  was 
a  long  time  looking  at  him,  she  thought  the  colours 
so  beautiful.  Then  the  water  went  away,  and  the  eel 
was  alone  in  the  vessel.  "  It  is  a  pity  you  cannot  speak 
to  me,"  said  Maeve.  "  What  is  it  you  want  to  know  ?  " 
said  the  eel.  "  I  would  like  to  know  what  way  it  is  with 
you  in  that  shape  of  a  beast,"  she  said  ;  "  and  I  would  like 
to  know  what  will  happen  me  after  I  get  the  sway 
over  Connaught."  "  Indeed  it  is  a  tormented  beast  I 
am,"  he  said,  "  and  it  is  in  many  shapes  I  have  been. 
And  as  to  yourself,"  he  said,  "  handsome  as  you  are,  you 
should  take  a  good  man  to  be  with  you  in  your  sway." 
"  I  have  no  wish,"  said  Maeve,  "  to  let  a  man  of 
Connaught  get  the  upper  hand  over  me,"  and  with 
that  she  went  home  again. 

But  she  married  Ailell  after  that,  and  as  for  the  eel, 
he  was  swallowed  down  by  one  of  Maeve's  cows  that 
came  to  drink  at  the  spring. 

And  it  was  from  that  cow,  and  from  the  cow  that 
belonged  to  Daire,  son  of  Fachna,  the  two  bulls  were 
born,  the  White-horned  and  the  Brown.  They  were  the 
finest  ever  seen  in  Ireland,  and  gold  and  silver  were  put 
on  their  horns  by  the  men  of  Ulster  and  Connaught. 
In   Connaught  no  bull  dared  bellow  before  the  White- 


THE   MEETING   OF   THE   BULLS    273 

horned,  and  in  Ulster  no  bull  dared  bellow  before  the 
Brown. 

As  to  the  Brown,  he  that  had  been  Friuch,  the  Munster 
swineherd,  his  lowing  when  he  would  be  coming  home 
every  evening  to  his  yard  was  good  music  to  the  people 
of  the  whole  of  Cuailgne.  And  wherever  he  was, 
neither  Bocanachs  nor  Bananachs  nor  witches  of  the 
valley,  could  come  into  the  one  place  with  him.  And 
it  was  on  account  of  him  the  great  war  broke  out. 

Now,  when  Maeve  saw  at  Ilgaireth  that  the  battle 
was  going  against  her,  she  sent  eight  of  her  own 
messengers  to  bring  away  the  Brown  Bull,  and  his 
heifers.  "  For  whoever  goes  back  or  does  not  go  back," 
she  said, "  the  Brown  Bull  must  go  to  Cruachan." 

Now  when  the  Brown  Bull  came  into  Connaught,  and 
saw  the  beautiful  trackless  country  before  him,  he  let 
three  great  loud  bellowings  out  of  him.  As  soon  as  the 
White-horned  heard  that,  he  set  out  for  the  place  those 
bellowings  came  from,  with  his  head  high  in  the  air. 

Then  Maeve  said  that  the  men  of  her  army  must  not 
go  to  their  homes  till  they  would  see  the  fight  between 
the  two  bulls. 

And  they  all  said  some  one  must  be  put  to  watch  the 
fight,  and  to  give  a  fair  report  of  it  afterwards.  And 
it  is  what  they  agreed,  that  Bricriu  should  be  sent  to 
watch  it,  because  he  had  not  taken  any  side  in  the 
war ;  for  he  had  been  through  the  whole  length  of  it 
under  care  of  physicians  at  Cruachan,  with  the  dint  of 
the  wound  he  got  the  day  he  vexed  Fergus,  and  that 
Fergus  drove  the  chess-men  into  his  head.  "  I  will  go 
willingly,"  said  Bricriu.  So  he  went  out  and  took  his 
place  in  a  gap,  where  he  could  have  a  good  view  of 
the  fight. 

As  soon  as  the  bulls  caught  sight  of  one  another 
they  pawed  the  earth  so  furiously  that  they  sent  the 
sods   flying,   and   their   eyes   were   like  balls  of  fire  in 

S 


2/4  THETWOBULLS 

their  heads ;  they  locked  their  horns  together,  and  they 
ploughed  up  the  ground  under  them  and  trampled  it, 
and  they  were  trying  to  crush  and  to  destroy  one 
another  through  the  whole  length  of  the  day. 

And  once  the  White-horned  went  back  a  little  way 
and  made  a  rush  at  the  Brown,  and  got  his  horn  into 
his  side,  and  he  gave  out  a  great  bellow,  and  they 
rushed  both  together  through  the  gap  where  Bricriu 
was,  the  way  he  was  trodden  into  the  earth  under 
their  feet.  And  that  is  how  Bricriu  of  the  bitter 
tongue,  son  of  Cairbre,  got  his  death. 

Then  when  the  night  was  coming  on,  Cormac 
Conloingeas  took  hold  of  a  spear-shaft,  and  he  laid 
three  great  strokes  on  the  Brown  Bull  from  head  to 
tail,  and  he  said  :  "  This  is  a  great  treasure  to  be  boast- 
ing of,  that  cannot  get  the  better  of  a  calf  of  his  own 
age."  When  the  Brown  Bull  heard  that  insult,  great 
fury  came  on  him,  and  he  turned  on  the  White-horned 
again.  And  all  through  the  night  the  men  of  Ireland 
were  listening  to  the  sound  of  their  bellowing,  and  they 
going  here  and  there,  all  through  the  country. 

On  the  morrow,  they  saw  the  Brown  Bull  coming 
over  Cruachan  from  the  west,  and  he  carrying  what 
was  left  of  the  White-horned  on  his  horns.  Then 
Maeve's  sons,  the  Maines,  rose  up  to  make  an  attack 
on  him  on  account  of  the  Connaught  bull  he  had  de- 
stroyed. "  Where  are  those  men  going  : "  said  Fergus. 
*'  They  are  going  to  kill  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne." 
"  By  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said  Fergus,  "  if  you  do 
not  let  the  Brown  Bull  go  back  to  his  own  country  in 
safety,  all  he  has  done  to  the  White-horned  is  little  to 
what  I  will  do  now  to  you." 

Then  the  Brown  Bull  bellowed  three  times,  and  set 
out  on  his  way.  And  when  he  came  to  the  great  ford 
of  the  Sionnan  he  stopped  to  drink,  and  the  two  loins  of 
the   White-horned   fell  from   his   horns  into  the  water. 


DEATH  OF  THE  BROWN  BULL  275 

And  that  place  is  called  Ath-luain,  the  ford  of  the  loin, 
to  this  day.  And  its  liver  fell  in  the  same  way  into  a 
river  of  Meath,  and  it  is  called  Ath-Truim,  the  ford  of 
the  liver,  to  this  day. 

Then  he  went  on  till  he  came  to  the  top  of  Slieve 
Breagh,  and  when  he  looked  from  it  he  saw  his  own 
home,  the  hills  of  Cuailgne  ;  and  at  the  sight  of  his 
own  country,  a  great  spirit  rose  up  in  him,  and  madness 
and  fury  came  on  him,  and  he  rushed  on,  killing  every- 
one that  came  in  his  way. 

And  when  he  got  to  his  own  place,  he  turned  his  back 
to  a  hill  and  he  gave  out  a  loud  bellowing  of  victory. 
And  with  that  his  heart  broke  in  his  body,  and  blood 
came  bursting  from  his  mouth,  and  he  died. 


XIV 

THE  ONLY  JEALOUSY  OF  EMER 

TT  happened  one  time,  near  to  the  day  of  Samhain, 
the  men  of  Ulster  came  together  for  games  and 
for  feasting  upon  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 

And  they  were  all  of  them  there  but  Conall  Cearnach 
and  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes.  "  Let  the  feast  be 
begun,"  they  said.  "  It  shall  not  be  begun,"  said 
Cuchulain,  "  till  Conall  and  Lugaid  are  here." 

Sencha,  the  poet,  said  then  :  "  Let  us  play  chess  while 
we  are  waiting,  and  let  poems  be  sung  for  us,  and  let 
games  be  played."     And  they  agreed  to  that. 

While  they  were  doing  these  things,  a  flock  of  birds 
came  down  on  the  lake  before  them,  and  in  all  Ireland 
there  were  not  birds  to  be  seen  that  were  more  beautiful. 

A  great  longing  came  on  the  women  that  were  there 
to  have  the  birds  that  were  on  the  lake,  and  they  began 
to  quarrel  with  one  another  as  to  who  should  have  them. 

King  Conchubar's  wife  said  :  "  I  must  have  a  bird  of 
these  birds  on  each  of  my  two  shoulders."  "  We  must 
all  have  the  same,"  said  the  other  women.  "If  any  one 
is  to  get  them,  it  is  I  that  must  first  get  them,"  said 
Eithne  Inguba,  who  loved  Cuchulain.  "  What  shall  we 
do  ?  "  said  the  women.  "  It  is  I  will  tell  you  that,"  said 
Levarcham,  "  for  I  will  go  to  Cuchulain  from  you  to  ask 
him  to  get  them." 

So  she  went  to  Cuchulain  and  said  :  "  The  women  of 

276 


THETWOBIRDS  277 

Ulster  desire  that  you  will  get  these  birds  for  them." 
Cuchulain  put  his  hand  upon  his  sword  as  if  to  strike 
her,  and  he  said  :  "  Have  the  idle  women  of  Ulster 
nothing  better  to  do  than  to  send  me  catching  birds  to- 
day ? "  "  It  is  not  for  you,"  said  Levarcham,  "  to  be 
angry  with  the  women  of  Ulster ;  for  there  are  many 
of  them  are  half  blind  to-day  with  looking  at  you,  from 
the  greatness  of  their  love  for  you." 

Then  Cuchulain  told  Laeg  to  yoke  his  chariot  for  him, 
and  he  went  in  it  to  the  lake,  and  he  gave  the  birds  a 
side  stroke  of  his  sword,  so  that  their  feet  and  their 
wings  could  not  rise  from  the  water. 

They  caught  them  all  then,  and  divided  them  among 
the  women,  so  that  there  was  not  a  woman  among  them 
who  did  not  get  two  birds,  but  Eithne  Inguba  only. 
Cuchulain  came  last  to  her.  "  It  is  vexed  you  seem  to 
be,"  he  said.  "  Is  it  because  I  have  given  the  birds  to 
the  other  women  ?  "  "  You  have  good  reason  for  that," 
she  said,  "  for  there  is  not  a  woman  of  them  but  would 
share  her  love  and  her  friendship  with  you  ;  while,  as  to 
me,  no  person  shares  my  love  but  you  alone." 

"  Do  not  be  vexed  then,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  for  what- 
ever birds  may  come  to  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  or  to 
the  Boinne,  from  this  out,  you  shall  have  the  two  most 
beautiful  among  them." 

It  was  not  long  after  that,  two  other  birds  came  on 
the  lake,  and  they  linked  together  with  a  chain  of  red 
gold,  and  they  were  singing  soft  music  that  went  near 
to  put  sleep  on  the  whole  gathering. 

Cuchulain  went  over  towards  the  birds,  but  Laeg  said 
to  him  not  to  go,  and  Eithne  said  :  "  If  you  would  take 
our  advice,  you  would  not  go  near  them,  for  there  is 
enchantment  behind  these  birds  ;  let  some  other  birds  be 
got  for  me  besides  these." 

"  Do  you  think  you  can  put  me  from  what  I  have  a 
mind  to  do  ? "  said  Cuchulain.     And  he  said  to  Laeg  : 


278         ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

''  Put  a  stone  into  that  sling."  Laeg  took  a  stone  and 
put  it  in  a  sling,  and  Cuchulain  made  a  cast,  but  it 
missed.  "  My  grief ! "  he  said.  Then  he  took  another 
stone,  and  made  another  cast,  and  it  passed  by  them. 
"  I  am  good  for  nothing,"  he  said,  "  for  since  I  first  took 
arms  I  never  made  a  bad  cast  till  this  day."  Then  he 
threw  his  heavy  spear,  and  it  went  through  the  flying 
wing  of  one  of  the  birds,  and  the  two  of  them  dived 
down  under  the  water. 

Cuchulain  went  away  then  with  vexation  on  him,  and 
he  lay  down  with  his  head  against  a  rock,  and  sleep 
came  on  him.  And  he  saw  two  women  coming  towards 
him,  one  of  them  having  a  green  cloak  about  her,  and 
the  other  a  five-folded  crimson  cloak. 

The  woman  with  the  green  cloak  went  up  to  him,  and 
smiled  at  him,  and  she  gave  him  a  stroke  of  a  rod.  The 
other  went  up  to  him  then,  and  smiled  at  him,  and  gave 
him  a  stroke  in  the  same  way  ;  and  they  went  on  doing 
this  for  a  long  time,  each  of  them  striking  him  in  turn, 
till  he  was  more  dead  than  alive.  And  then  they  went 
away  and  left  him  there. 

All  the  men  of  Ulster  saw  that  something  had 
happened,  and  they  asked  if  they  would  awaken  him. 
"  Do  not,"  said  Conall  ;  "  do  not  move  him  before  night." 

After  that  Cuchulain  stood  up  in  his  sleep,  and  the 
men  of  Ulster  asked  him  who  was  it  had  used  him  like 
that,  but  he  could  not  speak  with  them.  But  after  a 
while  he  said  :  "  Bring  me  and  lay  me  on  my  bed,  not  to 
Dundealgan,  but  to  the  Speckled  House  at  Emain." 
"  Let  him  be  brought  to  Dundealgan,  where  Emer  his 
wife  is,"  said  Laeg.  "  Not  so,"  said  Cuchulain,  "■  but 
bring  me  to  the  Speckled  House."  So  he  was  brought 
there,  and  he  stopped  to  the  end  of  a  year  in  that  place 
without  speaking  to  any  person. 

One  day  before  the  next  feast  of  Samhain,  at  the  end 
of  the   year,  Conchubar  and  the   men   of  Ulster   were 


ANGUS  279 

around  him  in  the  house ;  that  is,  Laegaire  between  him 
and  the  wall,  and  Conall  Cearnach  between  him  and  the 
door,  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes  beside  his  pillow,  and 
Eithne  Inguba  at  his  feet. 

As  they  were  sitting  like  this,  one  who  had  the 
appearance  of  a  man  came  into  the  house  to  them,  and 
sat  down  on  the  side  of  the  bed  where  Cuchulain  was 
lying. 

"  What  has  brought  you  here  ?  "  said  Conall.  "  I  will 
tell  you  that,"  said  he.  "  It  is  to  speak  with  the  man 
lying  here  on  the  bed  I  am  come.  And  if  the  man 
lying  here  were  in  his  health,  he  would  be  a  protection 
to  all  the  men  of  Ulster ;  but  as  he  is,  under  great  sick- 
ness and  weakness,  he  is  a  better  protection  to  them." 
And  he  stood  up  then,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"  If  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim,  would  take  my  friend- 
ship to-day,  all  he  has  seen  in  his  sleep  would  be  hiS) 
with  no  help  from  his  army. 

"  Liban,  she  who  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  Labraid  of 
the  quick  sword,  has  said  that  the  coming  of  Cuchu- 
lain would  bring  great  joy  to  the  heart  of  Fand  her 
sister. 

"  O  Cuchulain,  it  is  not  long  your  sickness  would  be 
on  you  if  they  would  come,  the  two  daughters  of  Aedh 
Abrat.  Here  to  the  south,  to  the  plain  of  Muirthemne, 
I  will  send  Liban  to  cure  your  sickness,  Cuchulain." 

"Who  are  you  yourself?"  they  said  to  him  then. 

"  I  am  Angus,"  he  said,  and  with  that  he  went  out ; 
and  they  did  not  know  where  he  came  from,  or  where  he 
went.  And  then  Cuchulain  sat  up  and  spoke  to  them. 
"  It  is  time  indeed,"  said  the  men  of  Ulster,  "  for  you  to 
tell  us  all  that  has  happened  you."  "  I  saw,"  he  said,  "  a 
vision  about  this  time  last  year  "  :  and  then  he  told  them 
all  he  had  seen,  and  of  the  women  that  had  come  and 
had  struck  him  with  their  rods.  "  And  what  is  to  be 
done  now,  my    master,   Conchubar?"   he   said.     "This 


28o        ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   E  M  E  R 

must  be  done,"  said  Conchubar :  "  you  must  go  back 
till  you  come  to  the  same  rock." 

So  then  Cuchulain  set  out,  and  came  to  the  same 
rock,  and  there  he  saw  the  same  woman  with  the  green 
cloak  coming  towards  him.  "  That  is  well,  Cuchulain," 
said  she.  "  It  is  not  well  indeed  ;  and  tell  me  what  did 
you  want  with  me  when  you  came  last  year?"  said 
Cuchulain. 

"It  was  not  to  harm  you,  indeed,  we  came,"  said  the 
woman,  "  but  to  ask  your  love  ;  and  I  am  come  now  to 
speak  to  you,"  she  said,  "  from  Fand,  daughter  of  Aedh 
Abrat ;  for  Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea,  has  left  her,  and 
her  love  has  fallen  on  you  ;  and  my  own  name  is  Liban, 
wife  of  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword.  And  I  have  a 
message  for  you  from  him,"  she  said,  ''that  he  will  give 
all  you  can  wish  for,  if  you  will  give  him  one  day's  help 
against  Senach  of  the  crooked  body,  and  against 
Eochaid  Juil,  and  against  Eoghan  of  Inver,  that  is 
Eoghan  of  the  River's  Mouth." 

"  My  weakness  is  on  me  yet,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  I 
could  not  go  out  fighting  against  men  to-day."  "You 
will  not  be  long  so,"  said  Liban  ;  "  you  will  be  healed, 
and  what  is  lost  of  your  strength  will  be  given  back  to 
you  again  ;  and  you  ought  to  do  this  much  for  Labraid," 
she  said,  "because  he  is  the  best  of  the  heroes  of  the 
world." 

"In  what  place  is  he?"  said  Cuchulain.  "He  is  in 
Magh  Mell,  the  Happy  Plain,"  she  said.  "  I  will  not  go," 
said  Cuchulain,  "  until  I  see  Emer,  my  wife.  And  you 
are  to  go  for  me,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  to  where  she  is,  and 
tell  her  it  was  the  women  of  the  Sidhe  came  to  me  from 
the  hills  and  struck  me  ;  and  tell  her  I  am  getting  better 
now,  and  bid  her  come  and  visit  me." 

So  Laeg  went  to  Emer,  and  he  told  her  what  way 
Cuchulain  was.  And  Emer  said  :  "  It  is  a  bad  servant 
you  are,  Laeg,  you  that  are  coming  and  going  by  the 


EMER'S    REPROACHES  281 

hills,  and  that  cannot  find  a  cure  for  your  master ;  and 
it  is  a  pity  for  the  men  of  Ulster,"  she  said,  "  that  they 
do  not  find  a  certain  cure  for  him.  If  it  had  been 
Conchubar  that  was  in  bonds,  or  Fergus  that  could  not 
sleep,  or  Conall  Cearnach  that  had  wounds  on  him,  it  is 
Cuchulain  that  would  give  them  relief."  And  it  is  what 
she  said : 

"My  grief!  son  of  Riangabra,  you  who  go  early  and 
late  among  the  hills,  you  are  not  early  but  late  in 
bringing  a  cure  for  the  beautiful  son  of  Dechtire. 

"  It  is  a  pity  for  the  brave  men  of  Ulster,  with  all  the 
knowledgeable  men  and  the  learners  among  them,  that 
they  have  not  searched  the  whole  face  of  the  world  for 
a  cure  for  their  friend  Cuchulain. 

"If  it  was  Fergus  had  lost  his  sleep,  and  that  any 
enchantment  could  cure  him,  it  is  the  son  of  Dechtire 
would  not  sleep  at  home  till  he  had  found  a  Druid 
to  do  it. 

"  If  it  were  Conall  in  the  same  way  was  suffering 
from  wounds  and  from  sores,  it  is  the  Hound  would 
search  the  wide  world  till  he  would  find  one  that  would 
cure  him. 

"If  it  was  Laegaire  of  many  gifts  was  wounded  in 
battle,  Cuchulain  would  have  searched  through  all 
Ireland  to  cure  the  grandson  of  Iliach. 

"  If  it  were  on  Celthair  the  revengeful  sleep  had 
fallen  and  long  sickness,  night  and  day  would  see  the 
journeys  of  Setanta  am.ong  the  hills. 

"  If  it  had  been  Furbaigh,  chief  of  fighters,  that  lay 
wasting  in  his  bed,  he  would  have  searched  the  ridge 
of  the  world  until  he  had  found  what  would  save  him. 

"  The  host  of  the  hill  of  Truin  has  killed  him ;  they 
have  taken  from  him  his  great  courage ;  the  Hound  of 
Muirthemne  is  no  better  than  any  other  hound  since 
the  sleep  of  the  hill  of  Bruagh  came  on  him. 

"  My  grief!  sickness  has  laid  hold  of  me  for  the  Hound 


282         ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

of  the  smith  of  Conchubar ;  it  will  be  sickness  to  my 
heart  and  my  body,  I  to  fail  in  bringing  him  a  cure. 

"My  grief!  It  hurts  my  heart,  sickness  to  be  on 
the  rider  of  the  plain,  so  that  he  could  not  come  here, 
to  the  gathering  at  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 

"  It  is  why  he  does  not  come  from  Emain,  the 
appearance  he  had  is  gone  from  him  ;  my  voice  is  weak 
and  dead  because  of  the  way  he  is.  A  month  and  a 
quarter  and  a  year  without  sleep,  that  is  the  way  I 
am,  and  without  hearing  any  one  speak  pleasant  words, 
son  of  Riangabra,  O  son  of  Riangabra." 

After  she  had  made  this  complaint,  Emer  went 
forward  to  Emain  Macha  to  attend  on  Cuchulain,  and 
she  sat  on  the  side  of  the  bed  where  he  was,  and  it  is 
what  she  was  saying  : 

"  Rise  up,  champion  of  Ulster,  awake  from  your 
sleep,  in  health  and  happiness.  Look  at  the  well- 
shaped  king  of  Macha ;  he  will  not  allow  your  long 
sleep.  Look  at  his  shoulder,  smooth  like  crystal  ; 
look  at  his  drinking-horns  and  battle  spoils  ;  look  at 
his  chariots  that  sweep  the  valleys ;  look  at  the 
movements  of  his  chess-men. 

"  Think  on  his  heroes  in  their  strength  ;  think  on  his 
high,  fine  women  ;  think  on  his  kings  of  brave  doings  ; 
think  on  their  high  noble  queens. 

"  Think  on  the  beginning  of  clear  winter ;  think  on 
its  wonders  in  their  turn ;  think  in  yourself  of  what  it 
brings  forth — its  cold,  its  length,  its  want  of  beauty. 
This  stupor,  it  is  not  good  wholesome  sleep ;  it  is 
idleness  and  the  fear  of  battle ;  long  sleep  is  the  same 
as  drunkenness  ;  weakness  is  only  second  to  death. 

"  Awake  from  the  sleep  of  the  Sidhe  you  have  drunk ; 
cast  it  off  with  all  your  great  strength.  You  have  had  your 
fill  of  sweet  flowery  words ;  rise  up,  O  hero  of  Ulster." 

Cuchulain  rose  up  then,  and  he  drew  his  hand  across 
his  face,  and  he  put  his  stupor  and  his  heaviness  off 


LABRAID'S   COUNTRY  283 

him.  Then  Laeg  said  :  "  It  is  great  idleness  for  a  hero 
to  give  in  to  the  sleep  of  a  sick-bed  because  women 
from  Magh  Mell  have  appeared  to  you,  who  overcame 
you,  who  bound  you,  who  put  you  within  the  power 
of  idle  women.  Rise  up  out  of  death,  you  who  are 
wounded  by  women  of  the  Sidhe,  for  your  strength 
has  come,  the  strength  of  a  hero  among  heroes ;  rise 
up  till  you  go  to  the  place  of  fighting  men,  till  you  do 
great  deeds,  where  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  leads 
his  men.  Rise  up  that  you  may  be  great,  and  leave 
this  idleness." 

Then  Cuchulain  went  again  to  the  rock,  and  he  saw 
Liban  coming  towards  him,  and  she  asked  him  again 
to  go  with  her  to  her  country.  "  What  place  is  Labraid 
in  at  this  time  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  will  tell  you  that," 
said  Liban,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"  Labraid  is  at  this  time  upon  a  clear  lake,  where 
companies  of  women  come  to.  It  is  not  tired  you 
would  be  coming  to  his  country,  if  you  would  but  visit 
Labraid  of  the  quick  sword. 

"  A  happy  house  ordered  by  a  kind  woman ;  a 
hundred  men  in  it  that  are  masters  of  learning;  the 
beauty  of  redness  is  on  the  cheek  of  Labraid. 

"  He  shakes  a  wolfs  head  before  his  thin  red  sword  ; 
he  bruises  the  armour  of  rushing  hosts ;  he  breaks  the 
shields  of  heroes. 

"  His  appearance  in  the  fight  is  the  delight  of  the 
eye ;  he  does  his  brave  deeds  at  all  points ;  it  is  he  is 
worth  more  than  any  other  man. 

"  The  greatest  of  fighters,  the  one  told  of  in  stories, 
has  reached  the  country  of  Eochaid  Juil ;  his  hair  is 
like  rings  of  gold  upon  him ;  his  coming  is  like  the 
smell  of  wine. 

"  A  man  of  many  strange  deeds,  Labraid  of  the  quick 
hand  at  sword  ;  he  does  not  strike  till  he  is  forced ;  he 
keeps  his  people  in  quietness. 


284        ONLY   JEALOUSY    OF   EMER 

"There  are  bridles  and  collars  of  red  gold  on  his 
horses,  and  this  is  not  all  his  riches  ;  the  house  he  lives 
in  is  supported  by  pillars  of  silver  and  of  crystal." 

"  I  will  not  go  on  a  woman's  asking,"  said  Cuchulain. 
"  Let  Laeg  come  with  me  then,"  said  Liban,  "  to  see 
and  to  know  everything."  ''  Let  him  go  then,"  said 
Cuchulain. 

Then  Laeg  went  along  with  the  women,  and  they 
went  past  Magh  Luada,  the  Racing  Plain,  and  past  the 
Bile  Buada,  the  Tree  of  Victory,  and  past  Oenach 
Emna,  the  gathering-place  of  Emain,  and  to  Oenach 
Fidhga,  the  gathering-place  of  the  woods ;  and  it  was 
there  Aedh  Abrat  used  to  be  with  his  daughters.  And 
Liban  caught  Laeg  by  the  shoulder :  "  You  will  not 
escape  to-day,  Laeg,"  she  said,  "  unless  you  are 
protected  by  a  woman."  "  That  is  not  what  we  were 
much  used  to  up  to  this,"  said  Laeg,  "to  be  under 
women  protection."  "  My  grief  for  ever,  Cuchulain  not 
to  be  in  your  place  now  !  "  said  Liban.  "  I  would  be  glad 
indeed  he  to  be  here,"  said  Laeg. 

They  went  away  then  towards  the  Island  of  Labraid, 
and  when  they  came  to  the  lake  they  saw  a  little 
copper  ship  upon  the  water  before  them.  Then  they 
went  into  the  ship,  and  they  came  to  the  island,  and 
there  they  went  to  the  door  of  a  house.  And  they  saw 
a  man  coming  towards  them,  and  Liban  said  to 
him  :  "  Where  is  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword  ?  "  And 
the  man  said  :  "  Labraid  is  putting  courage  into  the 
people,  and  he  is  gathering  them  for  battle.  There 
will  be  great  slaughter  made  there,  that  will  fill  the 
plain  of  Fidgha," 

Then  they  went  up  to  the  house,  and  Laeg  thought 
he  had  seen  it  before,  and  yet  it  was  strange.  And  in  it 
were  beds,  crimson,  green,  white  and  gold ;  and  the  great 
candle  there  was  a  bright  precious  stone.  And  at  the 
western  door,  where  the  sun  goes   down,  there  was  a 


FAND  285 

stud  of  horses  with  grey  speckled  manes,  and  others  of 
red-brown.  And  at  the  eastern  door  were  three  tall 
trees  of  pure  crimson,  with  lasting  flowers,  and  birds 
singing  from  them  for  the  young  men  of  the  king's 
rath.  And  there  was  a  tree  at  the  door  of  the  court 
that  there  was  not  the  like  of  for  beauty,  a  silver  tree, 
and  when  the  sun  was  shining  on  it,  it  was  like  gold. 
And  there  were  three  times  twenty  other  trees  there, 
and  the  top  of  every  one  meeting  the  other,  and  three 
hundred  could  be  fed  from  every  tree  with  fruit  that  is 
different,  that  is  always  ripe.  And  there  was  a  fountain 
in  the  great  court,  and  three  times  fifty  striped  cloaks, 
and  a  shining  gold  pin  in  the  ear  of  every  cloak.  And 
there  was  a  vat  of  merry  mead  for  dividing  among  the 
household  ;  it  is  a  lasting  custom  that  it  is  always  full, 
ever  and  always.  And  in  the  house  were  three  times 
fifty  women,  and  they  all  bade  welcome  to  Laeg,  and 
it  is  what  they  all  said  to  him  :  "  There  is  a  welcome 
before  you,  Laeg,  for  the  sake  of  the  woman  with  whom 
you  come,  and  for  the  sake  of  him  from  whom  you 
come,  and  for  your  own  sake." 

"  What  will  you  do  now,  Laeg  ?  "  said  Liban.  "  Will 
you  go  first  and  speak  with  Fand  ?  "  "I  will,  if  I  know 
the  place  she  is  in,"  said  Laeg.  "  I  will  tell  you  that, 
for  she  is  apart  in  a  room  by  herself,"  said  Liban.  So 
they  went  to  speak  with  her,  and  she  bade  Laeg 
welcome  in  the  same  way  as  the  others.  And  the 
meaning  of  the  name  Fand  is  a  tear  that  passes  over 
the  fire  of  the  eye.  It  was  for  her  purity  she  was 
called  that,  and  for  her  beauty  ;  for  there  was  nothing 
in  life  with  which  she  could  be  compared  besides  it. 

And  when  she  had  bade  Laeg  welcome,  she  said  : 
"  For  what  reason  did  Cuchulain  not  come  ? "  "  He 
had  no  mind  to  come  on  a  woman's  asking,"  said 
Laeg.  "  And  besides  that,"  he  said,  "  he  did  not  know 
if  it  was   from  yourself  the  message  came."     "  It  was 


286        ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

from  myself  indeed,"  she  said,  "  and  let  him  not  be  long  in 
coming,  for  it  is  on  this  day  the  battle  is  to  be  fought." 

While  they  were  there  together,  they  heard  the  sound 
of  Labraid's  chariot  coming  to  the  island.  "  It  is 
troubled  Labraid's  mind  is  to-day,"  said  Liban.  "  Let 
us  go  out  before  him."  So  they  went  out,  and  Liban 
bade  him  welcome,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"  Welcome,  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  at  sword, 
yourself  an  army,  a  destroyer  of  heroes ;  welcome, 
welcome,  Labraid." 

Labraid  made  no  answer,  and  Liban  spoke  again : 

"  Welcome,  Labraid  of  the  quick  hand  at  sword  ;  his 
hand  is  open  to  all ;  his  word  is  faithful ;  his  justice  is 
right ;  kind  his  sway ;  strong  his  right  arm  ;  gentle  to 
his  horses  ;  welcome,  welcome,  Labraid  !  " 

Still  Labraid  did  not  answer,  and  she  spoke  again, 
and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  Welcome,  Labraid  of  the  quick  sword  ;  lifter  up  of 
the  weak ;  subduer  of  the  strong ;  welcome,  Labraid ; 
welcome,  Labraid !  " 

Then  Labraid  said  :  "  Leave  your  praises,  woman,  for 
it  is  not  pride  or  happiness  or  high  thoughts  of  myself  I 
have  in  my  mind  to-day.  A  battle  is  near,  and  the 
striking  of  swords  in  right  and  left  hands ;  the  one 
heart  of  Eochaid  Juil  is  equal  to  many.  It  is  not 
a  time  for  pride." 

"  There  is  good  news  before  you,"  said  Liban  then. 
"  Laeg,  the  chariot-driver  of  Cuchulain,  is  here,  and  he 
has  brought  a  message  from  him  that  he  will  go  into 
the  battle  with  you."  Then  Labraid  bade  him  welcome 
as  the  women  had  done,  and  he  said  :  "  Go  back  home 
now,  and  tell  Cuchulain  to  make  no  delay  in  coming, 
for  it  is  to-day  the  battle  is  to  be  fought." 

So  Laeg  went  away  then  to  Emain  Macha,  and 
told  his  story  to  Cuchulain,  and  to  all  the  rest,  and  it  is 
what  he  said  : 


FAND   WELCOMES   CUCHULAIN    287 

"  Labraid  is  a  king  of  great  armies.  I  saw  his 
country,  bright,  free,  where  no  lies  are  spoken,  and  no 
bad  thing.  I  saw  the  masters  of  music  within,  giving 
deh'ght  to  the  daughters  of  Aedh.  If  I  had  not 
come  away  quickly,  they  would  have  taken  my 
strength  from  me. 

"  I  saw  all  this  at  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe.  The  women 
there  are  beautiful,  their  gifts  are  beyond  counting;  as 
to  Fand,  the  daughter  of  Aedh  Abrat,  no  one  could 
reach  her  beauty  but  the  queens  of  the  kings. 

"  Eithne  Inguba  is  a  beautiful  woman,  but  the 
woman  I  am  speaking  of  now  takes  away  the  wits 
from  whole  armies. 

"  It  is  a  pity,  Cuchulain,  you  did  not  go  a  while  ago, 
and  every  one  asking  you  to  do  it,  that  you  might  see 
the  way  it  is  in  the  great  house  I  have  seen. 

"  If  all  Ireland  were  mine,  and  I  king  over  the  happy 
hills,  I  would  give  it,  and  that  would  be  no  small  thing, 
to  live  for  ever  in  the  place  I  have  been  in." 

"  That  is  good,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  is  good,"  said 
Laeg,  "  and  it  is  right  to  go  to  reach  it,  and  everything 
in  that  country  is  good." 

Then  Cuchulain  rose  up,  and  he  passed  his  hand  over 
his  face,  and  he  spoke  pleasantly  with  Laeg,  and  he  felt 
that  the  things  the  young  man  was  telling  him  were  a 
strengthening  to  his  mind.  And  Laeg  said  :  "  It  is  time 
to  come,  for  the  battle  is  being  fought  to-day." 

Cuchulain  went  along  with  him  then  to  that  country, 
and  took  his  chariot  with  him  till  they  reached  the 
island.  Labraid  bade  them  welcome,  and  all  the  women  ; 
and  Fand  bade  Cuchulain  her  own  welcome. 

"What   is   to  be   done  here  now?"   said  Cuchulain. 

"  This  is  what  we  have  to  do,"  said  Labraid  ;  "  to  go 
and  take  a  turn  round  the  army  that  is  against  us." 

They  went  forward  then  till  they  reached  the  gather- 
ing-place of  the  armies,  and  till  they  cast  an  eye  over 


288         ONLY   JEALOUSY    OF    EMER 

them,  and  it  seemed  as  if  there  was  no  end  to  them. 
"  Go  you  away  for  a  while,"  said  Cuchulain  to  Labraid. 
So  Labraid  went  away  then,  and  Cuchulain  stayed  before 
the  armies.  Then  two  black  ravens  croaked,  and  all  the 
armies  laughed.  ''It  is  likely,"  they  said,  "  the  rav'ens 
are  telling  of  the  coming  of  the  angry  man  from 
IMuirthemne."     And  they  hunted  them  away. 

After  that  Eochaid  Juil  went  to  wash  his  hands  at 
the  spring,  and  Cuchulain  saw  his  bare  shoulder  through 
the  shirt,  and  he  threw  a  spear  at  him,  and  it  passed 
through  him  ;  and  then  he  attacked  the  army  alone,  and 
killed  a  great  many.  Then  he  was  attacked  by  Senach 
Siabartha  the  Unearthly,  and  they  fought  very  hard, 
and  Cuchulain  overcame  him  in  the  end.  And  Labraid 
came  then,  and  broke  the  armies  before  him.  and  he 
called  to  Cuchulain  to  leave  off  from  killing.  But  Laeg 
said  :  "  I  am  in  dread  he  will  spend  his  rage  on  us,  since 
he  has  not  had  enough  of  fighting.  And  let  your  people 
go,"  he  said,  "  and  let  them  make  ready  three  vats  of 
water  to  put  out  his  heat.  The  first  vat  he  will  go  into 
will  boil  over ;  the  second  vat,  no  person  could  bear  its 
heat ;  but  the  heat  of  the  third  vat  will  be  fit  to  bear." 

When  the  women  saw  Cuchulain  coming  back,  it  was 
then  Fand  sang  before  him  :  "  Stately  is  the  man  that 
comes  in  his  chariot ;  young  he  is,  and  without  a  beard  ; 
his  course  is  splendid  across  the  plain  at  evening,  at 
Senach  Fidhga,  the  gathering-place  of  the  woods. 

"  It  is  not  the  music  of  the  Sidhe  would  keep  him  in 
a  bed ;  it  is  the  red  colour  of  blood  that  is  upon  him  ;  I 
stand  looking  at  the  horses  of  his  chariot ;  their  like  is 
not  known,  they  are  as  fast  as  the  winds  of  spring. 

"  It  is  Cuchulain  that  is  coming,  the  young  hero  from 
Muirthemne  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  the  man  against  whom  he 
is  angered." 

Then  Liban  asked  him  what  he  had  done  in  the  fight 
And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Fair,  ruddy-faced  men  attacked 


EMER'S   ANGER  289 

me  on  every  side  from  the  back  of  horses,  the  people  of 
Manannan,  Son  of  the  Sea,  called  there  by  Eochaid  of 
Inver  ;  I  gave  them  wound  for  wound.  I  threw  my  spear 
at  Eochaid  Juil ;  it  was  not  with  the  uncertain  cast 
of  a  man  among  mists  I  threw  it.  I  heard  his  groan,  and 
its  sound  was  friendly  to  me  ;  if  those  who  have  spoken 
have  told  the  truth,  it  was  that  throw  won  the  battle." 

It  was  to  the  son,  now,  of  this  Eochaid  Juil  of  the 
Land  of  Promise,  that  Aebgreine,  the  daughter  of 
Naoise  and  Deirdre  was  given  afterwards  in  marriage 
by  Manannan. 

After  that,  Cuchulain  stopped  a  month  in  that  country 
with  Fand,  and  at  the  end  of  the  month  he  bade  her 
farewell,  and  she  said  to  him :  "  In  whatever  place  you 
tell  me  to  go  and  meet  you,  I  will  go  there."  And  the 
place  they  settled  to  meet  at  was  at  Ibar  Cinn  Tracta, 
the  yew  at  the  head  of  Baile's  strand. 

But  when  all  this  was  told  to  Emer,  there  was  great 
anger  on  her,  and  she  had  knives  made  ready  to  kill  the 
woman  with ;  and  she  came,  and  fifty  young  girls  with 
her,  to  the  place  where  they  had  settled  to  meet. 

Cuchulain  and  Laeg  were  playing  chess  there,  and  they 
did  not  see  the  women  coming.  It  was  Fand  saw  them 
first,  and  she  said  to  Laeg :  "  Look,  Laeg,  at  what  I  see." 
"  What  is  that  ?  "  said  Laeg.  Then  he  looked,  and  it  is 
what  Fand  said :  "  Look  behind  you,  Laeg ;  there  are 
women  listening  to  you,  wise,  with  sharp,  green  knives  in 
their  right  hands,  with  gold  at  their  well-shaped  breasts  ; 
they  move  as  brave  men  do,  going  through  a  battle  of 
chariots.  Well  does  Emer,  daughter  of  Forgall,  change 
colour  in  her  anger." 

"  No  harm  shall  be  done  to  you  by  her,"  said  Cuchulain  ; 
"  and  she  shall  not  reach  to  you  at  all.  Come  into  the 
sunny  seat  of  the  chariot,  opposite  myself,  for  I  will 
defend  you  against  all  the  many  women  of  the  four 
points   of  Ulster ;   for  though  Forgall's  daughter  may 

T 


290        ONLY   JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

threaten,"  he  said,  "  on  the  strength  of  her  companions, 
to  do  some  daring  thing,  it  is  surely  not  against  me  she 
will  dare  it." 

Then  Cuchulain  said  to  Emer  :  "  It  is  little  I  mind  you, 
woman,  in  spite  of  my  affection  for  you,  more  than  any 
other  man  minds  a  woman.  The  spear  in  your  shaking 
hand  does  not  wound  me,  nor  your  weak,  thin  knife, 
nor  your  vain,  gathered  anger ;  for  it  would  be  a  pity 
my  strength  to  be  put  down  by  a  woman's  strength." 

"  I  ask  then,"  said  Emer,  "  what  was  it  led  you, 
Cuchulain,  to  dishonour  me  before  all  the  women  of 
the  province,  and  before  all  the  women  of  Ireland,  and 
before  all  honourable  people  in  the  same  way?  For 
it  was  under  your  shelter  I  came,  and  on  the  strength 
of  your  faithfulness  ;  for  although  you  threaten  a  great 
quarrel  in  your  pride,  it  is  certain,  Cuchulain,  you  cannot 
put  me  away,  even  if  you  would  try  to  do  it." 

"  I  ask  you,  Emer,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  why  I  may  not 
have  my  turn  in  the  company  of  this  woman  ;  for  in  the 
first  place  she  is  well-behaved,  comely,  well-mannered, 
worthy  of  a  king,  this  woman  from  beyond  the  waves  of 
the  great  sea  ;  with  form  and  countenance  and  high 
descent  ;  with  embroidery  and  handiness,  with  sense  and 
quickness  ;  for  there  is  not  anything  under  the  skies  her 
husband  could  ask,  but  she  would  do  it,  even  if  she  had 
not  given  her  promise.  And  O  Emer,"  he  said,  "you 
will  never  find  any  brave,  comely  man  so  good  as 
myself" 

"  It  is  certain,"  said  Emer,  "  that  I  will  not  refuse  this 
woman  if  you  follow  her.  But  all  the  same,  everything 
red  is  beautiful,  everything  new  is  fair,  everything  high 
is  lovely,  everything  common  is  bitter,  everything  we 
are  without  is  thought  much  of;  everything  we  know 
is  thought  little  of,  till  all  knowledge  is  known.  And 
O  Cuchulain,"  she  said,  "  I  was  at  one  time  in  esteem  with 
you  and  I  would  be  so  again,  if  it  were  pleasing  to  you," 


FAND'S   COMPLAINT  291 

And  grief  came  upon  her,  and  overcame  her.  "  By 
my  word,  now,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  you  are  pleasing  to  me, 
and  will  be  pleasing  as  long  as  I  live." 

"  Let  me  be  given  up,"  said  Fand.  "  It  is  better  for 
me  to  be  given  up,"  said  Emer.  "  Not  so,"  said  Fand, 
"  it  is  I  that  will  be  given  up  in  the  end,  and  it  is  I  that 
have  been  in  danger  of  it  all  this  time." 

And  great  grief  and  trouble  of  mind  came  on 
Fand,  because  she  was  ashamed  to  be  given  up, 
and  to  have  to  go  back  to  her  home  there  and  then ; 
and  the  great  love  she  had  given  Cuchulain  troubled 
her ;  and  so  she  was  lamenting,  and  she  made  this  com- 
plaint : 

"  It  is  I  will  go  on  the  journey  ;  I  agree  to  it  with  great 
sorrow  ;  though  my  father  has  so  great  a  name,  I  would 
sooner  stay  with  Cuchulain.  It  would  be  better  for 
me  to  be  here,  to  be  under  your  rule  without  grief,  than 
to  go,  though  you  may  wonder  at  it,  to  the  sunny  house 
of  Aedh  Abrat. 

"  O  Emer,  the  man  is  yours,  and  well  may  you  wear 
him,  for  you  are  worthy  ;  what  my  arm  cannot  reach, 
that  at  least  I  may  wish  well  to. 

"  Many  were  the  men  asking  for  me,  in  the  court  and 
in  country  places;  I  never  went  to  meet  one  of  them,  for 
it  is  myself  was  of  right  behaviour. 

"  A  pity  it  is  to  give  love  to  a  man,  and  he  to  take  no 
heed  to  it.  It  is  better  to  be  turned  away,  if  you  are 
not  loved  as  you  love. 

"  It  was  not  right  of  you,  Emer  of  the  yellow  hair,  to 
take  hold  of  Fand,  to  kill  her  in  her  misery." 

Now  all  this  was  told  to  Manannan,  that  Fand, 
daughter  of  Aedh  Abrat  was  fighting  alone  against  the 
women  of  Ulster,  and  that  Cuchulain  was  putting  her 
away.  Manannan  came  then  from  the  east  in  search  of 
her,  and  he  was  near  them,  and  no  one  of  them  saw 
him  but  only  Fand,     And  then  great  fear  and  trouble  of 


292        ONLY  JEALOUSY   OF   EMER 

mind  came  on  her  at  seeing  Manannan,  and  it  is  what 
she  said : 

"  Look  on  the  great  son  of  the  sea,  from  the  plains 
of  Eoghan  of  Inver  ;  Manannan,  lord  of  the  fair  hills  of 
the  world  ;  there  was  a  time  when  he  was  dear  to  me. 

"  He  may  even  to-day  be  constant ;  my  mind  is  no 
friend  to  jealousy.     There  is  a  road  love  leads  us  in. 

"  The  time  I  and  the  friend  of  Lugh  were  in  the  sunny 
palace  of  Dun  Inver,  we  thought,  without  a  doubt,  that 
we  should  never  be  parted  from  one  another. 

"  When  Manannan  the  great  married  me,  I  was  a  wife 
worthy  of  him  ;  he  gave  me  a  bracelet  of  heavy  gold,  as 
the  price  of  my  beauty. 

"  I  see,  coming  over  the  sea,  no  earthly  person  sees 
him,  the  crested  horseman  of  the  high-maned  waves  ;  he 
has  no  need  of  long  ships. 

"  As  for  me  myself,  because  there  is  foolishness  in  the 
minds  of  women,  the  man  I  loved  exceedingly  has  left 
me  here  astray. 

"  Farewell  to  you,  beautiful  Cuchulain ;  I  go  away 
from  you  with  a  kind  heart.  Though  I  do  not  come  back 
again,  let  me  have  your  good  will ;  all  things  are  good  in 
comparison  with  a  parting. 

"  It  is  time  for  me  to  go  away  ;  there  is  one  to  whom 
it  is  not  grief,  but  for  all  that,  it  is  a  great  disgrace  to 
me,  O  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra. 

"  It  is  with  my  own  husband  I  will  go,  because  he  will 
do  as  I  desire.  Look  now  at  my  going,  that  it  may  not 
be  said  I  went  away  secretly." 

Then  Fand  went  over  to  Manannan,  and  Manannan 
bade  her  welcome,  and  he  said  :  "  Well,  woman,  is  it  after 
Cuchulain  you  will  be  going  from  this  time,  or  is  it  with 
me  you  will  go  ?  "  "  By  my  word  now,"  said  she,  "  there 
is  one  of  you  I  would  sooner  follow  than  the  other  ;  but 
it  is  along  with  you  I  will  go  and  I  will  not  wait  on 
Cuchulain,  because  he  has  left  me.    And  another  thing," 


MANANNAN'S   CLOAK  293 

she  said,  "  you  have  not  a  queen  that  is  fitting  for  you, 
and  that  is  what  Cuchulain  has." 

But  when  Cuchulain  saw  the  woman  going  away  from 
him  with  Manannan,  he  said  to  Laeg  :  "  What  is  that  ?  " 
"  It  is  Fand,"  said  Laeg,  "  that  is  going  to  Manannan, 
Son  of  the  Sea,  because  she  was  not  pleasing  to  you." 

It  is  then  there  was  great  anger  on  Cuchulain,  and  he 
went  with  great  leaps  southward  to  Luachair,  the  place 
of  rushes  ;  and  he  stopped  for  a  long  while  without 
drink,  without  food,  among  the  mountains,  and  where  he 
slept  every  night,  was  on  the  road  of  Midluachan. 

And  when  Emer  heard  that,  she  went  to  visit 
Conchubar  in  Emain  Macha,  and  she  told  him  the  way 
Cuchulain  was. 

Then  Conchubar  sent  the  poets  and  the  skilled  men 
and  the  Druids  of  Ulster  to  visit  him,  that  they  might 
lay  hold  of  him,  and  bring  him  to  Emain  Macha  along 
with  them.  But  when  they  came  to  him,  he  would  have 
killed  them,  but  the  Druids  did  enchantment  on  him, 
until  they  had  laid  hold  of  him,  and  until  his  wits  began 
to  come  back  to  him.  Then  he  asked  them  for  a  drink, 
and  the  Druids  gave  him  a  drink  of  forgetfulness.  From 
the  moment  he  drank  that  drink,  he  did  not  remember 
Fand,  and  all  the  things  he  had  done.  And  they  gave 
a  drink  of  forgetfulness  to  Emer  as  well,  that  she  might 
forget  her  jealousy,  for  the  state  she  was  in  was  no  better 
than  his  own. 

And  after  that,  Manannan  shook  his  cloak  between 
Cuchulain  and  Fand,  the  way  they  should  never  meet 
one  another  again. 


XV 

ADVICE  TO  A  PRINCE 

'T^HERE  was  a  meeting  of  the  three  provinces  of 
Ireland  held  about  this  time  in  Teamhair,  to  try 
could  they  find  some  person  to  give  the  High  Kingship  of 
Ireland  to  ;  for  they  thought  it  a  pity  the  Hill  of  the 
Lordship  of  Ireland,  that  is  Teamhair,  to  be  without  the 
rule  of  a  king  on  it,  and  the  tribes  to  be  without  a 
king's  government  to  judge  their  houses.  For  the  men 
of  Ireland  had  been  without  the  government  of  a  High 
King  over  them  since  the  death  of  Conaire  at  Da 
Derga's   Inn. 

And  the  kings  that  met  now  at  the  court  of  Cairbre 
Niafer  were  Ailell  and  Maeve  of  Connaught,  and  Curoi, 
and  Tigernach,  son  of  Luchta,  king  of  Tuathmumain, 
and  Finn,  son  of  Ross,  king  of  Leinster.  But  they 
would  not  ask  the  men  of  Ulster  to  help  them  in 
choosing  a  king,  for  they  were  all  of  them  against  the 
men  of  Ulster. 

There  was  a  bull-feast  made  ready  then,  the  same 
way  as  the  time  Conaire  was  chosen,  to  find  out  who  was 
the  best  man  to  get  the  kingship. 

After  a  while  the  dreamer  screamed  out  in  his  sleep, 
and  told  what  he  saw  to  the  kings.  And  what  he  saw 
this  time,  was  a  young  strong  man,  with  high  looks,  and 
with  two  red  stripes  on  his  body,  and  he  sitting  over  the 
pillow  of  a  man  that  was  wasting  away  in  Emain 
Macha. 

291 


CUCHULAIN'S   ADVICE  295 

A  message  was  sent  then  with  this  account  to  Emain 
Macha.  The  men  of  Ulster  were  gathered  at  that  time 
about  Cuchulain,  that  was  on  his  sick-bed.  The 
messenger  told  his  story  to  Conchubar  and  to  the  chief 
men  of  Ulster. 

"  There  is  a  young  man  of  good  race  and  good  birth 
with  us  now  that  answers  to  that  account,"  said 
Conchubar  ;  "  that  is  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes,  son 
of  Clothru,  daughter  of  Eochaid  Feidlech,  the  pupil 
of  Cuchulain  ;  and  he  is  sitting  by  his  pillow  within, 
caring  him,  for  he  is  on  his  sick-bed." 

And  when  it  was  told  Cuchulain  that  messengers 
were  come  for  Lugaid,  to  make  him  King  in  Teamhair, 
he  rose  up  and  began  to  advise  him,  and  it  is  what 
he  said  : 

"  Do  not  be  a  frightened  man  in  a  battle ;  do  not  be 
light-minded,  hard  to  reach,  or  proud.  Do  not  be 
ungentle,  or  hasty,  or  passionate  ;  do  not  be  overcome 
with  the  drunkenness  of  great  riches,  like  a  flea  that  is 
drowned  in  the  ale  of  a  king's  house.  Do  not  scatter 
many  feasts  to  strangers  ;  do  not  visit  mean  people  that 
cannot  receive  you  as  a  king.  Do  not  let  wrongful 
possession  stand  because  it  has  lasted  long ;  but  let 
witnesses  be  searched  to  know  who  is  the  right  owner 
of  land.  Let  the  tellers  of  history  tell  truth  before  you  ; 
let  the  lands  of  brothers  and  their  increase  be  set  down 
in  their  lifetime  ;  if  a  family  has  increased  in  its  branches, 
is  it  not  from  the  one  stem  they  are  come  ?  Let  them 
be  called  up,  let  the  old  claims  be  established  by  oaths  ; 
let  the  heir  be  left  in  lawful  possession  of  the  place  his 
fathers  lived  in  ;  let  strangers  be  driven  off  it  by  force. 

"  Do  not  use  too  many  words.  Do  not  speak  noisily  ; 
do  not  mock,  do  not  give  insults,  do  not  make  little  of 
old  people.  Do  not  think  ill  of  any  one  ;  do  not  ask 
what  is  hard  to  give.  Let  you  have  a  law  of  lending,  a 
law  of  oppression,  a  law  of  pledging.     Be  obedient  to 


296  ADVICE   TO   A    PRINCE 

the  advice  of  the  wise ;  keep  in  mind  the  advice  of  the 
old.  Be  a  follower  of  the  rules  of  your  fathers.  Do  not 
be  cold-hearted  to  friends  ;  be  strong  towards  your 
enemies ;  do  not  give  evil  for  evil  in  your  battles.  Do 
not  be  given  to  too  much  talking.  Do  not  speak  any 
harm  of  others.  Do  not  waste,  do  not  scatter,  do  not 
do  away  with  what  is  your  own.  When  you  do  wrong, 
take  the  blame  of  it ;  do  not  give  up  the  truth  for  any 
man.  Do  not  be  trying  to  be  first,  the  way  you  will  not 
be  jealous  ;  do  not  be  an  idler,  that  you  may  not  be  weak  ; 
do  not  ask  too  much,  that  you  may  not  be  thought  little 
of.     Are  you  willing  to  follow  this  advice,  my  son  ?  " 

Then  Lugaid  answered  Cuchulain,  and  it  is  what  he 
said  :  "  As  long  as  all  goes  well,  I  will  keep  to  your  words, 
and  every  one  will  know  that  there  is  nothing  wanting 
in  me  ;  all  will  be  done  that  can  be  done." 

Then  Lugaid  went  away  with  the  messengers  to 
Teamhair,  and  he  was  made  king,  and  he  slept  in 
Teamhair  that  night.  And  after  that  all  the  people 
that  had  gathered  there  went  to  their  own  homes. 


XVI 

THE  SONS  OF  DOEL  DERMAIT 

/^NE  time  Cuchulain  was  gone  west  to  Carraige,  in 
^""^  the  province  of  Connaught,  and  Lugaid  of  the  Red 
Stripes  with  him,  and  Laeg.  And  one  day  they  saw  a 
young  girl  standing  on  the  burial-hill  of  Tetach.  "  What 
is  it  you  are  wanting  ?  "  said  Lugaid.  "  I  want  Cuchulain, 
son  of  Sualtim,"  she  said,  "  for  I  have  set  my  love  on  him 
on  account  of  his  great  deeds  that  I  have  heard  of." 
"There  he  is,  beyond,"  said  Lugaid.  Then  she  went 
over  to  him,  and  put  her  arms  about  his  neck,  and  kissed 
him  ;  and  she  told  him  she  was  Finnchoem,  daughter  of 
Eocho  Rond,  king  of  Hy  Maine. 

Then  Cuchulain  took  her  into  his  keeping,  and  they 
travelled  northward  through  the  night,  towards  Emain. 
And  one  time  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  towards  Fid 
Manach,  they  saw  three  fires  in  a  wood  before  them,  and 
nine  men  at  every  fire ;  outlaws  they  were,  that  were 
robbing  the  country.  And  Cuchulain  killed  three  of 
them  at  every  fire. 

And  in  the  morning  they  saw  a  troop  of  men  coming 
towards  them  on  the  plain,  and  Finnchoem's  father, 
the  king  of  Hy  Maine,  leading  them,  and  he  having  on 
him  a  four-folded  crimson  cloak,  with  four  borders  of 
gold,  and  a  shield  with  eight  borders  of  white  bronze, 
and  a  gold-hilted  sword  at  his  side.  And  he  had  light 
yellow  hair  falling  down  on  each  side  to  the  flanks  of  his 
grey-black  horse ;  and  there  was  a  gold   chain   of  the 

2»7 


298    THE   SONS   OF   DOEL   DERMAIT    . 

weight  of  seven  ounces  hanging  from  his  hair,  and  it  was 
from  that  he  took  his  name,  Eocho  Rond,  that  is, 
Eocho  of  the  gold  chain.  And  as  soon  as  he  saw 
Cuchulain,  he  threw  his  spear  at  him.  But  Cuchulain 
caught  the  spear  and  threw  it  back  again,  and  it  struck 
the  horse  in  the  neck,  so  that  he  reared  up  and  threw  his 
master.  And  Cuchulain  lifted  Eocho  in  his  arms,  and 
carried  him  as  far  as  Cruachan,  that  they  were  near  at 
the  time,  to  leave  him  with  Ailell  and  with  Maeve. 
And  there  was  great  shame  on  the  king  of  Hy  Maine  at 
what  had  happened. 

And  when  Cuchulain  was  leaving  him  he  said  :  "  May 
you  never  have  rest  in  sitting,  or  in  lying  down,  until 
you  find  out  what  it  was  brought  away  the  three  sons  of 
Doel  Dermait,  the  Beetle  of  Forgetfulness,  out  of  their 
own  country." 

And  Cuchulain  went  on  to  Emain.  But  when  he  sat 
down  in  his  place,  it  seemed  to  him  the  walls  of  the  house 
and  the  ground  under  him  to  be  on  fire.  Then  he  said 
to  his  people  :  "  I  think  what  Eocho  Rond  threatened  me 
with  is  coming  on  me,  and  I  will  get  my  death  if  I  do 
not  do  as  he  bade  me." 

Then  he  went  back  to  his  own  place,  Dundealgan,  and 
out  westward  to  Baile's  strand.  And  there  he  saw  a  boat 
coming,  and  the  king  of  Alban's  son  in  it,  and  his  people, 
and  they  bringing  presents  for  king  Conchubar,  of  purple, 
and  of  golden  drinking-cups.  And  when  they  saw  the 
three  men  on  the  strand,  Cuchulain  and  Lugaid  and 
Laeg,  they  said  to  them :  "  It  is  likely  if  the  king  knew 
we  were  here,  he  would  send  us  food  and  drink  by 
you."  "Is  it  a  steward  you  would  make  of  me?"  said 
Cuchulain,  and  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  took  the 
sword  in  his  hand  to  strike  them.  "  Give  us  our  life, 
Cuchulain,  for  we  did  not  know  you,"  said  the  king's  son. 

"  Do  you  know  what  was  it  drove  the  three  sons  of 
Doel  Dermait  from  their  own  country  ? "  said  Cuchulain. 


THE   SILVER-WALLED    ISLAND    299 

"  I  do  not  know  that,"  said  the  king's  son.  "  But  I  have 
a  sea  charm,  and  I  will  set  it  for  you,  and  I  will  give  it  to 
you,  and  you  will  find  the  knowledge  you  are  looking  for." 
Then  Cuchulain  gave  him  his  little  spear,  and  scratched 
an  Ogham  on  it,  and  said  to  him  :  "  Set  out  now,  and  go 
and  take  my  seat  at  Emain  Macha." 

Then  they  took  the  things  out  of  the  boat,  and 
Cuchulain  got  in,  and  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes,  and 
Laeg ;  and  they  put  up  the  sail,  and  went  on  for  a  day 
and  a  night  until  they  came  to  an  island.  It  was  a  fine, 
large,  beautiful  island,  having  a  silver  wall  about  it,  and 
a  paling  of  bronze. 

Then  Cuchulain  landed,  and  he  saw  a  house  with 
pillars  of  white  bronze,  and  three  times  fifty  beds  in  the 
house,  and  a  chessboard,  and  a  draughtboard,  and  a  harp 
hanging  over  every  bed.  And  he  saw  a  grey  king  and 
queen  in  the  house,  with  purple  cloaks  on  them, 
worked  with  dark-coloured  gold,  and  three  young  girls 
of  the  one  age,  having  a  dress  worked  with  gold  thread 
on  each  of  them. 

And  the  king  gave  them  a  friendly  welcome,  and  he 
said  :  "  Cuchulain  is  welcome  to  us  for  Lugaid's  sake, 
and  Laeg  is  welcome  for  his  father  and  his  mother's 
sake." 

Then  Cuchulain  asked  him  did  he  know  what  was  it 
drove  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  out  of  their  own 
country.  "  You  will  soon  know  that,"  he  said,  "  for  their 
sister  and  their  sister's  husband  are  in  that  island  there 
to  the  south." 

Then  three  pieces  of  iron  were  put  in  the  fire,  and 
when  they  were  red-hot,  the  three  young  girls  took  them 
out,  and  put  them  in  three  vats,  and  Cuchulain  and 
Lugaid  and  Laeg  bathed  in  the  vats.  And  they  were 
brought  cups  of  mead.  And  then  they  heard  a  noise  of 
arms  and  of  trumpets,  and  they  saw  fifty  armed  men 
coming  to  the  house,  and  every  two  of  them  bringing  a 


300     THESONSOFDOELDERMAIT 

pig  and  an  ox,  and  every  one  a  cup  of  mead  of  hazel 
nuts.  And  then  every  man  of  them  came  again,  and  a 
load  of  firing  on  his  back ;  and  then  the  oxen  and  the 
pigs  were  cooked,  and  a  feast  for  hundreds  was  given  to 
Cuchulain  and  his  comrades. 

And  the  next  day  they  went  on  to  the  island  where 
the  daughter  of  Doel  Dermait  was,  and  the  boat  went 
on,  steering  itself,  to  the  island.  And  Condla,  son-in-law 
of  Doel  Dermait,  was  lying  on  the  strand,  and  his  head 
against  a  pillar  at  the  east  of  the  island,  and  his  feet  at 
the  west  of  the  island,  and  every  time  he  breathed,  he 
made  a  wave  in  the  sea  that  turned  the  boat  back.  But 
then  he  called  out  to  Cuchulain :  ''  Come  to  land,  for 
there  is  no  fear  of  you  on  us  ;  for  however  great  your 
anger  may  be,  it  is  not  in  the  prophecy  that  it  is  by  you 
this  island  will  be  destroyed."  Then  Cuchulain  came  to 
land,  and  Condla  and  his  wife  bade  him  welcome.  And 
Cuchulain  asked  if  they  knew  what  it  was  had  driven 
the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  from  their  own  country. 
"  I  know  it,"  said  the  woman,  "  and  I  will  show  you 
where  they  are,  for  it  is  foretold  that  their  healing  is  to 
come  by  you  ;  and  it  is  glad  my  true,  warm  heart  would 
be,  they  to  be  healed."  And  then  she  said  :  "  Go  to 
where  that  wall  is,  and  you  will  find  Cairpre  Cundail, 
and  he  will  bring  you  to  the  valley  where  they  are  kept 
by  Eocho  Glas,  the  strong  man." 

So  they  went  on  to  the  wall,  and  they  saw  two 
women  that  were  cutting  rushes,  and  Cuchulain  said 
to  one  of  them  :  "  What  is  the  name  of  this  country 
I  have  come  to  ? "  And  the  woman  rose  up,  and  it 
is  what  she  said :  "  There  are  seven  princes  in  this 
country,  and  every  one  of  them  has  had  seven  victories  ; 
and  there  are  seven  women  in  this  country,  every  one  of 
them  having  a  king  under  her  feet.  And  every  one  of 
them  has  seven  armies  ;  and  when  a  thief  comes  to  this 
place,  he  does  not  go  back  again  to  tell  the  story  of  it." 


THE   PRISONERS    HEALED        301 

Then  Cuchulain  struck  her  down  with  his  hand,  and 
the  other  woman  went  away  to  tell  Cairpre  Cundail 
what  had  happened. 

Cairpre  Cundail  came  out  then,  and  he  and  Cuchulain 
fought  through  the  day,  and  neither  got  the  better  of 
the  other.  But  at  night  Cairpre  said  :  "  That  is  enough, 
Cuchulain."  And  they  left  off  for  the  night.  And  next 
morning  Cairpre  brought  Cuchulain  to  the  valley  where 
Eocho  Glas  was,  that  he  himself  was  always  at  war 
with.  And  Eocho  Glas  called  out :  "  Is  any  one  there  of 
your  miserable  fighters  ? "  "  There  is  some  one  here," 
said  Cuchulain.  At  that  Eocho  said  :  "  That  is  not  a 
voice  that  pleases  me,  for  it  is  the  voice  of  the  angry 
man  from  Muirthemne." 

Then  he  came  out,  and  they  fought  together  in  the 
valley,  and  then  they  fought  beside  the  sea.  And  in 
the  end  Cuchulain  took  the  Gae  Bulg  and  put  it 
through  him,  and  he  fell,  and  Cuchulain  struck  his 
head  off. 

Then  the  prisoners  of  Eocho  Glas  came  running  from 
the  hills  on  every  side,  east  and  west,  and  bathed  them- 
selves in  his  blood,  for  he  had  been  doing  them  every 
sort  of  hurt  and  harm,  and  they  all  got  healing. 

And  the  three  sons  of  Doel  Dermait  came  with  them, 
and  were  healed  along  with  them,  and  they  told  their 
whole  story  to  Cuchulain.  And  then  they  set  out  for 
their  own  country. 

And  Cuchulain  went  back  the  same  way  as  he  came ; 
and  he  brought  wonderful  presents  with  him  from 
Cairpre  Cundail. 

And  when  he  got  back  to  Ulster,  he  went  on  to 
Emain  Macha,  and  his  share  of  food  and  drink  were 
waiting  there  for  him  yet.  And  he  told  his  whole  story 
to  Conchubar  and  to  the  heroes  of  the  Red  Branch,  and 
to  Eocho  Rond,  king  of  Hy  Maine  ;  and  that  is  the  way 
he  made  his  peace  with  him, 


XVII 

BATTLE  OF  ROSNAREE 

npHERE  was  a  time,  now,  after  the  war  for  the  Bull 
'*'  of  Cuailgne,  when  King  Conchubar  got  someway 
down-hearted,  and  there  was  a  heaviness  on  his  mind. 

And  the  men  of  Ulster  thought  it  might  be  lonesome 
he  was,  and  fretting  after  Deirdre  yet,  and  they  searched 
about  through  the  whole  province  for  a  wife  for  him. 

And  at  last  they  found  a  beautiful  young  girl  of  good 
race,  whose  name  was  Luain,  and  they  brought  her  to 
Emain  Macha,  and  a  great  wedding  was  made,  and  great 
feasting  ;  and  the  king  grew  to  be  quiet  and  happy  in  his 
mind.  But  among  the  men  that  came  to  the  wedding 
were  the  two  sons  of  the  poet  Aithirne,  that  had  such 
a  bad  name  for  covetousness  and  for  cruelty. 

The  two  sons  were  poets  as  well,  Cuingedach  and 
Abhartach,  and  when  they  saw  Luain,  Conchubar's 
queen,  and  she  so  beautiful,  the  two  of  them  fell  in 
love  with  her  there  and  then.  And  they  stopped  at 
Emain,  and  after  a  while  each  of  them  tried  to  gain  her 
secret  love.  But  there  was  great  anger  and  displeasure 
on  Luain  at  that,  and  she  drove  them  from  her. 

They  went  home  then  to  their  father,  Aithirne,  and  the 
three  of  them,  to  avenge  themselves  on  Luain,  made 
satires  on  her,  that  brought  blotches  out  on  her  face. 
And  when  her  face  that  was  so  beautiful  was  spoiled 
like  that,  she  went  back  and  hid  herself  in  her  father's 

302 


CONCHUBAR'S   SICKNESS         303 

house,  and  with  the  shame  and  the  sorrow  that  were  on 
her,  she  died  there. 

Then  great  anger  and  rage  came  on  Conchubar,  and 
he  sent  the  men  of  Ulster  to  Aithirne's  house,  and  they 
killed  himself  and  his  two  sons,  and  they  pulled  his  house 
down  to  the  ground. 

But  the  rest  of  the  poets  of  Ulster  were  not  well 
pleased  that  Conchubar  should  put  such  disrespect  on 
one  of  themselves  and  do  such  a  great  vengeance  on  him, 
and  they  gathered  together  and  gave  Aithirne  a  great 
burial  and  keened  him,  and  it  was  Amergin  that  made  a 
lament  over  his  grave. 

And  then  Conchubar  stopped  in  Emain  Macha,  and 
the  cloud  of  trouble  came  on  him  again,  and  he  used  to 
be  thinking  of  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  of 
all  that  Maeve's  army  did  when  he  was  in  his  weakness ; 
and  he  did  not  sleep  in  the  night,  and  there  was  no  food 
that  pleased  him. 

And  then  the  men  of  Ulster  bid  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  go 
to  Conchubar,  and  rouse  him  out  of  his  sickness. 

So  Cathbad  went  to  him,  and  he  cried  tears  down  when 
he  saw  him,  and  he  said  :  "  Tell  me,  Conchubar,  what 
wound  it  is  or  what  sickness  has  weakened  you  and 
has  made  your  face  so  pale  ?  "  "  It  is  no  wonder  sick- 
ness to  be  on  me,"  said  Conchubar,  "when  I  think  of 
the  way  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  came  and  destroyed 
my  forts  and  my  duns  and  my  walled  towns  and  the 
houses  of  my  people,  and  when  I  think  how  Maeve 
brought  away  cattle  and  gold  and  silver,  and  how  she 
came  as  far  as  Dun  Sescind  and  Dun  Sobairce,  and 
brought  away  Daire's  bull  out  of  my  own  province. 
And  it  is  what  vexes  me,  Maeve  herself  to  have  got  away 
safe  from  the  battle ;  and  it  is  time  for  me  to  go  and 
avenge  that  time  on  the  men  of  Ireland,"  he  said. 
"  That  is  no  right  thing  you  are  saying,"  said  Cathbad, 
"for  the  men  of  Ulster  did  a  good  vengeance  on  the 


304  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

men  of  Ireland  the  time  they  gained  the  battle  of 
Ilgaireth."  "  I  do  not  count  any  battle  to  be  a  battle," 
said  Conchubar,  "  unless  a  king  or  a  queen  has  fallen  in 
it ;  and  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,  Cathbad,"  he 
said,  "  that  kings  and  great  men  will  be  brought  to  their 
death  by  me,  or  else  I  myself  will  go  to  my  death." 

"  This  is  my  advice  to  you,"  said  Cathbad,  "  not  to  set 
out  till  the  winter  is  gone  by  ;  for  at  this  time  the  winds 
are  rough,  and  the  roads  are  heavy,  and  the  rivers  are  full 
and  flooded,  and  every  windy  gap  is  cold.  It  is  best  to 
wait  for  the  summer,"  he  said,  "  till  the  fords  are  shallow 
and  the  roads  are  smooth,  till  the  thick  leaves  on  the 
bushes  will  be  shelters,  till  every  sod  of  grass  will  be  a 
pillow,  till  our  colts  will  be  strong,  till  the  nights  will  be 
short  for  keeping  watch  against  an  enemy.  It  is  best  to 
wait,"  he  said, "  till  you  can  gather  together  the  men  of 
Ulster,  and  till  you  can  send  messengers  to  your  friends 
among  the  Gall."  "  I  am  willing  to  do  that,"  said 
Conchubar,  "  but  I  give  my  word,"  he  said,  "  let  them 
come,  or  let  them  not  come,  I  will  go  myself  to  Teamhair 
to  get  satisfaction  from  Cairbre  Niafer,  my  own  son-in- 
law,  that  did  not  come  to  help  me  at  the  gathering  at 
Ilgaireth,  and  to  Lugaid,  son  of  Curoi,  and  to  Eocha,  son 
of  Luchta,  and  to  Maeve,  and  to  Ailell,  till  I  throw 
down  the  stones  over  the  graves  of  their  chief  men,  till  I 
destroy  and  lay  waste  their  country,  the  same  way  as 
the  men  of  Ireland  destroyed  my  province." 

So  then  Conchubar  sent  out  messengers  to  Conall 
Cearnach,  that  was  raising  his  tribute  in  the  islands  of 
Leodus,  and  of  Cadd,  and  of  Ore,  and  to  the  countries 
of  the  Gall,  to  Olaib,  grandson  of  the  king  of  Norway, 
and  to  Baire  of  the  Scigger  islands,  and  to  Siugraid  Soga, 
king  of  Sudiam  ;  to  the  seven  sons  of  Romra,  and  to  the 
son  of  the  king  of  Alban,  and  to  the  king  of  the  island  of 
Ore. 

And  the  first  to  answer  the  messengers,  and  to  set  out 


BAILEANDAILLINN  305 

for  Ulster  was  Conall  Cearnach,  for  there  was  great 
anger  on  him  when  he  heard  of  all  that  had  happened  in 
Ulster  in  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  he  not  in 
it.  "  And  if  I  had  been  in  it,"  he  said,  "  the  men  of 
Connaught  would  not  have  taken  spoil  from  Ulster, 
without  an  equal  vengeance  being  measured  to  them 
again."  And  Olaib,  grandson  of  the  king  of  Norway, 
came  with  him,  and  Baire,  of  the  Scigger  islands,  and  their 
men  with  them  in  their  ships ;  and  they  came  through 
the  green  waves,  and  the  seals  and  the  sword-fishes  rising 
about  them,  towards  Dundealgan,  and  the  place  where 
they  landed  was  at  the  Strand  of  Baile,  son  of  Buan. 

This,  now,  is  the  story  of  Baile  that  was  buried  at  that 
strand. 

He  was  of  the  race  of  Rudraige,  and  although  he  had 
but  little  land  belonging  to  him,  he  was  the  heir  of 
Ulster,  and  every  one  that  saw  him  loved  him,  both  man 
and  woman,  because  he  was  so  sweet-spoken  ;  and  they 
called  him  Baile  of  the  Honey-Mouth.  And  the  one 
that  loved  him  best  was  Aillinn,  daughter  of  Lugaidh, 
the  King  of  Leinster's  son.  And  one  time  she  herself 
and  Baile  settled  to  meet  one  another  near  Dundealgan, 
beside  the  sea.  Baile  was  the  first  to  set  out,  and  he 
came  from  Emain  Macha,  over  Slieve  Fuad,  over  Muir- 
themne,  to  the  strand  where  they  were  to  meet ;  and  he 
stopped  there,  and  his  chariots  were  unyoked,  and  his 
horses  were  let  out  to  graze.  And  while  he  and  his  people 
were  waiting  there  they  saw  a  strange,  wild-looking 
man,  coming  towards  them  from  the  South,  as  fast  as 
a  hawk  that  darts  from  a  cliff  or  as  the  wind  that  blows 
from  off  the  green  sea.  "  Go  and  meet  him,"  said  Baile 
to  his  people,  "  and  ask  him  news  of  where  he  is  going 
and  where  he  comes  from,  and  what  is  the  reason  of  his 
haste."  So  they  asked  news  of  him,  and  he  said  :  "  I  am 
going  back  now  to  Tuagh  Inbhir,  from  Slieve  Suidhe 
Laighen,  and  this  is  all  the  news  I  have,  that  Aillinn 

U 


3o6  BATTLE   OF   ROSN  A  REE 

daughter  of  Lugaidh,  was  on  her  way  to  meet  Baile,  son 
of  Buan,  that  she  loved.  And  the  young  men  of 
Leinster  overtook  her,  and  kept  her  back  from  going  to 
him,  and  she  died  of  the  heartbreak  there  and  then. 
For  it  was  foretold  by  Druids  that  were  friendly  to  them 
that  they  would  not  come  together  in  their  lifetime,  but 
that  after  their  death  they  would  meet,  and  be  happy 
for  ever  after."  And  with  that  he  left  them,  and  was 
gone  again  like  a  blast  of  wind,  and  they  were  not  able 
to  hinder  him. 

And  when  Baile  heard  that  news,  his  life  went  out 
from  him,  and  he  fell  dead  there  on  the  strand. 

And  at  that  time  the  young  girl  Aillinn  was  in  her 
sunny  parlour  to  the  south,  for  she  had  not  set  out  yet. 
And  the  same  strange  man  came  in  to  her,  and  she 
asked  him  where  he  came  from.  "  I  come  from  the 
North,"  he  said,  "  from  Tuagh  Inver,  and  I  am  going 
past  this  place  to  Slieve  Suidhe  Laighen.  And  all  the 
news  I  have,"  he  said,  "  is  that  I  saw  the  men  of  Ulster 
gathered  together  on  the  strand  near  Dundealgan,  and 
they  raising  a  stone,  and  writing  on  it  the  name  of  Baile, 
son  of  Buan,  that  died  there  when  he  was  on  his  way 
to  meet  the  woman  he  had  given  his  love  to  ;  for  it  was 
not  meant  for  them  ever  to  reach  one  another  alive,  or 
that  one  of  them  should  see  the  other  alive."  And  when 
he  had  said  that  he  vanished  away,  and  as  to  Aillinn, 
her  life  went  from  her,  and  she  died  the  same  way  that 
Baile  had  died. 

And  an  apple-tree  grew  out  of  her  grave,  and  a  yew- 
tree  out  of  Baile's  grave.  And  it  was  near  that  yew-tree 
Conall  Cearnach  landed,  and  Baire,  and  the  grandson 
of  the  king  of  Norway.  And  Cuchulain  had  made 
ready  a  great  feast  for  them,  and  for  Conchubar  that 
had  come  to  meet  them,  at  bright-faced  Dundealgan. 

And  the  Hound  bade  them  a  kind,  loving  welcome, 
and  he  said  :  "  Welcome  to  those  I  know,  and  those  I  do 


THE   OLD   FIGHTING   MEN         307 

not  know,  to  the  good  and  the  bad,  the  young  and  the 
old  among  you."  And  they  stopped  there  a  week,  and 
Conchubar  was  well  pleased  to  see  the  whole  strand 
full  of  his  friends  that  were  come  in  their  ships.  And 
then  he  bade  farewell  to  Emer,  daughter  of  Forgall,  and 
he  said  to  Cuchulain  :  "  Go  now  to  the  three  fifties  of  old 
fighting  men,  that  are  resting  in  their  age,  under 
Irgalach,  son  of  Macclach,  and  say  to  them  to  come 
with  me  to  this  gathering  and  to  this  war,  the  way  I  will 
have  their  help  and  their  advice."  "  Let  them  go  to  it  if 
they  have  a  mind,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  but  it  is  not  I 
that  will  go  and  ask  it  of  them." 

So  then  Conchubar  himself  went  to  the  great  house, 
where  the  old  fighting  men  used  to  be  living  that  had 
laid  by  their  arms.  And  when  he  came  in,  they  raised 
their  heads  from  their  places  to  look  at  the  great  king. 
And  then  they  leaped  up,  and  they  said :  "  What  has 
brought  you  to  us  to  day,  our  chief  and  our  lord  ? " 
"  Did  you  get  no  word,"  he  said,  "  of  the  way  the  four 
provinces  of  Ireland  came  against  us,  and  how  they 
burned  down  our  forts  and  our  houses,  and  how  they 
brought  their  makers  of  poems  and  of  stories  along  with 
them,  that  their  deeds  might  be  told,  and  our  disgrace 
might  be  the  greater.  And  I  am  going  out  against 
them  now,"  he  said,  "  to  get  satisfaction  from  them  ;  and 
let  you  come  with  me,  and  I  will  have  your  advice." 
Then  the  hearts  of  the  old  men  rose  in  them,  and  they 
caught  their  old  horses  and  yoked  their  old  chariots. 
And  they  went  on  with  the  king  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Water  of  Luachann  that  night. 

And  the  next  day  Conchubar  set  out  with  his  own 
men  and  his  friends  from  beyond  the  sea,  to  Slieve 
Breagh,  that  is  near  Rosnaree  on  the  Boinne.  And  they 
made  their  camp  at  Cuanglas,  the  green  harbour,  and 
lighted  their  fires,  and  music  and  merry  songs  were 
made   for   them.      But   Cuchulain   stopped   behind    in 


308  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

Dundealgan  to  gather  his  own  people,  and  to  make 
provision  for  them  on  the  march. 

Now  news  had  been  brought  to  Cairbre  Niafer  at 
Teamhair,  that  Conchubar  was  gathering  his  men  to  get 
satisfaction  for  all  that  had  been  done  to  Ulster  in  the 
war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  that  it  was  likely  he 
himself  would  be  the  first  he  would  come  against. 

For  there  was  some  bad  feeling  between  Cairbre  and 
the  men  of  Ulster,  since  the  time  he  drove  the  sons  of 
Umor  into  Connaught,  with  the  heavy  rent  he  put  on 
them,  and  that  after  Conall  Cearnach  and  Cuchulain 
giving  their  own  security  for  their  good  behaviour. 
They  turned  on  their  securities  after  that,  and  fought 
with  them,  and  Conall  Cool,  the  son  of  their  chief,  fell  ; 
and  Cuchulain,  and  his  father,  and  his  friends,  raised  the 
heap  of  stones  over  him  that  is  called  Carn  Chonaill,  in 
the  province  of  Connaught. 

And  Cairbre  sent  a  message  to  Cruachan,  to  say  to 
Ailell  and  to  Maeve  :  "  If  it  is  towards  us  Conchubar 
and  the  men  of  Ulster  are  coming,  let  you  come  to 
our  help  ;  but  if  it  is  past  us  they  go,  into  the  fair- 
headed  province  of  Connaught,  we  will  go  to  your 
help."  So  when  Conchubar  came  to  Cuanglas,  at 
Rosnaree,  there  was  a  good  army  gathered  there  to 
make  a  stand  against  him  ;  the  three  troops  of  the 
children  of  Deagha,  and  a  great  troop  of  the  Collam- 
nachs,  and  of  the  men  of  Bregia,  and  of  the  Gailiana. 
And  he  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  he  could  see 
the  moving  of  men  and  the  shining  of  spears,  and  he 
heard  the  noise  of  a  great  army,  and  he  said  :  "  We  will 
send  some  one  of  our  men  to  bring  us  word  about  them." 

And  he  sent  out  Feic,  son  of  Follaman.  And  Feic 
went  up  to  a  hill  beside  the  Boinne,  and  he  began  to  look 
at  the  army  and  to  count  it,  and  it  vexed  him  to  see 
how  many  were  in  it.  "  If  I  go  back  now  and  tell  this," 
he  said,  "  the  men  of  Ulster  will  come  and  will  begin  the 


DAIREOFCUAILGNE  309 

battle,  and  there  will  be  no  better  chance  for  me  to  get 
a  great  name  and  do  great  deeds  than  for  any  other 
man.  And  why  would  I  not  go  and  begin  a  fight  now 
by  myself?"     And  with  that  he  crossed  the  river. 

But  the  men  that  were  in  front  caught  sight  of  him, 
and  the  whole  army  began  shouting  around  him,  and  he 
had  not  courage  to  go  against  them,  but  he  turned  to 
cross  the  river  again.  But  he  gave  a  false  leap,  just 
where  the  water  was  deepest,  and  a  wave  laughed  over 
him,  and  he  died. 

It  seemed  a  long  time  to  Conchubar  that  he  was 
away,  and  he  said  to  the  men  of  Ulster :  "  What  is 
your  advice  to  us  about  this  battle  ?  "  "  It  is  what  we 
advise,"  they  said,  "  to  wait  till  our  strong  fighters  and 
our  chief  men  are  come.  And  they  had  not  long  to 
wait  before  they  saw  troops  coming,  Cathbad  with 
twelve  hundred  men,  and  Am.ergin  with  twelve  hundred 
men,  and  Eoghan,  king  of  Fernmaighe,  and  Laegaire 
Buadach,  and  the  three  sons  of  Conall  Buide. 

And  then  they  saw  another  troop  coming,  and  in  the 
front  of  it  a  fierce,  brown  man.  Rough,  dark  hair  he 
had,  and  a  big  nose  and  hollow  cheeks,  and  his  talk 
was  quick  and  hurried.  A  blue  cloak  about  him,  and 
a  brooch  of  silver  as  white  as  a  bird,  a  heavy  sword, 
and  a  shield  with  iron  rims.  And  this  is  who  he  was, 
Daire  of  Cuailgne,  that  was  come  to  get  satisfaction  for 
his  bull  and  for  his  herds  on  the  men  of  Ireland. 
"  What  is  delaying  you  here,"  he  said  to  Conchubar. 
"  I  have  good  reason  for  delaying,"  said  Conchubar, 
"  for  there  is  a  great  army  under  Cairbre  Niafer  before 
us  at  Rosnaree,  and  there  are  not  enough  of  us  to  go 
against  them.  And  it  is  not  refusing  a  battle  we  are, 
but  waiting  till  we  get  our  full  number."  "  By  my 
word,"  said  Daire,  "  if  you  do  not  go  out  against  them, 
it  is  I  will  go  against  them  by  myself" 

Then  Conchubar  put   on   his   armour,  and  took   his 


310  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

many-coloured  shield,  and  his  sword,  the  Ochain.  And 
all  the  men  of  Ulster  gathered  around  him,  and  they 
raised  their  spears  and  their  shields,  and  it  was  like  a 
great  river  breaking  from  the  side  of  a  mountain,  and 
breaking  what  it  meets  of  stones  and  trees  before  it,  that 
they  went  to  meet  the  men  of  Leinster  at  Rosnaree  on 
the  Boinne. 

And  when  Cairbre  Niafer  and  his  friends  and  his 
men  saw  them  coming,  they  made  ready  for  them,  and 
came  towards  the  river. 

And  the  men  of  Ulster  crossed  the  river,  and  the  two 
armies  met,  and  each  of  them  took  to  hacking  and 
destroying  the  other.  And  the  Gailiana  pressed  heavily 
on  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  came  in  to  the  middle  of 
them,  and  cut  them  down  like  trees  are  cut  in  a  wood. 
And  as  for  Conchubar  he  did  not  give  back,  where  he 
was,  and  Celthair  on  his  right  hand,  and  Amergin  the 
poet  on  his  right  hand  again,  and  Eoghan,  king  of 
Fernmaighe,  on  his  left,  and  Daire  of  Cuailgne  near  him. 
These  few  stood  against  the  Gailiana,  and  fought 
against  them,  stout  and  proud.  But  as  to  the  young 
men  and  those  that  were  never  in  a  fight  before,  they 
turned  round  and  burst  through  the  battle  northwards. 

It  was  just  then  Conall  Cearnach  was  coming  in 
his  chariot,  and  when  the  young  men  of  Ulster  saw 
the  face  of  Conall,  they  came  to  a  stop,  and  Conall 
saw  that  they  were  beaten  and  running  from  the  battle, 
and  he  called  out  sharp  words  to  them,  for  there  was 
anger  on  him,  they  to  have  left  the  fight,  and  with  no 
sign  of  blood  or  of  wounds  upon  them. 

But  they  were  ashamed  then,  and  content  to  go  back 
to  the  battle,  when  they  had  Conall's  hand  to  help  them  ; 
and  each  one  of  them  tore  a  green  branch  off  the  oak 
trees  that  were  near  them,  and  held  it  up,  and  they  went 
with  him  ;  for  they  knew  there  would  be  no  running 
away  in  any  place  where  Conall's  face  would  be  seen. 


CONALL'S   SWORD  311 

And  it  happened  just  at  that  time  Conchubar,  the  High 
King,  was  taking  three  backward  steps  out  of  the  battle 
northward,  but  when  he  saw  the  face  of  Conall  coming 
towards  him,  he  called  to  him  to  stop  the  army  from  fall- 
ing back.    "  I  give  my  word,"  said  Conall,  "  I  think  it  easier 
to  fight  the  battle  by  myself  than  to  stop  the  rout  now." 
And  just  then  the  three  royal  poets  of  the  king  of 
Teamhair  came  to   give  him  their   help,  Eochaid   the 
Learned,  and  Diarment  of  the  Songs,  and  Forgel  the 
Just,  and  they  went  into  the  fight  against  Conall.     And 
Conall  looked  at  them  and  he  said  :  "  I   give  my  true 
word,"  he  said,  "  if  you  were  not  poets  and  men  of  learn- 
ing, you  would  have  got  your  death  by  me  before  this  ; 
and  now  that  you  are  come  fighting  with  your  master,"  he 
said,  "  where  is  there  any  reason  for  sparing  you  ?  "    And 
with  that  he  made  a  blow  at  them  with  a  heavy  stick 
that  was  in  his  hand,  that  struck  the  three  heads  off  them. 
Then  Conall  drew  his  sword  out  of  its  sheath,  and  he 
played  the  music  of  his  sword  on  the  armies  of  Leinster, 
and  the  sound  of  it  was  heard  on  every  side ;  and  when 
the  men  near  him  heard  it  their  faces  whitened,  and  each 
one  of  them  went  back  to  his  place  in  the  battle.     And 
at  that  time  Cuchulain  came  into  the  battle,  and  the  men 
of  the  Gailiana  gave  wild  shouts  at  him,  and  anger  came 
on  him  and  he  scattered  them. 

And  strength  came  again  into  the  hearts  of  the  men  of 
Ulster,  and  their  anger  rose,  and  the  earth  shook  under 
their  feet,  and  there  was  clashing  of  swords  on  both  sides, 
and  the  shouting  of  young  men,  and  the  screams  of  old 
men,  and  the  groaning  of  chariot-fighters,  and  the  crying 
of  ravens.  And  there  were  many  lying  in  cold  pools,  the 
white  soles  of  their  feet  close  together,  and  the  red  lips  turn- 
ing grey,  and  the  bright  faces  very  pale,  and  darkness  com- 
ing on  their  grey  eyes,  and  confusion  on  their  clear  wits. 
It  is  then  Cuchulain  met  with  Cairbre  Niafer,  and  he 
went  against  him,  and  put  his  shield  against  his  shield 


312  BATTLE   OF   ROSNAREE 

and  there  they  were  face  to  face.     And  Cairbre  said  words 
of  insult  to  Cuchulain,  and  Cuchulain  answered  him  back 
and  said  :  "  It  is  all  I  ask  of  you,  to  fight  with  me  now 
alone."     "  I  will  do  that,"  said  Cairbre  Niafer,  "  for  I  am 
a  king  in  my  way  of  living,  and  a  champion  in  battles." 
Then  each  attacked  the  other,  and  it  was  hard  for  them 
to  hold  their  feet  firm,  or  to  strike  with  their  hands,  in 
the  closeness  of  the  fight.     And  Cairbre  broke  all  his 
weapons,  but  nine  of  his  men  came  and  kept  up  the  fight 
against  Cuchulain  till  more  weapons  could  be  brought  to 
him.     And  then  Cuchulain's  weapons  were  broken,  and 
Cairbre  and  nine  of  his  men   came  and  held  up  their 
shields  before  him  till  Laeg  could  bring  him  his  own  right 
weapons,  the  Dubach,  the  grim  one,  his  spear,  and  the 
Cruaidin,  his  sword.     And  then  they  took  to  hitting  at 
one  another  again,  and  at  last  Cuchulain  took  his  spear 
into  his  left  hand,  and  struck  at  Cairbre  with  it,  and  he 
lowered  his  shield  to  protect  his  body.    And  then  Cuchu- 
lain changed  it  to  his  right  hand,  and  struck  at  him  over 
the  rim  of  his  shield,  and  it  went  through  his  heart ;  and 
before  his  body  could  reach  the  ground,  Cuchulain  made 
a  spring  and  struck  his  head  off.     And  then  he  held  up 
the  head,  and  shook  it  before  the  two  armies. 

Then  Sencha,  son  of  Ailell,  rose  up  and  shook  the 
branch  of  peace,  and  the  men  of  Ulster  stood  still.  As  to 
the  men  of  Leinster,  when  they  saw  their  king  was 
killed,  they  fell  back  ;  but  Iriel  of  the  Great  Knees,  the 
son  of  Conall  Cearnach,  followed  after  them,  and  did  a 
great  slaughter  on  the  Gailiana  and  on  the  rest  of  the 
army  till  they  reached  to  the  Rye  of  Leinster. 

And  then  the  men  of  Ulster  went  back  to  their  homes. 
And  as  to  Conchubar,  he  went  back  to  Emain,  and  it  was 
not  till  a  good  while  after  that  he  got  the  wound  in  his 
head  that  Fintan  sewed  up  with  gold  thread,  to  match 
the  colour  of  his  hair,  and  that  brought  him  to  his  death 
in  the  end. 


XVIII 

THE  ONLY  SON  OF  AOIFE 

'T^HE  time  Cuchulain  came  back  from  Alban,  after  he 
had    learned    the   use   of    arms    under    Scathach, 
he  left  Aoife,  the  queen  he  had  overcome  in  battle,  with 
child. 

And  when  he  was  leaving  her,  he  told  her  what  name 
to  give  the  child,  and  he  gave  her  a  gold  ring,  and  bade 
her  keep  it  safe  till  the  child  grew  to  be  a  lad,  and  till  his 
thumb  would  fill  it ;  and  he  bade  her  to  give  it  to  him 
then,  and  to  send  him  to  Ireland,  and  he  would  know  he 
was  his  son  by  that  token.  She  promised  to  do  so,  and 
with  that  Cuchulain  went  back  to  Ireland. 

It  was  not  long  after  the  child  was  born,  word  came 
to  Aoife  that  Cuchulain  had  taken  Emer  to  be  his  wife 
in  Ireland.  When  she  heard  that,  great  jealousy  came 
on  her,  and  great  anger,  and  her  love  for  Cuchulain  was 
turned  to  hatred  ;  and  she  remembered  her  three  cham- 
pions that  he  had  killed,  and  how  he  had  overcome 
herself,  and  she  determined  in  her  mind  that  when  her 
son  would  come  to  have  the  strength  of  a  man,  she 
would  get  her  revenge  through  him.  She  told  Conlaoch 
her  son  nothing  of  this,  but  brought  him  up  like  any 
king's  son  ;  and  when  he  was  come  to  sensible  years,  she 
put  him  under  the  teaching  of  Scathach,  to  be  taught 
the  use  of  arms  and  the  art  of  war.  He  turned  out  as 
apt  a  scholar  as  his  father,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he 
had  learnt  all  Scathach  had  to  teach. 

313 


314        THE   ONLY   SON   OF   AOIFE 

Then  Aoife  gave  him  the  arms  of  a  champion,  and 
bade  him  go  to  Ireland,  but  first  she  laid  three 
commands  on  him  :  the  first  never  to  give  way  to  any- 
living  person,  but  to  die  sooner  than  be  made  turn  back  ; 
the  second,  not  to  refuse  a  challenge  from  the  greatest 
champion  alive,  but  to  fight  him  at  all  risks,  even  if  he 
was  sure  to  lose  his  life ;  the  third,  not  to  tell  his  name 
on  any  account,  though  he  might  be  threatened  with 
death  for  hiding  it.  She  put  him  under  geasa,  that  is, 
under  bonds,  not  to  do  these  things. 

Then  the  young  man,  Conlaoch,  set  out,  and  it  was 
not  long  before  his  ship  brought  him  to  Ireland,  and 
the  place  he  landed  at  was  Baile's  Strand,  near 
Dundealgan. 

It  chanced  that  at  that  time  Conchubar,  the  High 
King,  was  holding  his  court  there,  for  it  was  a  con- 
venient gathering-place  for  his  chief  men,  and  they  were 
settling  some  business  that  belonged  to  the  government 
of  that  district. 

When  word  was  brought  to  Conchubar  that  there  was 
a  ship  come  to  the  strand,  and  a  young  lad  in  it  armed 
as  if  for  fighting,  and  armed  men  with  him,  he  sent  one 
of  the  chief  men  of  his  household  to  ask  his  name,  and 
on  what  business  he  was  come. 

The  messenger's  name  was  Cuinaire,  and  he  went 
down  to  the  strand,  and  when  he  saw  the  young  man  he 
said  :  "  A  welcome  to  you,  young  hero  from  the  east, 
with  the  merry  face.  It  is  likely,  seeing  you  come 
armed  as  if  for  fighting,  you  are  gone  astray  on  your 
journey  ;  but  as  you  are  come  to  Ireland,  tell  me  your 
name  and  what  your  deeds  have  been,  and  your  victories 
in  the  eastern  bounds  of  the  world." 

"  A:  to  my  name,"  said  Conlaoch,  "  it  is  of  no  great 
account ;  but  whatever  it  is,  I  am  under  bonds  not  to 
tell  it  to  the  stoutest  man  living." 

"It  is  best  for  you  to  tell  it  at  the  king's  desire,"  said 


CUCHULAIN    AND   CONLAOCH    315 

Cuinaire,  "  before  you  get  your  death  through  refusing 
it,  as  many  a  champion  from  Alban  and  from  Britain 
has  done  before  now."  "If  that  is  the  order  you  put  on 
us  when  we  land  here,  it  is  I  will  break  it,"  said 
Conlaoch,  "and  no  one  will  obey  it  any  longer  from 
this  out." 

So  Cunaire  went  back  and  told  the  king  what  the 
young  lad  had  said.  Then  Conchubar  said  to  his 
people :  "  Who  will  go  out  into  the  field,  and  drag  the 
name  and  the  story  out  of  this  young  man ? "  "I  will 
go,"  said  Conall,  for  his  hand  was  never  slow  in  fighting. 
And  he  went  out,  and  found  the  lad  angry  and  destroying, 
handling  his  arms,  and  they  attacked  one  another  with 
a  great  noise  of  swords  and  shouts,  and  they  were 
gripped  together,  and  fought  for  a  while,  and  then  Conall 
was  overcome,  and  the  great  name  and  the  praise  that 
was  on  Conall,  it  was  on  the  head  of  Conlaoch  it  was 
now. 

Word  was  sent  then  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  in 
pleasant,  bright-faced  Dundealgan.  And  the  messenger 
told  him  the  whole  story,  and  he  said  :  "  Conall  is  lying 
humbled,  and  it  is  slow  the  help  is  in  coming ;  it  is  a 
welcome  there  would  be  before  the  Hound." 

Cuchulain  rose  up  then  and  went  to  where  Conlaoch 
was,  and  he  still  handling  his  arms.  And  Cuchulain 
asked  him  his  name  and  said  :  "  It  would  be  well  for  you, 
young  hero  of  unknown  name,  to  loosen  yourself  from 
this  knot,  and  not  to  bring  down  my  hand  upon  you,  for 
it  will  be  hard  for  you  to  escape  death."  But  Conlaoch 
said  :  "If  I  put  you  down  in  the  fight,  the  way  I  put 
down  your  comrade,  there  will  be  a  great  name  on  me  ; 
but  if  I  draw  back  now,  there  will  be  mockery  on  me, 
and  it  will  be  said  I  was  afraid  of  the  fight.  I  will  never 
give  in  to  any  man  to  tell  the  name,  or  to  give  an 
account  of  myself.  But  if  I  was  not  held  with  a  com- 
mand," he  said,  "there  is  no  man  in  the  world  I  would 


3i6        THE   ONLY   SON   OF   AOIFE 

sooner  give  it  to  than  to  yourself,  since  I  saw  your  face. 
But  do  not  think,  brave  champion  of  Ireland,  that  I  will 
let  you  take  away  the  fame  I  have  won,  for  nothing." 

With  that  they  fought  together,  and  it  is  seldom  such 
a  battle  was  seen,  and  all  wondered  that  the  young  lad 
could  stand  so  well  against  Cuchulain. 

So  they  fought  a  long  while,  neither  getting  the 
better  of  the  other,  but  at  last  Cuchulain  was  charged 
so  hotly  by  the  lad  that  he  was  forced  to  give  way, 
and  although  he  had  fought  so  many  good  fights,  and 
killed  so  many  great  champions,  and  understood  the 
use  of  arms  better  than  any  man  living,  he  was  pressed 
very  hard. 

And  he  called  for  the  Gae  Bulg,  and  his  anger  came 
on  him,  and  the  flames  of  the  hero-light  began  to  shine 
about  his  head,  and  by  that  sign  Conlaoch  knew  him  to 
be  Cuchulain,  his  father.  And  just  at  that  time  he  was 
aiming  his  spear  at  him,  and  when  he  knew  it  was 
Cuchulain,  he  threw  his  spear  crooked  that  it  might 
pass  beside  him.  But  Cuchulain  threw  his  spear,  the 
Gae  Bulg,  at  him  with  all  his  might,  and  it  struck  the 
lad  in  the  side  and  went  into  his  body,  so  that  he  fell  to 
the  ground. 

And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Now,  boy,  tell  your  name  and 
what  you  are,  for  it  is  short  your  life  will  be,  for  you  will 
not  live  after  that  wound." 

And  Conlaoch  showed  the  ring  that  was  on  his 
hand,  and  he  said :  "  Come  here  where  I  am  lying 
on  the  field,  let  my  men  from  the  east  come  round  me. 
I  am  suffering  for  revenge.  I  am  Conlaoch,  son  of  the 
Hound,  heir  of  dear  Dundealgan  ;  I  was  bound  to  this 
secret  in  Dun  Scathach,  the  secret  in  which  1  have  found 
my  grief" 

And  Cuchulain  said  :  "  It  is  a  pity  your  mother  not 
to  be  here  to  see  you  brought  down.  She  might  have 
stretched  out  her  hand  to  stop  the  spear  that  wounded 


CUCHULAIN'S   COMPLAINT      317 

you."  And  Conlaoch  said  :  "  My  curse  be  on  my 
mother,  for  it  was  she  put  me  under  bonds  ;  it  was  she 
sent  me  here  to  try  my  strength  against  yours."  And 
Cuchulain  said  :  "  My  curse  be  on  your  mother,  the 
woman  that  is  full  of  treachery ;  it  is  through  her  harm- 
ful thoughts  these  tears  have  been  brought  on  us." 
And  Conlaoch  said  :  "  My  name  was  never  forced  from 
my  mouth  till  now ;  I  never  gave  an  account  of  myself 
to  any  man  under  the  sun.  But,  O  Cuchulain  of  the 
sharp  sword,  it  was  a  pity  you  not  to  know  me  the  time 
I  threw  the  slanting  spear  behind  you  in  the  fight." 

And  then  the  sorrow  of  death  came  upon  Conlaoch, 
and  Cuchulain  took  his  sword  and  put  it  through  him, 
sooner  than  leave  him  in  the  pain  and  the  punishment 
he  was  in. 

And  then  great  trouble  and  anguish  came  on 
Cuchulain,  and  he  made  this  complaint : 

"  It  is  a  pity  it  is,  O  son  of  Aoife,  that  ever  you  came 
into  the  province  of  Ulster,  that  you  ever  met  with  the 
Hound  of  Cuailgne. 

"If  I  and  my  fair  Conlaoch  were  doing  feats  of 
war  on  the  one  side,  the  men  of  Ireland  from  sea  to  sea 
would  not  be  equal  to  us  together.  It  is  no  wonder  I 
to  be  under  grief  when  I  see  the  shield  and  the  arms  of 
Conlaoch.  A  pity  it  is  there  is  no  one  at  all,  a  pity 
there  are  not  hundreds  of  men  on  whom  I  could  get 
satisfaction  for  his  death. 

"  If  it  was  the  king  himself  had  hurt  your  fair  body,  it 
is  I  would  have  shortened  his  days. 

"  It  is  well  for  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch,  and  for 
the  heads  of  its  fair  army  of  heroes,  it  was  not  they  that 
killed  my  only  son. 

"  It  is  well  for  Laegaire  of  Victories  it  is  not  from  him 
you  got  your  heavy  pain. 

"  It  is  well  for  the  heroes  of  Conall  they  did  not  join 
in  the  killing  of  you ;  it  is  well  that  travelling  across 


3i8        THE   ONLY   SON   OF   AOIFE 

the  plain  of  Macha  they  did  not  fall  in  with  me  after 
such  a  fight. 

"  It  is  well  for  the  tall,  well-shaped  Forbuide  ;  well  for 
Dubthach,  your  Black  Beetle  of  Ulster. 

"It  is  well  for  you,  Cormac  Conloingeas,  your  share 
of  arms  gave  no  help,  that  it  is  not  from  your  weapons 
he  got  his  wound,  the  hard-skinned  shield  or  the  blade. 

"  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  one  on  the  plains  of  Munster, 
or  in  Leinster  of  the  sharp  blades,  or  at  Cruachan 
of  the  rough  fighters,  that  struck  down  my  comely 
Conlaoch. 

"  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  in  the  country  of  the  Cruithne, 
of  the  fierce  Fians,  you  fell  in  a  heavy  quarrel,  or  in 
the  country  of  the  Greeks,  or  in  some  other  place  of  the 
world,  you  died,  and  I  could  avenge  you. 

"  Or  in  Spain,  or  in  Sorcha,  or  in  the  country  of  the 
Saxons  of  the  free  armies  ;  there  would  not  then  be  this 
death  in  my  heart. 

"It  is  very  well  for  the  men  of  Alban  it  was  not 
they  that  destroyed  your  fame ;  and  it  is  well  for  the 
men  of  the  Gall. 

"  Och  !  It  is  bad  that  it  happened  ;  my  grief!  it  is  on 
me  is  the  misfortune,  O  Conlaoch  of  the  Red  Spear,  I 
myself  to  have  spilled  your  blood, 

"  I  to  be  under  defeat,  without  strength.  It  is  a  pity 
Aoife  never  taught  you  to  know  the  power  of  my 
strength  in  the  fight. 

"  It  is  no  wonder  I  to  be  blinded  after  such  a  fight  and 
such  a  defeat. 

"  It  is  no  wonder  I  to  be  tired  out,  and  without  the 
sons  of  Usnach  beside  me. 

"  Without  a  son,  without  a  brother,  with  none  to  come 
after  me ;  without  Conlaoch,  without  a  name  to  keep 
my  strength. 

"  To  be  without  Naoise,  without  Ainnle,  without 
Ardan  ;  is  it  not  with  me  is  my  fill  of  trouble  ? 


CUCHULAIN    AND   THE   WAVES    319 

"  I  am  the  father  that  killed  his  son,  the  fine  green 
branch  ;  there  is  no  hand  or  shelter  to  help  me. 

"  I  am  a  raven  that  has  no  home ;  I  am  a  boat  going 
from  wave  to  wave ;  I  am  a  ship  that  has  lost  its 
rudder ;  I  am  the  apple  left  on  the  tree ;  it  is  little 
I  thought  of  falling  from  it ;  grief  and  sorrow  will  be 
with  me  from  this  time." 

Then  Cuchulain  stood  up  and  faced  all  the  men 
of  Ulster.  "  There  is  trouble  on  Cuchulain,"  said 
Conchubar ;  "  he  is  after  killing  his  own  son,  and  if  I 
and  all  my  men  were  to  go  against  him,  by  the  end 
of  the  day  he  would  destroy  every  man  of  us.  Go 
now,"  he  said  to  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  "and  bind  him 
to  go  down  to  Baile's  Strand,  and  to  give  three  days 
fighting  against  the  waves  of  the  sea,  rather  than  to 
kill  us  all." 

So  Cathbad  put  an  enchantment  on  him,  and  bound 
him  to  go  down.  And  when  he  came  to  the  strand, 
there  was  a  great  white  stone  before  him,  and  he  took 
his  sword  in  his  right  hand,  and  he  said :  "  If  I  had  the 
head  of  the  woman  that  sent  her  son  to  his  death,  I 
would  split  it  as  I  split  this  stone."  And  he  made  four 
quarters  of  the  stone. 

Then  he  fought  with  the  waves  three  days  and  three 
nights,  till  he  fell  from  hunger  and  weakness,  so  that 
some  men  said  he  got  his  death  there.  But  it  was  not 
there  he  got  his  death,  but  on  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 


XIX 
THE  GREAT  GATHERING  AT  MUIRTHEMNE 

IVTOW  after  all  the  battles  Cuchulain  had  fought,  and 
all  the  men  he  had  killed,  it  is  no  wonder  he  had 
a  good  share  of  enemies  watching  to  get  the  upper  hand 
of  him.  And  besides  Maeve,  those  that  had  their  minds 
most  set  against  him  were  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre  Niafer, 
that  he  had  killed  at  Rosnaree,  and  Lugaid,  son  of 
Curoi,  that  he  had  killed  at  his  own  house  in  Munster, 
and  the  three  daughters  of  Calatin. 

This,  now,  was  the  way  it  happened  that  Curoi  got 
his  death  by  him.  He  met  with  Blanad  one  time,  a 
good  while  after  Curoi  had  given  him  the  championship 
of  Ulster,  and  it  is  what  she  told  him  that  there  was  not 
a  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth  she  loved  more  than  him- 
self. And  she  bade  him  come,  near  Samhain  time, 
to  Curoi's  dun  at  Finglas,  and  his  men  with  him,  and  to 
bring  her  away  by  force. 

So  when  the  time  came,  Cuchulain  set  out,  and  his 
men  with  him,  and  they  came  to  a  wood  near  the  dun, 
that  had  a  stream  running  through  it,  and  he  sent  word 
to  Blanad  he  was  waiting  there.  And  Blanad  sent  him 
back  word  to  come  and  bring  her  away  at  whatever  time 
he  would  see  the  stream  in  the  wood  turning  white.  And 
when  what  she  thought  to  be  a  good  time  came,  when 
all  the  men  of  the  place  were  sent  out  looking  for  stones 
to  build  a  great  new  dun,  she  milked  the  three  white 

320 


BLANAD  321 

cows  with  red  ears  Curoi  had  brought  away  by  force 
from  her  father,  Midhir,  into  the  cauldron  he  had 
brought  away  with  them,  and  she  poured  a  great  vessel 
of  new  milk  into  the  stream,  where  it  ran  by  the  dun. 
And  when  Cuchulain  saw  the  stream  turning  white,  he 
went  up  to  the  dun.  But  he  found  Curoi  there  before 
him,  and  they  fought,  and  Curoi  was  killed,  the  son  of 
Daire,  lord  of  the  southern  sea,  that  had  a  great  name 
and   great  praise  on  him   before   Blanad  was  his  wife. 

Then  Cuchulain  brought  Blanad  away  with  him  to 
Ulster.  But  Curoi's  poet,  Feirceirtne,  followed  after 
them  to  avenge  his  master's  death.  And  when  they 
were  come  as  far  as  the  headland  of  Cian  Beara,  he 
saw  Blanad  standing  on  the  edge  of  a  high  rock,  and 
she  alone.  And  he  went  up  to  her,  and  took  her  in  his 
arms,  and  threw  her,  and  himself  along  with  her,  over 
the  rock,  and  they  both  got  their  death  by  the  fall  on 
the  moment. 

And  as  to  the  children  of  Calatin,  this  is  the  way  it 
was  with  them.  At  the  time  Cuchulain  made  an  end  of 
Calatin  at  the  ford,  and  of  all  his  sons  with  him,  Calatin's 
wife  was  with  child.  And  when  her  time  came,  there 
were  three  daughters  born  at  the  one  birth,  and  they  de- 
formed, and  each  of  them  having  but  one  eye. 

Then  Maeve  came  from  Cruachan  to  visit  them,  and 
she  brought  away  the  children  with  her,  and  took  the 
charge  of  them.  And  when  they  were  come  to  sensible 
years,  she  came  to  see  them,  and  she  said  :  "  Do  you  know 
who  it  was  killed  your  father  ?  "  "  We  know  well,"  they 
said,  "  it  was  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim,  killed  him." 
*'  That  is  so,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  let  you  make  a  journey 
now,"  she  said,  "  through  the  whole  world,  to  get  know- 
ledge of  spells  and  enchantments  from  them  that  have  it, 
the  way  you  will  be  able  to  avenge  your  father  when  the 
time  comes." 

When  the  three  one-eyed  daughters  of  Calatin  heard 

X 


322   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

that,  they  went  out  into  Alban,  and  to  every  other  country, 
from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  and  they  were 
learning  every  sort  of  enchantment  and  of  witchcraft. 
And  at  the  end  they  came  back  to  Cruachan. 

And  as  to  Maeve,  she  went  up  one  morning  to  her 
sunny  parlour,  and  from  there  she  saw  the  three  daughters 
of  Calatin  sitting  outside  on  the  lawn.  So  she  took  her 
cloak,  that  had  beautiful  embroidery  on  it,  and  put  it 
about  her,  and  she  went  out  on  the  lawn  and  bade  them 
welcome,  and  she  sat  down  before  them,  and  asked  news 
of  all  they  had  done  since  they  left  Ireland.  And  they 
told  her  all  they  had  learned.  "  Do  you  remember  it 
all  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  We  remember  it  well,"  they  said, 
"  and  we  can  do  many  things,  and  we  can  make  the 
appearance  of  terrible  battles  by  secret  words." 

Maeve  brought  them  then  into  the  royal  house, 
and  they  were  attended  on,  and  they  were  given  every 
sort  of  food  and  of  drink,  and  of  good  treatment. 

And  then  Maeve  sent  word  to  Lugaid,  and  he  came  to 
Cruachan,  and  himself  and  Maeve  began  to  talk  together. 
"  Do  you  remember,"  she  said,  "  who  it  was  killed  Curoi 
your  father  ?  "  "I  remember  it  well,"  he  said  ;  "  it  was 
Cuchulain  killed  him."  Then  Ere  came  to  her,  and  she 
asked  him  the  same  question  about  his  father  Cairbre 
Niafer,  and  he  made  the  same  answer.  "  What  you  say 
is  true,"  Maeve  said  then,  "  and  the  children  of  Calatin 
are  come  back  to  me  now,  after  going  through  the  whole 
world,  to  fight  against  Cuchulain  with  their  enchantments. 
And  there  is  no  king  or  chief  man,  or  fighting  man  in 
the  four  provinces  of  Ireland,  but  lost  his  friend  or  his 
comrade,  his  father  or  his  brother,  by  him  in  the  war  for 
the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  or  at  some  other  time.  And  now," 
she  said,  "  it  is  best  for  us  to  gather  together  a  great  army 
of  the  men  of  Ireland  to  make  an  attack  on  him,  for  the 
men  of  Ulster  have  their  weakness  coming  on  them,  and 
it  is  likely  they  will  not  be  able  to  help  him." 


LEVARCHAM'S   MESSAGE        323 

With  that,  Lugaid  went  away  southward  to  the  king 
of  Munster,  to  bid  him  come,  and  bring  his  men  with 
him ;  and  Ere  went  and  called  to  the  chief  men  of 
Leinster  in  the  same  way. 

Then  all  the  provinces  gathered  together  to  Cruachan, 
and  they  stopped  there  with  feasting  and  merriment 
for  three  days  and  three  nights.  And  at  the  end  of  that 
time  they  went  out  of  Cruachan.  But  Maeve  did  not 
bring  Fergus  with  them  this  time,  for  she  was  sure  the 
men  of  Ireland  would  never  be  able  to  make  an  end  of 
Cuchulain  if  Fergus  was  along  with  them. 

And  this  is  the  way  they  went,  beyond  Magh  Finn  to 
Athluain,  and  they  rested  there  that  night. 

And  the  next  day  they  went  on  their  road  till  they 
came  to  Glean-na-loin,  and  from  that  to  Glean-mor,  and 
from  that  to  Tailtin,  and  they  stopped  the  night  there ; 
and  then  they  went  on  by  the  borders  of  Magh  Breagh, 
and  Midhe,  and  Treathfa,  and  Cuailgne. 

It  is  then  Conchubar,  King  of  Ulster,  got  word  that 
the  borders  of  his  province  were  being  robbed  and 
destroyed  by  the  men  of  Munster  and  Leinster,  and  of 
Con  naught. 

"  Where  is  Levarcham  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  I  am 
here,"  she  said.  "Go  out  for  me  now,"  said  Con- 
chubar, "  and  bring  Cuchulain  here  to  Emain  ;  for  it  is 
against  him  this  army  we  have  news  of  is  gathered.  Bid 
him  to  make  no  delay,  but  to  leave  Dundealgan  and  Muir- 
themne  and  to  come  here  to  advise  with  myself,  and  with 
Cathbad  and  Amergin,  and  all  the  knowledgeable  men. 
For  if  he  can  put  off  this  battle  till  I  myself,  and  Conall, 
and  all  the  men  of  Ulster,  will  be  ready  to  go  out  with 
him,  we  will  give  them  a  great  defeat,  the  way  they  will 
not  come  into  my  province  again.  For  there  are  many 
bear  him  ill-will,"  he  said,  "  on  account  of  all  he  killed. 
Finn,  son  of  Ross,  Fraoch,  son  of  Idath,  and  Dearg, 
son  of  Conroi,  and  many  of  the  best  men  of  Ulster ;  and 


324   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

Cairbre  Niafer  at  the  battle  of  Rosnaree  ;  and  Curoi,  son 
of  Daire,  High  King  of  Munster,  and  many  of  the  men  of 
Munster  besides  him  ;  Fircearna,  and  Fiamain,  and  Niall, 
and  Laoc  Leathbuine,  and  many  more  along  with  them." 

Levarcham  went  quickly  then  with  that  message,  and 
it  is  where  she  found  Cuchulain,  between  sea  and  land, 
on  Baile's  Strand,  and  he  trying  to  bring  down  sea-birds 
with  his  sling  ;  but  with  all  the  birds  that  were  flying 
over  him  and  past  him,  he  could  not  bring  one  down, 
but  they  all  escaped  him. 

And  there  was  heaviness  on  him,  not  to  be  able  to  hit 
them,  for  he  knew  it  had  some  bad  meaning.  And  in- 
deed he  had  never  been  very  happy  in  his  mind  since  the 
death  of  the  blossomed  branch,  Aoife's  son,  there  on  that 
strand.  Then  he  saw  Levarcham  coming,  and  he  bade 
her  welcome.  "  I  am  glad  of  that  welcome,"  said 
Levarcham,  "and  it  with  news  from  Conchubar  I  am 
come  to  you."  "  What  is  your  news  ?  "  said  Cuchulain. 
"  I  have  news  indeed,"  she  said.  And  then  she  told  him 
all  that  Conchubar  had  said,  from  beginning  to  end. 
"  And  it  is  what  all  are  asking  of  you,"  she  said  :  ''chief 
men  and  fighting  men,  poets  and  learned  men,  women 
and  young  girls,  to  keep  aside  from  the  men  of  Ireland 
that  are  coming  here  to  Muirthemne,  and  not  to  go  out 
alone  against  that  great  army."  "  I  would  sooner  stop 
here  and  defend  my  own  place,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  is 
best  for  you  to  go  to  Emain,"  said  Laeg.  So  after  a  while 
he  gave  in  to  them,  and  they  went  back  to  Dundealgan, 
and  Emer  came  out  on  the  lawn  to  meet  them,  and  they 
gave  her  the  same  advice,  to  go  to  Emain  Macha  where 
Conchubar  and  his  chief  men  were  gathered  together. 
Then  Emer  got  her  chariot,  and  she  sent  her  servants 
and  the  herds,  and  the  cattle  to  Slieve  Cuilenn  in  the 
North,  and  herself  and  Cuchulain  set  out  for  Emain. 
And  that  was  the  first  time  Dundealgan  was  emptied 
since  Cuchulain  had  the  sway  over  it. 


CUCHULAINATEMAIN  325 

And  when  Cuchulain  came  to  Emain  Macha,  they 
brought  him  to  the  bright,  sunny  house.  And  when  the 
women  of  the  place  heard  he  was  there,  they  came  and 
spoke  sweet  words,  and  the  poets  and  the  harpers  came, 
and  the  skilled  men,  and  they  all  made  music,  and 
feasting,  and  pleasant  talk  round  about  Cuchulain,  in 
the  wide,  white,  sunny  house  of  the  Red  Branch  ;  for 
what  always  quieted  Cuchulain  best  was  the  singing  of 
songs  and  rhymes  before  him.  It  is  that  way  Scumac, 
the  story-teller,  quieted  him  one  time  he  was  vexed, 
and  had  a  mind  to  set  fire  to  Emain,  because  Conchubar 
had  gone  to  a  feast  given  by  Conall,  son  of  Gleo  Glas,  in 
Cuailgne,  and  had  left  no  word  for  him  to  follow. 

And  Conchubar  bade  Cathbad,  and  the  learned  men, 
and  the  women,  to  keep  a  good  watch  on  Cuchulain,  and 
to  mind  him  well.  "  For  I  leave  the  charge  of  him  on 
you,"  he  said,  "  to  save  him  from  the  plans  Maeve  has 
made  against  him,  and  from  the  power  of  the  children  of 
Calatin.  For  if  he  should  fall,"  he  said,  "  it  is  certain 
the  safety  and  the  prosperity  of  Ulster  will  fall  with  him 
for  ever."  "That  is  true,"  said  Cathbad,  and  all  the 
others  said  the  same. 

"  Well,"  said  Geanann,  Cathbad's  son,  "  I  will  go  now 
and  see  him."  He  went  then  to  the  place  Cuchulain  and 
Emer  were,  and  the  poets,  and  the  women,  and  the 
learned  men  with  them,  and  a  feast  laid  out  on  the  table, 
and  all  of  them  at  drinking  and  pleasantness  and  games. 

Now  as  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  they  came  to  the  plain  of 
Muirthemne,  and  they  made  their  camp  there,  and  they 
began  to  destroy  and  to  take  all  they  could  find  there, 
and  in  Macaire  Conall ;  and  when  they  knew  Cuchulain 
had  left  Dundealgan,  it  is  then  the  three  daughters  of 
Calatin  went  with  the  lightness  and  the  quickness  of 
the  wind  to  Emain  Macha.  And  they  sat  down  on  the 
lawn  outside  the  house  where  Cuchulain  was,  and  they 
began  to  tear  up  the  earth  and  the  grass,  and  by  means 


326  GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

of  their  witchcraft  they  put  the  appearance  of  troops  of 
men  and  of  armies  on  stalks  and  coloured  oak-leaves, 
and  little  fuzz-balls  ;  and  the  sounds  of  fighting  and  strik- 
ing, and  the  shouting  of  a  great  army  were  heard  on 
every  side,  as  if  there  was  an  attack  being  made  on  the 
dun. 

It  was  bright-faced  Geanann,  son  of  Cathbad,  was 
keeping  a  watch  on  Cuchulain  that  day,  and  he  saw 
him  sit  up  and  look  out  on  the  lawn,  and  redness  and 
shame  came  on  his  face,  when  he  saw,  as  he  thought, 
two  armies  fighting  one  another,  and  he  put  out  his 
hand  as  if  to  take  his  sword,  but  Geanann  threw  his  two 
arms  about  him  and  hindered  him,  and  told  him  there 
was  nothing  before  him  but  witchcraft  and  enchantment, 
and  the  appearance  of  fighting  made  up  by  the  children 
of  Calatin  to  bring  him  out  to  his  death.  And  Cathbad 
and  all  the  learned  men  came  then  and  told  him  the 
same  thing.  But  after  all  that,  it  was  hardly  they  were 
able  to  hold  him  back  and  to  persuade  him. 

The  next  day  Cathbad  himself  came  to  keep  a  watch 
on  him  with  the  rest,  and  after  a  while  the  noise  of 
shouting  began  again,  and  for  all  they  could  do,  Cuchu- 
lain went  and  looked  out  at  the  window.  And  the  first 
thing  he  thought  he  saw  was  the  army  of  Ireland  stand- 
ing there  upon  the  plain.  And  then  he  thought  he  saw 
Gradh,  son  of  Lir,  standing  there ;  and  after  that  he 
thought  he  heard  the  harp  of  the  son  of  Meardha  playing 
the  sweet  music  of  the  Sidhe,  and  he  knew  when  he 
heard  those  sounds  that  his  time  was  come,  and  that  his 
courage  and  his  strength  would  soon  be  made  an  end 
of.  And  then  one  of  the  daughters  of  Calatin  took  the 
appearance  of  a  crow,  and  came  flying  over  him  and 
saying  mocking  words,  and  she  bade  him  go  out  and 
save  his  own  house  and  his  lands  from  the  enemies  that 
were  destroying  them.  And  though  Cuchulain  knew 
well   by  this  time  it  was  witchcraft  was  being  worked 


N  I  A  M  H  327 

against  him,  he  was  as  ready  as  before  to  rush  out  when 
he  heard  the  sounds  and  the  shouting  of  battle  ;  and 
there  came  trouble  and  confusion  on  his  mind  with  the 
noise  of  striking  and  of  fighting,  and  with  the  sweet 
sounds  of  the  harp  of  the  Sidhe.  But  Cathbad  did  his 
best  with  him,  and  it  is  what  he  told  him,  that  if  he 
would  but  stop  quiet  for  another  three  days  in  Emain, 
the  power  of  the  enchantments  would  be  broken,  and 
Conall  Cearnach  would  have  come  to  his  help,  and  he 
could  go  out  again,  and  the  whole  world  would  be 
full  of  his  name  and  of  his  lasting  victories. 

And  the  women  of  Emain  and  the  musicians  closed 
round  him,  and  they  sang  sweet  songs,  and  led  away 
his  mind  from  what  he  had  heard,  until  the  day  drew 
to  a  close. 

And  on  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  Conchubar  called 
for  Cathbad  and  Bright-Faced  Geanann,  and  the  rest 
of  the  Druids.  And  Emer  came  along  with  them,  and 
Celthair's  daughter,  Niamh,  that  Cuchulain  loved,  and 
the  rest  of  the  women  of  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch. 
And  Conchubar  asked  them  in  what  way  they  could 
best  keep  a  watch  on  Cuchulain  through  the  day.  "  We 
do  not  know  that,"  they  said.  "  I  will  tell  you  what  is 
best  to  do,"  said  Conchubar  then.  "  Bring  him  away 
with  you  to  Glean-na-Bodhar,  the  Deaf  Valley.  For 
if  all  the  men  of  Ireland  were  letting  out  shouts  and 
cries  of  war  around  it,  no  one  that  would  be  in  that  valley 
would  hear  any  sound  at  all.  Bring  Cuchulain  there, 
then,"  he  said,  "  and  keep  him  there  with  you  till  their 
enchantments  will  be  spent,  and  till  Conall  Cearnach 
will  come  to  his  help  out  of  the  island  of  Leodus." 
"  King,"  said  Niamh, "  we  were  asking  him  and  persuading 
him  all  through  yesterday  to  go  to  that  valley,  but  he 
would  not  go  there,  for  all  I  myself  or  the  rest  of  the 
women  of  Ireland  could  say.  And  let  you  yourself  go  to 
him  now,"  she  said, "  with  Cathbad,  and  Geanann,  and  the 


328   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

poets,  and  with  Emer,  and  let  you  bring  him  into  that 
valley,  and  let  there  be  music  and  pleasantness  made 
about  him  there,  the  way  he  will  not  hear  the  shouts  and 
the  mocking  words  of  the  children  of  Calatin."  It  is 
not  I  will  go  with  him,"  said  Emer,  "  but  let  Niamh  go, 
and  my  blessing  with  her,  for  it  will  be  hard  for  him  to 
refuse  her."  So  they  agreed  to  that,  and  they  went  to 
where  Cuchulain  was,  and  Conchubar's  harper,  Cobhtach, 
went  along  with  them,  making  sweet  music.  Then 
Cathbad  went  out  to  Cuchulain  where  he  was  lying  on 
the  bed,  and  he  began  to  ask  him  and  to  persuade  him. 
"  Dear  son,"  he  said,  "  come  with  me  to-day  to  use  the 
feast  I  am  making,  and  all  the  women  and  the  poets 
will  come  with  us.  And  there  are  bonds  on  you  not  to 
refuse  my  feast."  "  My  grief  for  that,"  said  Cuchulain. 
"  This  is  no  fit  time  for  me  to  be  feasting  and  making 
merry,  and  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  burning  and 
destroying  Ulster,  and  the  men  of  Ulster  in  their  weak- 
ness, and  Conall  away,  and  the  men  of  Ireland  putting 
insults  on  me  and  reproaches,  and  saying  I  have  run 
away  before  them.  And  but  for  yourself  and  Con- 
chubar,"  he  said,  "  and  for  Geanann  and  Amergin,  I  would 
fall  on  them  and  scatter  them,  that  their  dead  would 
be  more  than  their  living."  Then  all  the  women  per- 
suaded him,  and  Emer  spoke  to  him,  and  it  is  what 
she  said  :  "  Little  Hound,  I  never  hindered  you  until 
this  hour  from  any  deed  or  any  adventure  you  had  a 
mind  for.  So  now,  for  my  sake,  my  choice  sweetheart, 
my  first  love  and  first  darling  of  the  men  of  the  world, 
go  with  Cathbad  and  with  Geanann,  with  Niamh  and 
with  the  poets,  to  share  Cathbad's  feast." 

Then  Niamh  went  over  to  him  and  gave  him  three 
fond,  loving  kisses  ;  and  then  they  all  rose  up,  and  he 
rose  along  with  them,  heavy  and  sorrowful,  and  in  that 
way  he  went  in  their  company  into  Glean-na-Bodhar. 
And  when  they  came  into  it,  he  said  :  "  My  grief!  I  ever 


THE   DEAF  VALLEY  329 

to  have  come  here,  and  I  never  came  to  any  place  I 
liked  less  than  this  :  for  now  the  men  of  Ireland  will  be 
saying  it  was  to  escape  them  I  came  here."  "  You  gave 
me  your  word,"  said  Niamh,  "  you  would  not  go  out  to 
meet  the  men  of  Ireland  without  leave  from  me."  If  I 
gave  it,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  right  for  me  to  hold  to  it." 

Their  chariots  were  unyoked  then,  and  the  Grey  of 
Macha  and  the  Black  Sainglain  were  let  loose  to  graze 
in  the  valley,  and  they  all  went  to  the  house  Cathbad 
had  made  ready.  And  there  was  a  great  feast  laid  out, 
and  Cuchulain  was  put  in  the  chief  place,  and  to  his 
right  hand  were  Cathbad  and  Geanann  and  the  poets,  and 
on  the  left  was  Niamh,  daughter  of  Celthair,  with  the 
women.  And  opposite  them  were  the  musicians  and  the 
reciters.  And  then  they  all  took  to  feasting  and  drink- 
ing and  to  games,  and  they  made  a  great  show  of  mirth 
and  pleasantness  before  Cuchulain. 

But  as  to  the  three  deformed,  one-eyed  children  of 
Calatin,  they  came  quickly  and  lightly,  the  way  they  had 
come  on  the  other  days,  to  the  lawn  at  Emain,  to  the 
place  where  they  had  got  sight  of  Cuchulain  in  the  house. 
And  when  they  did  not  see  him  there,  they  searched 
through  the  whole  of  Emain,  but  when  they  did  not  find 
him  with  Conchubar,  or  with  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch, 
there  was  great  wonder  on  them.  And  then  they  began 
to  think  it  was  Cathbad  was  hiding  him  from  them,  and 
they  rose  up  high  in  the  air,  on  a  blast  of  moaning  wind 
they  made  by  their  enchantments,  and  on  it  they  went 
over  the  whole  province,  searching  out  every  wood  and 
valley,  every  cave  and  secret  path.  But  they  fou  nd  nothing, 
till  at  last  they  came  over  Glean-na-Bodhar,  and  there 
in  the  middle  of  the  valley  they  saw  the  Grey  of  Macha 
and  the  Black  Sainglain  and  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra, 
beside  them. 

They  knew  then  that  Cuchulain  must  be  in  the  valley, 
and   presently  they  heard  the  sounds  of  music  and  of 


330   GATHERING   AT    MUIRTHEMNE 

laughter  and  of  women's  voices,  where  all  the  people  in 
the  feasting-house  were  trying  their  best  to  raise  the 
cloud  and  the  heaviness  off  Cuchulain's  mind. 

Then  the  children  of  Calatin  came  down  into  the 
valley,  and  the  same  way  as  before  they  took  thistle- 
stalks  and  little  fuzz-balls  and  withered  leaves,  and  put  on 
them  the  appearance  of  troops  of  armed  men,  so  that 
there  seemed  to  be  no  hill  or  no  place  outside  the  whole 
valley  but  was  filled  with  battalions,  coming  hundred  by 
hundred.  And  the  air  w^as  all  filled  with  sounds  of 
battle  and  shouts,  and  of  trumpets  and  dreadful  laughter, 
and  the  cries  of  wounded  men.  And  there  seemed  to  be 
fires  in  the  country  about,  and  a  noise  of  the  crying  of 
women.  And  great  dread  came  on  all  that  heard  that 
outcry,  both  men  and  women,  and  dogs  of  every  kind. 

But  when  the  women  that  were  with  Cuchulain  heard 
those  shouts,  they  shouted  back  again  and  raised  their 
voices,  but  with  all  they  could  do,  they  did  not  keep  the 
outcry  from  reaching  to  Cuchulain,  "  My  grief !  "  he  said, 
"  I  hear  the  shouts  of  the  men  of  Ireland  that  are  spoiling 
the  whole  of  the  province ;  my  fame  is  at  an  end,  my 
great  name  is  gone  from  me,  Ulster  is  put  down  for  ever." 
"  Let  the  noise  pass  by,"  said  Cathbad  ;  "  it  is  only  the 
noise  made  by  the  children  of  Calatin,  that  want  to 
draw  you  out  from  where  you  are,  to  make  an  end  of 
you.  Stop  here  with  us  now,  and  put  the  trouble  off 
your  mind." 

Cuchulain  stayed  quiet  then,  but  the  children  of 
Calatin  went  on  a  long  time  filling  the  air  with  battle 
noises.  But  they  tired  of  it  at  last,  for  they  saw  that 
Cathbad  and  the  women  were  too  much  for  them. 

Then  anger  came  on  Badb,  one  of  Calatin's  daughters, 
and  she  said:  "Go  on  now,  makingsounds  of  fighting  in  the 
air,  and  I  myself  will  go  into  the  valley  ;  for  even  if  I  get 
my  death  by  it,  I  will  speak  with  Cuchulain." 

With  that,  she  went  on  in  the  madness  of  her  anger 


CUCHULAIN   GOES   OUT  331 

to  the  very  house  where  the  feast  was  going  on,  and 
there  she  took  the  appearance  of  a  woman  of  Niamh's 
women,  and  she  beckoned  Niamh  out  to  speak  with  her. 

So  Niamh  came  out,  thinking  she  had  news  to  give 
her,  and  a  good  many  of  the  other  women  of  Emain  with 
her,  and  Badb  bade  them  follow  her.  And  she  led  them 
a  long  way  down  the  valley,  and  then  by  her  enchant- 
ments she  raised  a  thick  mist  between  them  and  the 
house,  so  that  they  could  not  find  their  way,  but  were 
astray  in  the  valley,  not  knowing  where  they  were. 

Then  she  went  back  to  the  feasting-house,  and  she 
put  on  herself  the  appearance  of  Niamh,  and  she  came 
in  to  where  Cuchulain  was  and  called  out :  "  Rise  up, 
Cuchulain  ;  Dundealgan  is  burned,  Muirthemne  is 
destroyed,  and  Conaille  Muirthemne.  The  whole  pro- 
vince is  trampled  down  by  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  it 
is  on  myself  the  blame  will  be  laid,"  she  said,  "  and  all 
Ulster  will  say  that  I  hindered  you,  and  kept  you  back 
from  going  out  to  check  the  army,  and  to  get  satisfaction 
from  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  it  is  from  Conchubar 
himself  I  will  get  my  death  on  account  of  that,"  she  said. 
For  she  knew  Cuchulain  had  given  Niamh  his  promise 
that  without  leave  from  her,  he  would  not  go  out  to  face 
the  men  of  Ireland. 

"  My  grief!"  said  Cuchulain  then,  "  it  is  hard  to  trust 
in  women.  For  I  thought,"  he  said,  "that  you  would 
not  have  given  me  that  leave  for  the  whole  riches  of 
the  world.  But  since  you  yourself  give  me  leave  to  go 
out  and  face  the  men  of  Ireland,  I  will  do  it."  And  with 
that  he  rose  up  to  go  out.  And  as  he  rose  up,  he  threw 
his  cloak  about  him,  and  his  foot  caught  in  the  cloak, 
and  the  gold  brooch  that  was  in  the  cloak  fell  on  his 
foot  and  pierced  it.  "  Truly  the  brooch  is  a  friend  that 
gives  me  a  warning,"  said  Cuchulain. 

He  went  out  then,  and  he  bade  Laeg  to  yoke  the 
horses  and  to  make  ready  the  chariot.     And  Cathbad, 


332   GATHERING   AT   MUIRTHEMNE 

and  Geanann,  and  the  women  followed  him  out,  and  took 
hold  of  him,  but  they  were  not  able  to  stop  him.  For 
the  cries  of  battle  were  still  in  the  air,  and  he  thought  he 
saw  a  great  army  standing  on  the  lawn  at  Emain,  and 
the  whole  plain  filled  up  and  crowded  with  troops  and 
bands  of  men,  with  horses  and  arms  and  armour,  and  he 
thought  he  heard  great  shouts,  and  that  he  saw  all 
Conchubar's  city  burning,  and  all  the  hills  round  about 
Emain  full  of  things  brought  away,  and  he  thought  he 
saw  Emer's  sunny  house  thrown  down,  and  the  House  of 
the  Red  Branch  in  one  blaze,  and  all  Emain  under  fire 
and  smoke.  And  Cathbad  tried  to  quiet  him.  "  Dear 
son,"  he  said,  "  for  this  day  only,  follow  my  advice,  and 
do  not  go  out  against  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  I  will  be 
able  to  save  you  from  all  the  enchantments  of  the 
children  of  Calatin."  But  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Dear  master, 
there  is  no  reason  for  me  to  care  for  my  life  from  this 
out,  for  my  time  is  at  an  end,  and  Niamh  has  given  me 
leave  to  go  and  face  the  men  of  Ireland."  And  then 
Niamh  herself  came  up  to  him  and  said:  "My  grief! 
my  little  Hound,  I  would  never  have  given  you  that 
leave  for  all  the  riches  of  the  world  ;  and  it  was  not  I 
that  gave  you  leave,  but  Badb,  the  daughter  of  Calatin, 
that  took  my  shape  on  her.  And  stay  with  me  now,"  she 
said,  "  my  friend,  my  darling."  But  Cuchulain  would  not 
believe  her,  and  he  bade  Laeg  yoke  the  chariot,  and  put 
his  arms  in  order.  Laeg  went  to  do  that,  but  indeed 
that  time  above  all  others  he  had  no  mind  for  the  work. 
And  when  he  shook  the  bridles  towards  the  horses  as  he 
was  used  to  do,  they  went  away  from  him  ;  and  the  Grey 
of  Macha  would  not  let  him  come  near  him  at  all. 
"  Truly,"  said  Laeg,  "  this  is  a  warning  of  some  bad 
thing.  And  indeed,  my  life,"  he  said  to  the  Grey,  "  it 
is  seldom  you  would  not  come  to  meet  the  bridle  and 
to  meet  myself,  up  to  this  day."  Then  he  went  to 
Cuchulain  and  said  :  "  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people 


THE   GREY   OF   MACHA  333 

swear  by,  that  if  all  the  men  in  the  province  of  Ulster 
were  round  about  the  Grey  of  Macha,  they  would  not 
be  able  to  bring  him  as  far  as  the  chariot,  and  I  never 
refused  you  up  to  this,"  he  said,  "  and  come  out  now  and 
speak  to  the  Grey  yourself." 

So  Cuchulain  went  out,  and  the  horse  turned  his  left 
side  three  times  to  his  master.  Then  he  reproached  the 
horse.  "  You  were  not  used,"  he  said,  "  to  behave  like 
that  to  me."  Then  the  Grey  of  Macha  came  up  to  him 
and  he  let  big,  round  tears  of  blood  fall  on  Cuchulain's 
feet. 

Then  the  chariot  was  yoked  ;  and  it  was  the  Morrigu 
had  unyoked  it  and  had  broken  it  the  night  before,  for  she 
did  not  like  Cuchulain  to  go  out  and  to  get  his  death  in 
the  battle.  And  Cuchulain  set  out  and  came  to  Emain, 
and  to  the  house  where  Emer  was,  and  she  came  out  and 
bade  him  come  down  from  his  chariot.  "  I  will  not,"  he 
said,  "  until  I  go  first  to  Muirthemne,  to  attack  the  four 
great  provinces  of  Ireland,  and  to  avenge  all  the  hurts 
and  the  insults  they  have  put  on  me,  and  on  Ulster,  for 
I  have  seen  their  gatherings  and  their  armies."  "  Those 
were  made  up  by  enchantments,"  said  Emer.  "  I  tell 
you,  woman,"  he  said,  "  and  I  swear  by  my  word,  I  will 
never  come  back  here  until  I  have  made  an  attack  upon 
them  in  their  camp." 

Then  he  turned  his  chariot  towards  the  south,  by  the 
road  of  Meadhon  Luachair,  and  Levarcham  cried  out 
after  him,  and  the  three  times  fifty  queens  that  were  in 
Emain  Macha,  and  that  loved  him,  cried  out  upon  him 
miserably,  and  struck  their  hands  together,  for  they  knew 
he  would  not  come  back  to  them  again. 


XX 

DEATH  OF  CUCHULAIN 

/^UCHULAIN  went  on  then  to  the  house  of  his 
^^  mother,  Dechtire,  to  bid  her  farewell.  And  she 
came  out  on  the  lawn  to  meet  him,  for  she  knew  well  he 
was  going  out  to  face  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  she  brought 
out  wine  in  a  vessel  to  him,  as  her  custom  was  when  he 
passed  that  way.  But  when  he  took  the  vessel  in  his 
hand,  it  was  red  blood  that  was  in  it.  "  My  grief!"  he 
said,  "  my  mother  Dechtire,  it  is  no  wonder  others  to 
forsake  me,  when  you  yourself  offer  me  a  drink  of 
blood."  Then  she  filled  the  vessel  a  second,  and  a 
third  time,  and  each  time  when  she  gave  it  to  him, 
there  was  nothing  in  it  but  blood. 

Then  anger  came  on  Cuchulain,  and  he  dashed  the 
vessel  against  a  rock,  and  broke  it,  and  he  said  :  "  The 
fault  is  not  in  yourself,  my  mother  Dechtire,  but  my 
luck  is  turned  against  me,  and  my  life  is  near  its  end, 
and  I  will  not  come  back  alive  this  time  from  facing  the 
men  of  Ireland."  Then  Dechtire  tried  hard  to  persuade 
him  to  go  back  and  to  wait  till  he  would  have  the  help 
of  Conall.  "  I  will  not  wait,"  he  said,  "  for  anything  you 
can  say ;  for  I  would  not  give  up  my  great  name  and 
my  courage  for  all  the  riches  of  the  world.  And  from 
the  day  I  first  took  arms  till  this  day,  I  have  never 
drawn  back  from  a  fight  or  a  battle.  And  it  is  not  now 
I  will  begin  to  draw  back,"  he  said,  "  for  a  great  name 
outlasts  life." 

334 


THE   WASHER   AT   THE    FORD     335 

Then  he  went  on  his  way,  and  Cathbad,  that  had 
followed  him,  went  with  him.  And  presently  they  came 
to  a  ford,  and  there  they  saw  a  young  girl,  thin  and 
white-skinned  and  having  yellow  hair,  washing  and 
ever  washing,  and  wringing  out  clothing  that  was 
stained  crimson  red,  and  she  crying  and  keening  all 
the  time.  "Little  Hound,"  said  Cathbad,  "do  you 
see  what  it  is  that  young  girl  is  doing?  It  is  your 
red  clothes  she  is  washing,  and  crying  as  she  washes, 
because  she  knows  you  are  going  to  your  death  against 
Maeve's  great  army.  And  take  the  warning  now  and 
turn  back  again."  "  Dear  master,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  you 
have  followed  me  far  enough ;  for  I  will  not  turn  back 
from  my  vengeance  on  the  men  of  Ireland  that  are 
come  to  burn  and  to  destroy  my  house  and  my 
country.  And  what  is  it  to  me,  the  woman  of  the 
Sidhe  to  be  washing  red  clothing  for  me  ?  It  is  not 
long  till  there  will  be  clothing  enough,  and  armour 
and  arms,  lying  soaked  in  pools  of  blood,  by  my  own 
sword  and  my  spear.  And  if  you  are  sorry  and  loth 
to  let  me  go  into  the  fight,  I  am  glad  and  ready  enough 
myself  to  go  into  it,  though  I  know  as  well  as  you 
yourself  I  must  fall  in  it.  Do  not  be  hindering  me 
any  more,  then,"  he  said,  "  for,  if  I  stay  or  if  I  go,  death 
will  meet  me  all  the  same.  But  go  now  to  Emain,  to 
Conchubar  and  to  Emer,  and  bring  them  life  and  health 
from  me,  for  I  will  never  go  back  to  meet  them  again. 
It  is  my  grief  and  my  wound,  I  to  part  from  them  !  And 
O  Laeg ! "  he  said,  "  we  are  going  away  under  trouble  and 
under  darkness  from  Emer  now,  as  it  is  often  we  came 
back  to  her  with  gladness  out  of  strange  places  and  far 
countries." 

Then  Cathbad  left  him,  and  he  went  on  his  way. 
And  after  a  while  he  saw  three  hags,  and  they  blind  of 
the  left  eye,  before  him  in  the  road,  and  they  having  a 
venomous  hound  they  were  cooking  with  charms  on  rods 


336  DEATH    OF  CUCHULAIN 

of  the  rowan  tree.  And  he  was  going  by  them,  for  he 
knew  it  was  not  for  his  good  they  were  there. 

But  one  of  the  hags  called  to  him  :  "  Stop  a  while  with 
us,  Cuchulain."  "  I  will  not  stop  with  you,"  said  Cuchu- 
lain.  "  That  is  because  we  have  nothing  better  than  a 
dog  to  give  you,"  said  the  hag.  "  If  we  had  a  grand,  big 
cooking-hearth,  you  would  stop  and  visit  us  ;  but  because 
it  is  only  a  little  we  have  to  offer  you,  you  will  not  stop. 
But  he  that  will  not  show  respect  for  the  small,  though 
he  is  great,  he  will  get  no  respect  himself." 

Then  he  went  over  to  her,  and  she  gave  him  the 
shoulder-blade  of  the  hound  out  of  her  left  hand,  and 
he  ate  it  out  of  his  left  hand.  And  he  put  it  down  on 
his  left  thigh,  and  the  hand  that  took  it  was  struck  down, 
and  the  thigh  he  put  it  on  was  struck  through  and 
through,  so  that  the  strength  that  was  in  them  before 
left  them. 

Then  he  went  down  the  road  of  Meadhon-Luachair,  by 
Slieve  Fuad,  and  his  enemy,  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre,  saw 
him  in  the  chariot,  and  his  sword  shining  red  in  his  hand, 
and  the  light  of  his  courage  plain  upon  him,  and  his  hair 
spread  out  like  threads  of  gold  that  change  their  colour 
on  the  edge  of  the  anvil  under  the  smith's  hand,  and  the 
Crow  of  Battle  in  the  air  over  his  head. 

"  Cuchulain  is  coming  at  us,"  said  Ere  to  the  men  of 
Ireland,  "  and  let  us  be  ready  for  him."  So  they  made 
a  fence  of  shields  linked  together,  and  Ere  put  a  couple 
of  the  men  that  were  strongest  here  and  there,  to  let  on 
to  be  fighting  one  another,  that  they  might  call  Cuchulain 
to  them  ;  and  he  put  a  Druid  with  every  couple  of  them, 
and  he  bid  the  Druid  to  ask  Cuchulain's  spears  of  him, 
for  it  would  be  hard  for  him  to  refuse  a  Druid.  For  it 
was  in  the  prophecy  of  the  children  of  Calatin  that  a  king 
would  be  killed  by  each  one  of  those  spears  in  that  battle. 

And  he  bid  the  men  of  Ireland  to  give  out  shouts,  and 
Cuchulain  came  against  them  in  his  chariot,  doing  his 


DEATHOFLAEG  337 

three  thunder  feats,  and  he  used  his  spear  and  his  sword 
in  such  a  way,  that  their  heads,  and  their  hands,  and  their 
feet,  and  their  bones,  were  scattered  through  the  plain  of 
Muirthemne,  like  the  sands  on  the  shore,  like  the  stars 
in  the  sky,  like  the  dew  in  May,  like  snow-flakes  and 
hailstones,  like  leaves  of  the  trees,  like  buttercups  in  a 
meadow,  like  grass  under  the  feet  of  cattle  on  a  fine 
summer  day.  It  is  red  that  plain  was  with  the  slaughter 
Cuchulain  made  when  he  came  crashing  over  it. 

Then  he  saw  one  of  the  men  that  was  put  to  quarrel 
with  the  other,  and  the  Druid  called  to  him  to  come  and 
hinder  them,  and  Cuchulain  leaped  towards  them. 
"  Your  spear  to  me,"  cried  the  Druid.  "  I  swear  by  the 
oath  of  my  people,"  said  Cuchulain,  "you  are  not  so 
much  in  want  of  it  as  I  am  in  want  of  it  myself  The 
men  of  Ireland  are  upon  me,"  he  said,  "and  I  am  upon 
them."  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  you  if  you  refuse  it 
to  me,"  said  the  Druid.  "  There  was  never  a  bad  name 
put  on  me  yet,  on  account  of  any  refusal  of  mine,"  said 
Cuchulain,  and  with  that  he  threw  the  spear  at  him,  and 
it  went  through  his  head,  and  it  killed  the  men  that 
were  on  the  other  side  of  him. 

Then  Cuchulain  drove  through  the  host,  and  Lugaid, 
son  of  Curoi,  got  the  spear.  "  Who  is  it  will  fall  by  this 
spear,  children  of  Calatin  ? "  said  Lugaid.  "  A  king 
will  fall  by  it,"  said  they.  Then  Lugaid  threw  the  spear 
at  Cuchulain's  chariot,  and  it  went  through  and  hit  the 
driver,  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  and  he  fell  back,  and  his 
bowels  came  out  on  the  cushions  of  the  chariot.  "  My 
grief!"  said  Laeg,  "it  is  hard  I  am  wounded."  Then 
Cuchulain  drew  the  spear  out,  and  Laeg  said  his  farewell 
to  him,  and  Cuchulain  said  :  "  To-day  I  will  be  a  fighter 
and  a  chariot-driver  as  well." 

Then  he  saw  the  other  two  men  that  were  put  to 
quarrel  with  one  another,  and  one  of  them  called  out 
it  would  be  a  great  shame  for  him  not  to  give  him  his 

Y 


338  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

help.  Then  Cuchulain  leaped  towards  them.  "Your 
spear  to  me,  Cuchulain,"  said  the  Druid.  "  I  swear 
by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,"  said  he,  "  you  are 
not  in  such  want  of  the  spear  as  I  am  myself,  for 
it  is  by  my  courage,  and  by  my  arms,  that  I  have  to 
drive  out  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  that  are  sweeping 
over  Muirthemne  to-day."  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  upon 
you,"  said  the  Druid.  '*  I  am  not  bound  to  give  more 
than  one  gift  in  the  day,  and  I  have  paid  what  is  due  to 
my  name  already,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  the  Druid 
said  :  "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  the  province  of  Ulster, 
because  of  your  refusal." 

"  Ulster  was  never  dispraised  yet  for  any  refusal  of 
mine,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  or  for  anything  I  did  unworthily. 
Though  little  of  my  life  should  be  left  to  me,  Ulster  will 
not  be  reproached  for  me  to-day."  With  that  he  threw 
his  spear  at  him,  and  it  went  through  his  head,  and 
through  the  heads  of  the]nine  men  that  were  behind  him, 
and  Cuchulain  went  through  the  host  as  he  did  before. 

Then  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre  Niafer,  took  up  his  spear. 
"  Who  will  fall  by  this  ? "  he  asked  the  children  of  Calatin. 
"  A  king  will  fall  by  it,"  they  said.  "  I  heard  you  say  the 
same  thing  of  the  spear  that  Lugaid  threw  a  while  ago," 
said  Ere.  "  That  is  true,"  said  they,  "  and  the  king  of  the 
chariot-drivers  of  Ireland  fell  by  it,  Cuchulain's  driver 
Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra." 

With  that.  Ere  threw  the  spear,  and  it  went  through 
the  Grey  of  Macha.  Cuchulain  drew  the  spear  out,  and 
they  said  farewell  to  one  another.  And  then  the  Grey 
went  away  from  him,  with  half  his  harness  hanging  from 
his  neck,  and  he  went  into  Glas-linn,  the  grey  pool  in 
Slieve  Fuad. 

Then  Cuchulain  drove  through  the  host,  and  he  saw 
the  third  couple  disputing  together,  and  he  went  between 
them  as  he  did  before.  And  the  Druid  asked  his  spear 
of  him,  but  he  refused  him,     "  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on 


CUCHULAIN   LEFT   ALONE        339 

you,"  said  the  Druid.  "  I  have  paid  what  is  due  to  my 
name  to-day,"  said  he  ;  "  my  honour  does  not  bind  me  to 
give  more  than  one  request  in  a  day."  "  I  will  put  a 
bad  name  upon  Ulster  because  of  your  refusal."  "  I  have 
paid  what  is  due  for  the  honour  of  Ulster,"  said  Cuchulain. 
"Then  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  your  kindred,"  said 
the  Druid.  "  The  news  that  I  have  been  given  a  bad 
name  shall  never  go  back  to  that  place  I  am  never  to 
go  back  to  myself ;  for  it  is  little  of  my  life  that  is  left 
to  me,"  said  Cuchulain.  With  that  he  threw  the  spear  at 
him,  and  it  went  through  him,  and  through  the  heads 
of  the  men  that  were  along  with  him. 

"  You  do  your  kindness  unkindly,  Cuchulain,"  said  the 
Druid,  as  he  fell.  Then  Cuchulain  drove  for  the  last  time 
through  the  host,  and  Lugaid  took  the  spear,  and  he  said  : 
"  Who  will  fall  by  this  spear,  children  of  Calatin  ?  "  "A 
king  will  fall  by  it,"  said  they.  "  I  heard  you  saying  that 
a  king  would  fall  by  the  spear  Ere  threw  a  while  ago." 
"  That  is  true,"  they  said,  "  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  fell 
by  it,  that  was  the  king  of  the  horses  of  Ireland." 

Then  Lugaid  threw  the  spear,  and  it  went  through 
and  through  Cuchulain's  body,  and  he  knew  he  had  got 
his  deadly  wound  ;  and  his  bowels  came  out  on  the 
cushions  of  the  chariot,  and  his  only  horse  went  away 
from  him,  the  Black  Sainglain,  with  half  the  harness 
hanging  from  his  neck,  and  left  his  master,  the  king  of  the 
heroes  of  Ireland,  to  die  upon  the  plain  of  Muirthemne. 

Then  Cuchulain  said  :  "  There  is  great  desire  on  me  to 
go  to  that  lake  beyond,  and  to  get  a  drink  from  it." 

"We  will  give  you  leave  to  do  that,"  they  said,  "if 
you  will  come  back  to  us  after." 

"  I  will  bid  you  come  for  me  if  I  am  not  able  to  come 
back  myself,"  said  Cuchulain. 

Then  he  gathered  up  his  bowels  into  his  body,  and 
he  went  down  to  the  lake.  He  drank  a  drink,  and 
he  washed   himself,  and   he  turned  back  again   to  his 


340  DEATH    OF   CUCHULAIN 

death,  and  he  called  to  his  enemies  to  come  and  meet 
him. 

There  was  a  pillar-stone  west  of  the  lake,  and  his  eye 
lit  on  it,  and  he  went  to  the  pillar-stone,  and  he  tied 
himself  to  it  with  his  breast-belt,  the  way  he  would  not 
meet  his  death  lying  down,  but  would  meet  it  standing 
up.  Then  his  enemies  came  round  about  him,  but  they 
were  in  dread  of  going  close  to  him,  for  they  were  not 
sure  but  he  might  be  still  alive. 

"  It  is  a  great  shame  for  you,"  said  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre, 
"  not  to  strike  the  head  off  that  man,  in  revenge  for 
his  striking  the  head  off  my  father." 

Then  the  Grey  of  Macha  came  back  to  defend 
Cuchulain  as  long  as  there  was  life  in  him,  and  the  hero- 
light  was  shining  above  him.  And  the  Grey  of  Macha 
made  three  attacks  against  them,  and  he  killed  fifty 
men  with  his  teeth,  and  thirty  with  each  of  his  hoofs. 
So  there  is  a  saying  :  "  It  is  not  sharper  work  than  this 
was  done  by  the  Grey  of  Macha,  the  time  of  Cuchulain's 
death." 

Then  a  bird  came  and  settled  on  his  shoulder.  "  It  is 
not  on  that  pillar  birds  were  used  to  settle,"  said  Ere. 

Then  Lugaid  came  and  lifted  up  Cuchulain's  hair 
from  his  shoulders,  and  struck  his  head  off,  and  the 
men  of  Ireland  gave  three  great  heavy  shouts,  and  the 
sword  fell  from  Cuchulain's  hand,  and  as  it  fell,  it  struck 
off  Lugaid's  right  hand,  so  that  it  fell  to  the  ground. 
Then  they  cut  off  Cuchulain's  hand,  in  satisfaction  for  it, 
and  then  the  light  faded  away  from  about  Cuchulain's 
head,  and  left  it  as  pale  as  the  snow  of  a  single  night. 
Then  all  the  men  of  Ireland  said  that  as  it  was  Maeve 
had  gathered  the  army,  it  would  be  right  for  her  to  bring 
away  the  head  to  Cruachan.  "  I  will  not  bring  it  with 
me  ;  it  is  for  Lugaid  that  struck  it  off  to  bring  it  with 
him,"  said  Maeve.  And  then  Lugaid  and  his  men  went 
away,  and  they  brought  away  Cuchulain's  head  and  his 


LUGAID   AT   THE   RIVER  341 

right  hand  with  them,  and  they  went  south,  towards  the 
Life  river. 

At  that  time  the  army  of  Ulster  was  gathering  to 
attack  its  enemies,  and  Conall  was  out  before  them, 
and  he  met  the  Grey  of  Macha,  and  his  share  of  blood 
dripping  from  him.  And  then  he  knew  that  Cuchulain 
was  dead,  and  himself  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  went 
looking  for  Cuchulain's  body.  And  when  they  saw  his 
body  at  the  pillar-stone,  the  Grey  of  Macha  went  and 
laid  his  head  in  Cuchulain's  breast :  "  That  body  is  a 
heavy  care  to  the  Grey  of  Macha,"  said  Conall. 

Then  Conall  went  after  the  army,  thinking  in  his  own 
mind  what  way  he  could  get  satisfaction  for  Cuchulain's 
death.  For  it  was  a  promise  between  himself  and 
Cuchulain  that  whichever  of  them  would  be  killed  the 
first,  the  other  would  get  satisfaction  for  his  death. 

"  And  if  I  am  the  first  that  is  killed,"  said  Cuchulain 
at  that  time,  "  how  long  will  it  be  before  you  get  satis- 
faction for  me  ?  " 

"  Before  the  evening  of  the  same  day,"  said  Conall,  "  I 
will  have  got  satisfaction  for  you.  And  if  it  is  I  that 
will  die  before  you,"  he  said,  "  how  long  will  it  be  before 
you  get  satisfaction  for  me  ?  " 

"  Your  share  of  blood  will  not  be  cold  on  the  ground," 
said  Cuchulain,  "  when  I  will  have  got  satisfaction  for 
you." 

So  Conall  followed  after  Lugaid  to  the  river  Life. 

Lugaid  was  going  down  to  bathe  in  the  water,  but  he 
said  to  his  chariot-driver :  "  Look  out  there  over  the 
plain,  for  fear  would  any  one  come  at  us  unknown." 

The  chariot-driver  looked  around  him.  "  There  is  a 
man  coming  on  us,"  he  said,  "and  it  is  in  a  great 
hurry  he  is  coming  ;  and  you  would  think  he  has  all  the 
ravens  in  Ireland  flying  over  his  head,  and  there  are 
flakes  of  snow  speckling  the  ground  before  him." 

"  It  is  not  in  friendship  the  man  comes  that  is  coming 


342  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

like  that,"  said  Lugaid.  "  It  is  Conall  Cearnach  it  is, 
with  Dub-dearg,  and  the  birds  that  you  see  after 
him,  they  are  the  sods  the  horse  has  scattered  in  the  air 
from  his  hoofs,  and  the  flakes  of  snow  that  are  speckHng 
the  ground  before  him,  they  are  the  froth  that  he  scatters 
from  his  mouth  and  from  the  bit  of  his  bridle.  Look 
again,"  said  Lugaid,  "  and  see  what  way  is  he  coming." 
"It  is  to  the  ford  he  is  coming,  the  same  way  the  army 
passed  over,"  said  the  chariot-driver.  "  Let  him  pass  by 
us,"  said  Lugaid,  "  for  I  have  no  mind  to  fight  with  him." 
But  when  Conall  came  to  the  middle  of  the  ford,  he 
saw  Lugaid  and  his  chariot-driver,  and  he  went  over  to 
them.  "  Welcome  is  the  sight  of  a  debtor's  face,"  said 
Conall.  "  The  man  you  owe  a  debt  to  is  asking  payment 
of  you  now,  and  I  myself  am  that  man,"  he  said,  "  for 
the  sake  of  my  comrade,  Cuchulain,  that  you  killed. 
And  I  am  standing  here  now,  to  get  that  debt  paid." 

They  agreed  then  to  fight  it  out  on  the  plain  of  Magh 
Argetnas,  and  in  the  fight  Conall  wounded  Lugaid  with 
his  spear.  From  that  they  went  to  a  place  called  Ferta 
Lugdac.  "  I  would  like  that  you  would  give  me  fair 
play,"  said  Lugaid.  "  What  fair  play  ? "  said  Conall 
Cearnach. 

"  That  you  and  I  should  fight  with  one  hand,"  said  he, 
"  for  I  have  the  use  of  but  one  hand." 

"  I  will  do  that,"  said  Conall.  Then  Conall's  hand 
was  bound  to  his  side  with  a  cord,  and  then  they  fought 
for  a  long  time,  and  one  did  not  get  the  better  of  the 
other.  And  when  Conall  was  not  gaining  on  him,  his 
horse,  Dub-dearg,  that  was  near  by,  came  up  to  Lugaid, 
and  took  a  bite  out  of  his  side. 

"  Misfortune  on  me,"  said  Lugaid,  "  it  is  not  right  or 
fair  that  is  of  you,  Conall." 

"  It  was  for  myself  I  promised  to  do  what  is  right  and 
fair,"  said  Conall.  "  I  made  no  promise  for  a  beast,  that 
is  without  training  and  without  sense." 


THENEWSATEMAIN  343 

"  It  is  well  I  know  you  will  not  leave  me  till  you 
take  my  head,  as  I  took  Cuchulain's  head  from  him," 
said  Lugaid.  "  Take  it,  then,  along  with  your  own  head. 
Put  my  kingdom  with  your  kingdom,  and  my  courage 
with  your  courage ;  for  I  would  like  that  you  would  be 
the  best  champion  in  Ireland." 

Then  Conall  made  an  end  of  him,  and  he  went  back, 
bringing  Cuchulain's  head  along  with  him  to  the  pillar- 
stone  where  his  body  was. 

And  by  that  time  Emer  had  got  word  of  all  that  had 
happened,  and  that  her  husband  had  got  his  death  by 
the  men  of  Ireland,  and  by  the  powers  of  the  children 
of  Calatin.  And  it  was  Levarcham  brought  her  the  story, 
for  Conall  Cearnach  had  met  her  on  his  way,  and  had 
bade  her  go  and  bring  the  news  to  Emain  Macha ;  and 
there  she  found  Emer,  and  she  sitting  in  her  upper 
room,  looking  over  the  plain  for  some  word  from  the 
battle. 

And  all  the  women  came  out  to  meet  Levarcham, 
and  when  they  heard  her  story,  they  made  an  outcry 
of  grief  and  sharp  cries,  with  loud  weeping  and  burning 
tears  ;  and  there  were  long  dismal  sounds  going  through 
Emain,  and  the  whole  country  round  was  filled  with 
crying.  And  Emer  and  her  women  went  to  the  place 
where  Cuchulain's  body  was,  and  they  gathered  round 
it  there,  and  gave  themselves  to  crying  and  keening. 

And  when  Conall  came  back  to  the  place,  he  laid  the 
head  with  the  body  of  Cuchulain,  and  he  began  to 
lament  along  with  them,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  It 
is  Cuchulain  had  prosperity  on  him,  a  root  of  valour 
from  the  time  he  was  but  a  soft  child  ;  there  never  fell  a 
better  hero  than  the  hero  that  fell  by  Lugaid  of  the 
Lands.  And  there  are  many  are  in  want  of  you,"  he 
said,  "  and  until  all  the  chief  men  of  Ireland  have  fallen 
by  me,  it  is  not  fitting  there  should  ever  be  peace. 

"It  is  grief  to  me,  he  to  have  gone  into  the  battle 


344  DEATH    OF   CUCHULAIN 

without  Conall  being  at  his  side;  it  was  a  pity  for  him 
to  go  there  without  my  body  beside  his  body.  Och  ! 
it  is  he  was  my  foster-son,  and  now  the  ravens  are 
drinking  his  blood  ;  there  will  not  be  either  laughter  or 
mirth,  since  the  Hound  has  gone  astray  from  us." 

"  Let  us  bury  Cuchulain  now,"  said  Emer.  "  It  is  not 
right  to  do  that,"  said  Conall,  "until  I  have  avenged 
him  on  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  it  is  a  great  shouting 
I  hear  about  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  and  it  is  full  the 
country  is  of  crying  after  Cuchulain ;  and  it  is  good  at 
keeping  the  country  and  watching  the  boundaries  the 
man  was  that  is  here  before  me,  a  cross-hacked  body  in 
a  pool  of  blood.  And  it  is  well  it  pleased  Lugaid,  son  of 
Curoi,  to  be  at  the  killing  of  Cuchulain,  for  it  was  Cuchu- 
lain killed  the  chiefs  and  the  children  of  Deaguid  round 
Famain,  son  of  Foraoi,  and  round  Curoi,  son  of  Daire 
himself.  And  this  shouting  has  taken  away  my  wits 
and  my  memory  from  me,"  he  said,  "  and  it  is  hard  for 
me,  Cuchulain  not  to  answer  these  cries,  and  I  to  be 
without  him  now  ;  for  there  is  not  a  champion  in  Ireland 
that  was  not  in  dread  of  the  sword  in  his  hand.  And  it  is 
broken  in  halves  my  heart  is  for  my  brother,  and  I  will 
bring  my  revenge  through  Ireland  now,  and  I  will  not 
leave  a  tribe  without  wounding,  or  true  blood  without 
spilling,  and  the  whole  world  will  be  told  of  my  rout  to 
the  end  of  life  and  time,  until  the  men  of  Munster  and 
Connaught  and  Leinster  will  be  crying  for  the  rising 
they  made  against  him.  And  without  the  spells  of 
the  children  of  Calatin,  the  whole  of  them  would  not 
have  been  able  to  do  him  to  death." 

After  that  complaint,  rage  and  madness  came  on 
Conall,  and  he  went  forward  in  his  chariot  to  follow  after 
the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  the  same  way  as  he  had 
followed  after  Lugaid. 

And  Emer  took  the  head  of  Cuchulain  in  her  hands, 
and  she  washed  it  clean,  and  put  a  silk  cloth  about  it. 


EMER'S   COMPLAINT  345 

and  she  held  it  to  her  breast ;  and  she  began  to  cry  heavily 
over  it,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  Ochone ! "  said  she,  "  it  is  good  the  beauty  of  this 
head  was,  though  it  is  low  this  day,  and  it  is  many  of 
the  kings  and  princes  of  the  world  would  be  keening  it 
if  they  knew  the  way  it  is  now,  and  the  poets  and  the 
Druids  of  Ireland  and  of  Alban ;  and  many  were  the 
goods  and  the  jewels  and  the  rents  and  the  tributes 
that  you  brought  home  to  me  from  the  countries  of 
the  world,  with  the  courage  and  the  strength  of  your 
hands ! " 

And  she  made  this  complaint : 

"  Och,  head !  Ochone,  O  head  !  you  gave  death  to 
great  heroes,  to  many  hundreds  ;  my  head  will  lie  in 
the  same  grave,  the  one  stone  will  be  made  for  both 
of  us 

"  Och,  hand !  Ochone,  hand  that  was  once  gentle. 
It  is  often  it  was  put  under  my  head  ;  it  is  dear  that 
hand  was  to  me  ! 

"  Dear  mouth  i  Ochone,  kind  mouth  that  was  sweet- 
voiced  telling  stories  ;  since  the  time  love  first  came 
on  your  face,  you  never  refused  either  weak  or  strong ! 

"  Dear  the  man,  dear  the  man,  that  would  kill  the 
whole  of  a  great  host;  dear  his  cold  bright  hair,  and 
dear  his  bright  cheeks  ! 

"  Dear  the  king,  dear  the  king,  that  never  gave  a 
refusal  to  any ;  thirty  days  it  is  to-night  since  my  body 
lay  beside  your  body. 

"  Och,  two  spears  !  Ochone,  two  spears  !  Och,  shield  ! 
Och,  deadly  sword !  Let  them  be  given  to  Conall 
of  the  battles  ;  there  was  never  any  wage  given  like 
that. 

"  I  am  glad,  I  am  glad,  Cuchulain  of  Muirthemne, 
I  never  brought  red  shame  on  your  face,  for  any  un- 
faithfulness against  you. 

"  Happy   arc   they,  happy  are  they,  who   will    never 


346  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

hear   the  cuckoo  again    for  ever,  now  that  the  Hound 
has  died  from  us. 

"  I  am  carried  away  like  a  branch  on  the  stream ;  I 
will  not  bind  up  my  hair  to-day.  From  this  day  I  have 
nothing  to  say  that  is  better  than  Ochone ! " 

And  then  she  said  :  "It  is  long  that  it  was  showed 
to  me  in  a  vision  of  the  night,  that  Cuchulain  would 
fall  by  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  it  appeared  to  me 
Dundealgan  to  be  falling  to  the  ground,  and  his  shield 
to  be  split  from  lip  to  border,  and  his  sword  and  his 
spears  broken  in  the  middle,  and  I  saw  Conall  doing 
deeds  of  death  before  me,  and  myself  and  yourself  in 
the  one  death.  And  oh  !  my  love,"  she  said,  "  we  were 
often  in  one  another's  company,  and  it  was  happy  for 
us  ;  for  if  the  world  had  been  searched  from  the  rising 
of  the  sun  to  sunset,  the  like  would  never  have  been 
found  in  one  place,  of  the  Black  Sainglain  and  the  Grey 
of  Macha,  and  Laeg  the  chariot-driver,  and  myself  and 
Cuchulain.  And  it  is  breaking  my  heart  is  in  my  body, 
to  be  listening  to  the  pity  and  the  sorrowing  of  women 
and  men,  and  the  harsh  crying  of  the  young  men  of 
Ulster  keening  Cuchulain,  and  Ulster  to  be  in  its 
weakness,  and  without  strength  to  revenge  itself  upon 
the  men  of  Ireland." 

And  after  she  had  made  that  complaint,  she  brought 
Cuchulain's  body  to  Dundealgan ;  and  they  all  cried  and 
keened  about  him  until  such  time  as  Conall  Cearnach 
came  back  from  making  his  red  rout  through  the  army 
of  the  men  of  Ireland. 

For  he  was  not  satisfied  to  make  a  slaughter  of  the 
men  of  Munster  and  Connaught,  without  reddening 
his  hand  in  the  blood  of  the  men  of  Leinster  as 
well. 

And  when  he  had  done  that,  he  came  to  Dundealgan, 
and  his  men  along  with  him,  but  they  made  no  rejoicing 
when  they  went  back  that  time.     And  he  brought  the 


LAY   OF   THE   HEADS  347 

heads  of  the  men  of  Ireland  along  with  him  in  a  gad, 
and  he  laid  them  out  on  the  green  lawn,  and  the  people  of 
the  house  gave  three  great  shouts  when  they  saw  the  heads. 
And  Emer  came  out,  and  when  she  saw  Conall 
Cearnach,  she  said  :  "  My  great  esteem  and  my  wel- 
come before  you,  king  of  heroes,  and  may  your  many 
wounds  not  be  your  death  ;  for  you  have  avenged  the 
treachery  done  on  Ulster,  and  now  what  you  have  to 
do  is  to  make  our  grave,  and  to  lay  us  together  in  the 
grave,  for  I  will  not  live  after  Cuchulain. 

"  And  tell  me,  Conall,"  she  said,  "  whose  are  those 
heads  all  around  on  the  lawn,  and  which  of  the  great 
men  of  Ireland  did  they  belong  to  ?  " 

And  she  was  asking,  and  Conall  was  answering,  and  it 
is  what  she  said  : 

"  Tell  me,  Conall,  whose  are  those  heads,  for  surely 
you  have  reddened  your  arms  with  them.  Tell  me  the 
names  of  the  men  whose  heads  are  there  upon  the 
ground." 

And  Conall  said :  "  Daughter  of  Forgall  of  the 
Horses,  young  Emer  of  the  sweet  words,  it  is  in 
revenge  for  the  Hound  of  Feats  I  brought  these  heads 
here  from  the  south." 

"  Whose  is  the  great  black  head,  with  the  smooth  cheek 
redder  than  a  rose ;  it  is  at  the  far  end,  on  the  left  side, 
the  head  that  has  not  changed  its  colour  ?  " 

"  It  is  the  head  of  the  king  of  Meath,  Ere,  son  of 
Cairbre  of  Swift  Horses  ;  I  brought  his  head  with  me 
from  far  off,  in  revenge  for  my  own  foster-son." 

"  Whose  is  that  head  there  before  me,  with  soft  hair, 
with  smooth  eyebrows,  its  eyes  like  ice,  its  teeth  like 
blossoms  ;  that  head  is  more  beautiful  in  shape  than  the 
others  ?  " 

"  A  son  of  Maeve  ;  a  destroyer  of  harbours,  yellow- 
haired  Maine,  man  of  horses  ;  I  left  his  body  without 
a  head ;  all  his  people  fell  by  my  hand." 


348  DEATH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

"O  great  Conall,  who  did  not  fail  us,  whose  head  is 
this  you  hold  in  your  hand  ?  Since  the  Hound  of  Feats 
is  not  living,  what  do  you  bring  in  satisfaction  for  his 
head  ?  " 

"  The  head  of  the  son  of  Fergus  of  the  Horses,  a 
destroyer  in  every  battle-field,  my  sister's  son  of  the 
narrow  tower  ;  I  have  struck  his  head  from  his  body." 

"  Whose  is  that  head  to  the  west,  with  fair  hair,  the 
head  that  is  spoiled  with  grief?  I  used  to  know  his 
voice  ;  I  was  for  a  while  his  friend." 

"  That  is  he  that  struck  down  the  Hound,  Lugaid,  son 
of  Curoi  of  the  Rhymes.  His  body  was  laid  out  straight 
and  fair,  I  struck  his  head  off  afterwards." 

"  Whose  are  those  two  heads  farther  out,  great  Conall 
of  good  judgment  ?  For  the  sake  of  your  friendship, 
do  not  hide  the  names  of  the  men  put  down  by  your 
arms." 

"  The  heads  of  Laigaire  and  Clar  Cuilt,  two  men  that 
fell  by  my  wounds.  It  was  they  wounded  faithful  Cuchu- 
lain ;  I  made  my  weapons  red  in  their  blood." 

"Whose  are  those  heads  farther  to  the  east,  great 
Conall  of  bright  deeds?  The  hair  of  the  two  is  of 
the  one  colour  ;  their  cheeks  are  redder  than  a  calf's 
blood." 

"  Brave  Cullain  and  hardy  Cunlaid,  two  that  were 
used  to  overcome  in  their  anger.  There  to  the  east, 
Emer,  are  their  heads ;  I  left  their  bodies  in  a  red 
pool." 

"  Whose  are  those  three  heads  with  evil  looks  I  see 
before  me  to  the  north  ?  Their  faces  blue,  their  hair 
black  ;  even  hard  Conall's  eye  turns  from  them." 

"  Three  of  the  enemies  of  the  Hound,  daughters  of 
Calatin,  wise  in  enchantments  ;  they  are  the  three  witches 
killed  by  me,  their  weapons  in  their  hands." 

'  O  great  Conall,  father  of  kings,  whose  is  that  head 
that  would  overcome  in  the  battle  ?     His  bushy  hair  is 


DEATHOFEMER  349 

gold-yellow ;  his  head-dress  is  smooth  and  white  like 
silver." 

"  It  is  the  head  of  the  son  of  Red-Haired  Ross,  son 
of  Necht  Min,  that  died  by  my  strength.  This,  Emer, 
is  his  head  ;  the  high  king  of  Leinster  of  Speckled 
Swords." 

"  O  great  Conall,  change  the  story.  How  many  of 
the  men  that  harmed  him  fell  by  your  hand  that  does 
not  fail,  in  satisfaction  for  the  head  of  Cuchulain?" 

"  It  is  what  I  say,  ten  and  seven  scores  of  hundreds  is 
the  number  that  fell,  back  to  back,  by  the  anger  of 
my  hard  sword  and  of  my  people." 

"  O  Conall,  what  way  are  they,  the  women  of  Ireland, 
after  the  Hound  ?  Are  they  mourning  the  son  of 
Sualtim  ?  are  they  showing  respect  through  their  grief?  " 

"O  Emer,  what  shall  I  do  without  my  Cuchulain, 
my  fine  nurseling,  going  in  and  out  from  me,  to- 
night ?  " 

"  O  Conall,  lift  me  to  the  grave.  Raise  my  stone 
over  the  grave  of  the  Hound  ;  since  it  is  through  grief 
for  him  I  go  to  death,  lay  my  mouth  to  the  mouth  of 
Cuchulain. 

"  I  am  Emer  of  the  Fair  Form  ;  there  is  no  more 
vengeance  for  me  to  find  ;  I  have  no  love  for  any  man. 
It  is  sorrowful  my  stay  is  after  the  Hound." 

And  after  that  Emer  bade  Conall  to  make  a  wide, 
very  deep  grave  for  Cuchulain  ;  and  she  laid  herself 
down  beside  her  gentle  comrade,  and  she  put  her 
mouth  to  his  mouth,  and  she  said :  "  Love  of  my  life, 
my  friend,  my  sweetheart,  my  one  choice  of  the  men  of 
the  earth,  many  is  the  woman,  wed  or  unwed,  envied 
me  till  to-day :  and  now  I  will  not  stay  living  after 
you." 

And  her  life  went  out  from  her,  and  she  herself  and 
Cuchulain  were  laid  in  the  one  grave  by  Conall.  And  he 
raised  the  one  stone  over  them,  and   he  wrote  their 


350  DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 

names  in  Ogham,  and  he  himself  and  all  the  men  of 
Ulster  keened  them. 

But  the  three  times  fifty  queens  that  loved  Cuchulain 
saw  him  appear  in  his  Druid  chariot,  going  through 
Emain  Macha ;  and  they  could  hear  him  singing  the 
music  of  the  Sidhe. 


THE    END 


NOTE   BY    W.   B.   YEATS    ON    THE    CONVER- 
SATION   OF    CUCHULAIN    AND    EMER. 

(Page  23). 

This  conversation,  so  full  of  strange  mythological  information, 
is  an  example  of  the  poet  speech  of  ancient  Ireland.  One  comes 
upon  this  speech  here  and  there  in  other  stories  and  poems.  One 
finds  it  in  the  poem  attributed  to  Ailbhe,  daughter  of  Cormac  Mac 
Art,  and  quoted  by  O'Curry  in  "  MS.  Materials,'  of  which  one 
verse  is  an  illusion  to  a  story  given  in  Lady  Gregory's  book : 

'*The  apple  tree  of  high  Aillinn, 
The  yew  of  Baile  of  little  land, 
Though  they  are  put  into  lays, 
Rough  people  do  not  understand  them." 

One  finds  it  too  in  the  poems  which  Brian,  Son  of  Tuireann, 
chanted  when  he  did  not  wish  to  be  wholly  understood.  "  That  is 
a  good  poem,  but  I  do  not  understand  a  word  of  its  meaning," 
said  the  kings  before  whom  he  chanted  ;  but  his  obscurity  was 
more  in  a  roundabout  way  of  speaking  than  in  mythological 
allusions.  There  is  a  description  of  a  banquet,  quoted  by  Professor 
Kuno  Meyer,  where  hens'  eggs  are  spoken  of  as  "  gravel  of  Glenn 
Ai,"  and  leek,  as  "  a  tear  of  a  fair  woman,"  and  some  eatable  sea- 
weed, dulse,  perhaps,  as  a  "net  of  the  plains  of  Rein" — that  is  to 
say,  of  the  sea — and  so  on.  He  quotes  also  a  poem  that  calls  the 
sallow,  "  the  strength  of  bees,"  and  the  hawthorn  "  the  barking  of 
hounds,"  and  the  gooseberry  bush  "  the  sweetest  of  trees,"  and  the 
yew,  "the  oldest  of  trees." 

This    poet    speech    somewhat    resembles  the   Icelandic    court 

poetry,  as  it  is  called,  which  certainly  required  alike  for  the  writing 

and  understanding  of  it  a  great  traditional  culture.     Its  descriptions 

of  shields  and  tapestry,  and  its  praises  of  Kings,  that  were  first 

written,  it  seems,  about  the  tenth  century,  depended  for  their  effects 

on  just  this  heaping  up  of  mythological  allusions,  and  the  "Eddas" 

?5l 


352  NOTES 

were  written  to  be  a  granary  for  the  makers  of  such  poems.  But 
by  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  they  have  come  to  be  as 
irritating  to  the  new  Christian  poets  and  writers  who  stood  outside 
their  tradition,  as  are  the  more  esoteric  kinds  of  modern  verse  to 
unlettered  readers.  They  were  called  "  obscure,"  and  "  speaking 
in  riddles,"  and  the  like. 

It  has  sometimes  been  thought  that  the  Irish  poet  speech  was 
indeed  but  a  copy  of  this  court  poetry,  but  Professor  York  Powell 
contradicts  this,  and  thinks  it  is  not  unlikely  that  the  Irish  poems 
influenced  the  Icelandic,  and  made  them  more  mythological  and 
obscure. 

I  am  not  scholar  enough  to  judge  the  Scandinavian  verse,  but 
the  Irish  poet  speech  seems  to  me  at  worst  an  over-abundance 
of  the  esoterism  which  is  an  essential  element  in  all  admirable 
literature,  and  I  think  it  a  folly  to  make  light  of  it,  as  a  recent 
writer  has  done.  Even  now,  verse  no  less  full  of  symbol  and  myth 
seems  to  me  as  legitimate  as,  let  us  say,  a  religious  picture  full 
of  symbolic  detail,  or  the  symbolic  ornament  of  a  Cathedral. 

Nash's— 

"  Brightness  falls  from  the  air. 
Queens  have  died  young  and  fair, 
Dust  hath  closed  Helen's  eye  " — 

must  seem  as  empty  as  a  Scald's  song,  or  the  talk  of  Cuchulain 
and  Emer,  to  one  who  has  never  heard  of  Helen,  or  even  to  one 
who  did  not  fall  in  love  with  her  when  he  was  a  young  man.  And 
if  we  were  not  accustomed  to  be  stirred  by  Greek  myth,  even  with- 
out remembering  it  very  fully,  "Berenice's  ever  burning  hair'  would 
not  stir  the  blood,  and  especially  if  it  were  put  into  some  foreign 
tongue,  losing  those  resounding  "  b's  "  on  the  way. 

The  mythological  events  Cuchulain  speaks  of  give  mystery  to 
the  scenery  of  the  tales,  and  when  they  are  connected  with  the 
battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  the  most  tremendous  of  mythological 
battles,  or  anything  else  we  know  much  about,  they  are  full  of 
poetic  meaning  or  historical  interest.  The  hills  that  had  the  shape 
of  a  sow's  back  at  the  coming  of  the  Children  of  Miled,  remind 
one  of  Borlase's  conviction  that  the  pig  was  the  symbol  of  the 
mythological  ancestry  of  the  Firbolg,  which  the  Children  of  Miled 
were  to  bring  into  subjection,  and  of  his  suggestion  that  the 
magical  pigs  that  Maeve  numbered  were  some  Firbolg  tribe  that 
Maeve  put  down  in  war.  And  everywhere  that  esoteric  speech 
brings  the  odour  of  the  wild  woods  into  our  nostrils. 

The  earlier  we  get,  the  more  copious  does  this  traditional  and 
symbolical  element  in  literature  become.     Till  Greece  and  Rome 


NOTES  353 

created  a  new  culture,  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  man,  all  that  we 
understand  by  humanism,  nobody  wrote  history,  nobody  described 
anything  as  we  understand  description.  One  called  up  the  image 
of  a  thing  by  comparing  it  with  something  else,  and  partly 
because  one  was  less  interested  in  man,  who  did  not  seem  to  be 
important,  than  in  divine  revelations,  in  changes  among  the 
heavens  and  the  gods,  which  can  hardly  be  expressed  at  all,  and 
only  by  myth,  by  symbol,  by  enigma.  One  was  always  losing 
oneself  in  the  unknown,  and  rushing  to  the  limits  of  the  world. 
Imagination  was  all  in  all.  Is  not  poetry,  when  all  is  said,  but 
a  little  of  this  habit  of  mind  caught  as  in  the  beryl  stone  of  a 
Wizard  ? 


NOTES 

The  Irish  text,  from  which  the  greater  number  of  the  stories  in 
this  book  have  been  taken,  has  been  published  either  in  Irische 
Texte  or  the  Revue  Celtiqiie^  or  by  O'Curry  in  Atlantis  and  else- 
where, and  I  have  worked  from  this  text,  comparing  it  with  the 
translations  that  have  been  already  made.  In  some  cases,  as  in  the 
greater  part  of  "  The  War  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,"  a  very  small 
part  of  the  Irish  text  has  as  yet  been  printed,  and  I  have  had  to 
work  by  comparing  and  piecing  together  various  translations. 

I  have  had  to  put  a  connecting  sentence  of  my  own  here  and 
there,  and  I  have  condensed  many  passages,  and  I  have  sometimes 
tried  to  give  the  meaning  of  a  formula  that  has  lost  its  old  meaning. 
Thus  I  have  exchanged  for  the  grotesque  accounts  of  Cuchulain's 
distortion — whicn  no  doubt  merely  meant  that  in  time  of  great 
strain  or  anger  he  had  more  than  human  strength — the  more  simple 
formula  that  his  appearance  changed  to  the  appearance  of  a  god. 
In  the  same  way,  I  have  left  out  Levarcham's  distortion,  which  was 
the  recognised  way  of  saying  she  was  a  swift  messenger. 

As  to  the  date  of  the  stories,  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  from 
Mr  Alfred  Nutt's  "  Cuchulain,  the  Irish  Achilles"  :— 

"  It  suffices  to  say  that  we  possess  a  MS.  literature  of  which 
Cuchulain  and  his  contemporaries  are  the  subject,  the  extent  of 
which  may  be  roughly  reckoned  at  2000  8vo  pages.  The  great 
bulk  of  this  is  contained  in  MSS.  which  are  older  than  the  twelfth 
century,  or  which  demonstrably  are  copied  from  pre-twelfth- 
century  MSS. ;  where  post-twelfth-century  versions  alone  remain, 
the  story  itself  is  nearly  always  known  from  earlier  sources  ;  in 
fact,  there  is  hardly  a  single  scene  or  incident  in  the  whole  cycle 
which  has  reached  us  only  in  MSS.  of  the  thirteenth  and  following 
centuries.  At  the  same  time  a  not  inconsiderable  portion  of  the 
cycle  comes  before  us  altered  in  language,  and  to  some  extent 
in  content,  style  of  narrative,  and  characterisation,  showing  that 
the  saga  as  a  whole  remained  a  living  element  of  Irish  culture  and 
participated  in  the  accidents  of  its  evolution. 


356  NOTES 

"  The  great  bulk  of  this  literature  is,  as  I  have  said,  certainly 
older  than  the  twelfth  century  ;  but  we  can  carry  it  back  much 
farther,  apart  from  any  considerations  based  upon  the  subject- 
matter.  Arguments  of  a  nature  purely  philological,  based  upon 
the  language  of  the  texts,  or  critical,  based  upon  the  relations  of 
the  various  MSS.  to  each  other,  not  only  allow,  but  compel  us 
to  date  the  redaction  of  the  principal  Cuchulain  stories,  substan- 
tially in  the  form  under  which  they  have  survived,  back  to  the 
seventh  to  ninth  centuries.  Whether  or  no  they  are  older  yet,  is 
a  question  that  cannot  be  answered  without  preHminary  examina- 
tion of  the  subject-matter.  In  the  meantime  it  is  something  to 
know  that  the  Cuchulain  stories  were  put  into  permanent  literary 
form  at  about  the  same  date  as  Beowulf,  some  loo  to  250  years 
before  the  Scandinavian  mythology  crystallised  into  its  present 
form,  at  least  200  years  before  the  oldest  Charlemagne  romances, 
and  probably  300  years  before  the  earliest  draft  of  the  Nibe- 
lungenlied.  Irish  is  the  most  ancient  vernacular  literature  of 
modern  Europe,  a  fact  which  of  itself  commends  it  to  the  attention 
of  the  student." 

A  critical  account  of  this  and  the  other  Irish  cycles  is  also  given 
in  Dr  Douglas  Hyde's  "  Literary  History  of  Ireland." 

The  Tuatha  de  Danaan,  or  the  Sidhe,  so  often  mentioned,  were 
the  divine  race,  the  people  of  the  Gods  of  Dana,  who  conquered 
the  Fomor,  the  powers  of  darkness  and  their  helpers  the  Firbolgs, 
in  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  and  possessed  Ireland  until  they 
were  in  their  turn  conquered  by  the  children  of  the  Gael,  under  the 
leadership  of  the  Sons  of  Miled.  Then  they  became  invisible,  and 
made  their  home  in  hills  and  raths. 

The  Morrigu  was  their  goddess  of  battle,  and  Angus  Og,  Son  of 
the  Dagda,  their  god  of  youth  and  love,  and  Lugh,  the  Master  of 
many  Arts,  their  Hermes,  their  Apollo,  and  Manannan,  Son  of  Lir, 
their  Sea-God,  or,  as  some  say,  the  sea  itself. 

The  spelling  of  Irish  names  for  English  readers  is  always  a 
difficulty.  I  have  not  gone  by  any  fixed  rule,  but  have  taken  the 
spelling  of  names  from  various  good  authorities.  As  to  pronuncia- 
tion, the  modern  is  generally  used,  but  we  know  so  little  what  the 
ancient  pronunciation  was,  that  we  are  left  some  freedom,  and 
some  words  have  taken  a  shape  from  English-speaking  generations, 
that  it  is  hard  to  change.  Teamhair,  for  instance,  has  become  Tara 
through  a  mistaken  use  of  the  genitive  ;  Muirthemne  is  called  by 
Irish  speakers  "  Mur-hev-na,"  but  others  call  it  Muir'them-rae, 


NOTES 


357 


and  I  am  inclined  to  prefer  this  for  the  charm  of  its  sound,  and  I 
do  not  see  any  stronger  reason  against  using  it  than  against 
sounding  as  we  do  the  "s"  in  Paris.  After  all,  it  has  not  yet  been 
definitely  settled  whether  Trafalgar  is  to  be  spoken  in  the  Spanish 
or  the  English  way  ;  English  poets  have  given  it  one  or  the  other 
emphasis.  This  is  the  approximate  pronunciation  of  some  of  the 
more  difficult  names  : — 


Aedh 

Aoife 

Badb 

Bodb 

Cliodna 

Cobhthach  . 

Conchubar  . 

Cuailgne 

Cuchulain    . 

Dun  Sobairce 

Emain 

Eochaid 

Eocho 

Eoghan 

Fernmaighe 

Glen  na  (m)  Bodhar 

Inbhir 

Lugh 

Magh  Tuireadh 

Muirthemne 

Niamh 

Rudraige     . 

Sidhe 

Slieve  Suidhe  Laig 

Suibnes 

Teamhair    . 

Tuathmumain 


hen 


Ae  (rhyming  to  "  day  "). 

Eefa. 

Bibe  (as  "jibe"). 

Bove. 

Cleevna. 

Cowhach. 

Conachoor. 

Cooley. 

Cuhoolin,  or  Cu-huUin. 

Dom  Severka. 

A  win. 

Yohee. 

Yucho. 

Owen. 

Farney. 

Glen  na  Mower  (as  ** bower"). 

Inver. 

Loo. 

Moytirra. 

Mvir-hev-na. 

Nee-av. 

Rury. 

Shee. 

Slieve  see  lihon. 

Sivness. 

T'yower. 

Too-moon. 


I  give  below  some  names  of  places  that  can  still  be  identified- 


Ard  Inver   . 
Argatros 
Ath  Cliath  . 
Ath  Firdiadh 
Ath  Truim . 
Beinn  Edair 
Boinne  River 
Bregia 


Mouth  of  the  Avoca,  Co.  Wicklow. 

On  the  Nore,  Co.  Kilkenny. 

Dublin. 

(Ferdiad's  Ford)  Ardee. 

Trim. 

Howth. 

The  Boyne. 

Bray. 


358 


NOTES 


Bri  Leith    . 
Brug  na  Boinne 
Carraige 

Cerna 

Clarthe 
Cleitech 

Conaille-Muirthemne 

Cniachan    . 
Cuailgne 
Cuilsilinne  . 
Drium  Criadh 
Dundealgan 
Dun  Rudraige 
Dun  Scathach 
Dun  Sobairce 

Emain  Macha 

Esro 

Fearbile 

Fenien 

Gairech  and  Ilgaireth 

Hill  of  Brughean  Mor 

Hy  Maine  . 

Inver  Colptha 

Loch  Cuan . 

Loch  Riach 

Leodus,  Cadd,  and  Ork 

Magh  Ai 

Magh  Breagh 

Magh  Mucrime 

Magh  Slecht 

Muirthemne 

Road  of  Midluachair 

Sionnan 

Sleamhain  of  Meath 
Slieve  Breagh 
Slieve  Cuilinn 
Slieve  Fuad 


In  Co.  Longford. 

On  the  Boyne. 

Kerry. 
/Probably   River   Muilchean,  Co. 
\      Limerick. 

Clara,  near  Mullingar. 

On  the  Boyne. 
/Between   the  Cooley   Mountains 
\     and  the  Boyne. 

In  Co.  Roscommon. 

Cooley,  Co.  Louth. 

South-west  of  Kells. 

Drumcree,  Co.  Westmeath. 

Dundalk. 

Dundrum,  Co.  Down. 

Isle  of  Skye. 

Dunseveiick,  Co.  Antrim. 

Navan  fort,  near  Armagh.  A 
description  and  plan  of  Emain 
Macha  are  given  by  D'Arbois 
de  Jubainville  in  Revue 
Celtique,  vol.  xvi. 

Ballyshannon. 

In  Co.  Westmeath. 

At  Slieve  na  Man,  Co.  Tipperary. 

Two  hills  near  Mullingar. 
/In     Parish     of    Drumany,     Co, 
\^     Westmeath. 

/A  part  of  Roscommon,  bordering 
(^     Sligo  and  Mayo. 

Estuary  of  the  Boyne. 

Strangford  Loch. 

In  Co.  Galway. 

Lewis,  Shetland,  and  Orkney. 

In  Co.  Roscommon. 

In  East  Meath. 

Near  Athenry,  Co.  Galway. 

Near  Ballymagauran,  Co.  Cavan. 
fThe  part  of  Co.  Louth  bordering 
-!  the  sea,  between  the  Boyne 
1^     and  Dundalk. 

/The     north-eastern     road     from 
\     Teamhair. 

The  Shannon. 

Near  Mullingar. 

Co.  Louth. 

Co.  Londonderry. 

Co.  Armagh. 


NOTES  359 


Slieve  Mis  . 

Slieve  Suidhe  Laighen 

Scigger  Isles 

Sudiam 

Tailltin 

Teamhair    . 

Tuathmumain 

Uaran  Garad 

Usnech 

Wave  of  Assaroe  . 
Wave  of  Cliodna  . 
Wave  of  Inbhir 


Co.  Kerry. 

Mount  Leinster. 

Faroe  Isles. 

Sweden. 

Telltown. 

Tara,  Co.  Meath. 

Thomond. 

River  Cruind. 
/The    Hill    of    Usnogh  in  West 
V     Meath. 

At  Ballyshannon. 

At  Glandore,  Co.  Cork. 

Mouth  of  the  Bann. 


The  following  is  a  list  of  the  authorities  I  have  been  chiefly 
helped  by  in  putting  these  stories  together.  But  I  cannot  make 
it  quite  accurate,  for  I  have  sometimes  transferred  a  mere  phrase, 
sometimes  a  whole  passage  from  one  story  to  another,  where  it 
seemed  to  fit  better.  I  have  occasionally  used  Scottish  Gaelic 
versions,  as  in  the  account  of  Deirdre's  birth,  and  the  manner  of 
her  death,  and  in  a  part  of  "The  Only  Son  of  Aoife."  "  O'Curry  " 
stands  for  his  two  books,  "The  Manners  and  Customs  of  Ancient 
Ireland,"  and  "MS.  Materials  for  Ancient  Irish  History,"  and  his 
contributions  to  Atlantis. 

Birth  of  Cuchulain.— O'Curry ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopee  Celtiqtie  ; 
Nutt,  Voj/a^e  of  Bran ;  Kuno  Meyer,  Revtte  Celtiqtie ;  Duvau, 
Revue  Celtique ;  Windisch,  Irische  Texte ;  Stokes,  Irische  Texte. 

Boy  Deeds  of  Cuchlain.— Same  as  "War  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne." 

Courting  of  Emer. — Kuno  Meyer,  Revue  Celtique;  Kuno  Meyer, 
Archceological  Review ;  Dr  Douglas  Hyde,  Literary  History  of 
Ireland ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopie  Celtique  ;  O'Curry. 

Bricriu's  Feast,  and  The  Championship  of  Ulster. — Text,  with 
Henderson's  translation,  published  by  Irish  Texts  Society ;  De 
Jubainville,  Epopee  Celtique ;  O'Curry  ;  Windisch,  Irische  Texte. 

The  High  King  of  Ireland. — Whitley  Stokes,  Revue  Celtique; 
O'Curry  ;  Zimmer,  Keltische  Studien. 

Fate  of  the  Children  of  Usnech, — Text  and  Translations  published 
by  the  Society  for  the  Preservation  of  the  Irish  Language  ;  Hyde, 
Literary  History  of  Ireland ;  Hyde,  Zeitschrift  Celt.  Philologie; 
O'Curry  ;  Whitley  Stokes,  Irische  Texte ;  Windisch,  Irische  Texte; 
Cameron,  Reliquae   Celticae ;  O'Flanagan,   Transactions  of  Gaelic 


36o  NOTES 

Society ;  O'Flanagan,  Reltquae  Celticae ;  Carmichael,  Transactions 
of  Gaelic  Society ;  Ultonian  Ballads ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopie 
Celtiqtie  ;  Dottin,  Revue  Celtiqiie. 

The  Dream  of  Angus. — Miiller,  Revue  Celtique. 

Cruachan. — Kuno  Meyer,  Revue  Celtique  ;  O'Beirne  Crowe,  Proceedings 
of  Royal  Irish  Academy  ;  O' Curry  ;  Rhys,  Celtic  Heathendoju. 

Wedding  of  Maine  Morgor. — Windisch,  Irische  Texte. 

War  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  Awakening  of  Ulster. — MS. 
translations  by  O'Daly  in  Royal  Irish  Academy;  MS.  translation 
by  O'Looney  in  Royal  Irish  Academy  ;  O'Curry ;  Standish  Hayes 
O'Grady's  S>Tiopsis  in  Miss  Hull's  Cuchtilain  Saga ;  Zimmer, 
Synopsis  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  Vergleichende  Sprachforschung. 

The  jTwo  Bulls. — Windisch,  Irische  Texte;  Nutt,  Voyage  of  Bran ; 
O'Curr}'. 

The  Only  Jealousy  of  Emer,  and  Instruction  to  a  Prince. — 
O'Curry,  Atlantis  ;  De  Jubainville,  Epopie  Celtique. 

The  Sons  of  Doel  Dermait. — Windisch,  Irische  Texte  ;  Rhys,  Hibbert 
Lectures. 

Battle  of  Rosnaree. — Text  with  Father  Hogan's  translation;  Todd 
Lecture  Series;  O'Curry;  Kuno  Meyer,  Revue  Celtique. 

Only  Son  of  Aoife. — Keating's  History  of  Ireland ;  Miss  Brooke's 
Reliques  ;  Curtain's  Folk  Tales  ;  Some  Gaelic  Ballads. 

Gathering  at  Muirthemne,  and  Death  of  Cuchulain. — "  Brislech 
Mor  Magh  Muirthemne,"  and  "Deargruatar  Conaill  Cearnaig" — 
published  in  Gaelic  Journal^  1901 ;  S.  Hayes  O'Grady  in  Miss 
Hull's  Cuchulain  Saga;  Whitley  Stokes,  Revue  Celtique;  an 
unpublished  MS.  in  Dr  Hyde's  possession. 

We  must  be  grateful  to  all  these  scholars,  workers,  or  compilers, 
those  who  have  passed  away,  and  those  who  are  living.  And 
I  am  personally  grateful  to  my  friend  Douglas  Hyde  for  patient 
answering  of  many  questions  ;  and  to  my  friend  and  critic,  W. 
B.  Yeats,  for  his  kindness  and  for  his  severity. 

A.  G. 


THE  OLD  STORIES  OF  IRELAND. 

TWO  WORKS  TREATING  OF  GAELIC  LEGENDS. 
Edited  and  Translated  by  LADY  GREGORY. 


Poets  and  Dreamers. 

STUDIES  AND  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  THE  IRISH. 

Crown  Svo.     6s. 

"  Lady  Gregory  has  written  the  most  charming  book  that  has  come  out  of  Ireland  for 
many  a  long  day.  It  consists  of  original  sketches  and  of  translations  from  the  Irish,  and 
from  beginning  to  end  the  atmosphere,  which  is  delightful,  is  the  same.  ...  It  has 
charm,  and  there  is  everywhere  a  felicity  of  simple  phrase  that  is  infinitely  refreshing. 
.  .  .  We  are  grateful  to  Lady  Gregory  for  some  hours  that  could  not  have  been  more 
pleasant  if  they  had  been  spent  in  the  country  in  actual  converse  with  poets  and 
dreamers." — Morning  Post. 

"  In  this  book  the  Irish  peasant  is  for  the  first  time  allowed  to  speak  for  himself.  In 
'  Cuchulain  of  Muirthemne '  Lady  Gregory  had  already  invented  a  new  form  of  English  : 
the  first  really  faithful  transcript  of  the  speech  of  the  Irish  peasant,  as  he  thinks  in  Irish 
and  speaks  in  English.  Here,  in  these  folk-tales  collected  from  old  men  and  women  on 
the  roads,  and  from  the  cabins  of  poor  people,  and  from  the  workhouses,  and  in  these 
songs,  ballads,  and  plays  translated  from  Irish  we  have  a  grave,  quaint,  simple,  and 
sinewy  language,  which  is  not  a  consciously  naive  or  experimental  thing,  but  a  living 
speech,  which  the  present  writer  has  heard  spoken,  in  exactly  this  form  and  with  just 
these  subtly  indicated  cadences,  in  Galway,  in  Sligo,  and  on  the  islands  of  Aran.  ...  It 
is  perhaps  in  the  translations  of  the  poems  and  plays  of  Dr  Hyde  that  the  English  reader 
will  find  the  most  interesting  part  of  an  exceptionally  and  variously  interesting  book." — 
Athenceiitn. 

"  In  this  book  of  simple  and  beautiful  prose  Lady  Gregory  has  preserved  much  old 
Irish  tradition,  and  much  old  lore  and  folk-lore,  that  has  gone  in  waif  words  among  the 
cottars  for  many  generations.  ...  In  Ireland,  where  folk  have  never  forgotten  that  their 
ancestors  were  kings  and  heroes,  and  that  the  ancient  gods  walked  upon  the  hills  they 
plough,  there  is  a  great  bcdy  of  tradition,  and  much  beautiful  lore,  which  is  warmth  and 
sweetness  to  many  poor  souls,  and  a  comfort  to  many  dreamers  whose  hearts  have  been 
too  filled  with  vision  to  find  peace  in  that  land  or  in  these  times.  .  .  .  This  book  takes 
the  reader  to  the  passionate  green  heart  of  Ireland." — The  Speaker. 

"  Lady  Gregory's  touch  is  an  excellent  one,  and  her  fashion  of  interpreting  and  bring- 
ing before  us  the  local  talk  is  pleasant  and  individual  to  a  high  degree.  .  .  .  The  first, 
also  on  the  whole  the  most  delightful,  of  these  essays  or  chapters  is  the  one  that  deals 
with  the  poet  Raftery,  a  Connaught  bard.  .  .  .  The  chapters  dealing  with  her  own 
people  and  neighbours  are  all  touched  in  with  the  same  light,  sure  hand.  '  Moun- 
tain Theology  '  and  '  Workhouse  Dreams'  especially,  are  full  of  charm,  fresh,  clear,  and 
penetrating  .  .  .  her  book  is  one  to  which  all  lovers  of  Ireland  and  Irish  literature  will 
turn  with  keen  enjoyment,  and  that  more  than  once." — The  Times. 

"  A  fascinating  group  of  studies  and  translations  from  the  Irish.  .  .  .  Erudition  and 
tireless  research  reveal  a  new  world  of  unimagined  charm." — Outlook. 

"  It  is  agreed  upon  all  hands  that  this  writer's  English  version  of  the  story  of  the  Red 
Branch  of  Ulster  is  the  best  thing  in  a  literary  way  that  has  come  out  of  Ireland  for 
some  years.  The  present  miscellany  of  translated  poems  and  stories  follows  up  the 
success  of  that  work  in  a  book  no  less  attractive." — Scotsman. 


Gods  and   Fighting  Men. 

THE  STORY  OF  THE  TUATHA  DE  DANAAN  AND  OF  THE 

FIANNA  OF  IRELAND. 

Large  Crown  Svo. 


London:   JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET,  W. 


THE  LATEST  SIX  SHILLING  NOVELS. 


THE    PINCH     OF     PROSPERITY.       By    Horack    Annesley 
Vachell,  Author  of  "The  Shadowy  Tliird,"  "John  Charity." 

"  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  this  book.     Wc  have  read  every  word  of  it,  and  can 

conwiieotiouiJy  rccomiaend  xl.'  —LadUi    Held. 

THE  WIND  IN  THE  ROSE  BUSH.     By  Mary   E.   Wilkins, 
AolhrjT  of  "The  Heart's  Highway." 

"  Here  we  have  the  be»t  and  ino^t  le^timatc  kind  of  gbo&t  Uory — the  kind  which  is 
thrilliog  io  effect  and  ingenious  in  incident,  yet  eatcotially  sober  in  its  method." — 
Wutmuutrr  Gm^ttt. 

DANNY.     By  Alfred  Oi.i.ivant,  Author  of  " Owd  liob." 

.   .   The  work   is  notable  for  the  fir.cne:,'   <A  \\\  sympathy  and  the  delicacy  of  its 
tiatural  art,  as  well    a»    new  io   its    kiri'!  A    s'-y  real  story,  of  real  httmour,  real 

pathfj*,  and  real  chara'.t^r.   —  Timet. 

MOTH    AND    RUST  w.th  Geoffrey!  Wife  and  the 

Pitfall.      1-y  Maj  V  <  i :i  i:v,  .A-.thor  of  ••  kc«i  Tottxi^e." 


I;  -  ■ 


)  »r..  »,.t:.  •  .       I ..Uh 


'  •      nan  character.   .   .  .   We 

>ji   m    wtvtj  wljlCii,    hr%]'ir\    f^tng  well    put 


TALES  FROM  A  FAk  RIDING      By  Oliver  <;mo.ns,  Author  of 

IK'   (  winplcat  Barhclor." 

"...  dearly  coocaivcd  aad  pow«rfiiUy  told  .  .  .  thtf  am  «BoeU«Bt  is  tb«r  peculur 
•  v«ak  apot  aaoac  ckcfls."— TAf  CtMn^VML 


THE  TRIAL  OP  If  AN.     An  Allegorical  RooMnce. 


li  i>  a  Ikac  ojttccpuoA,  cm^hiiiy  tbovclM  emtmad  natimi  wick  ■•  Mnall  literary  skill 
.  .  .  (or  iu  sioooity,  the  bcMity  of  such  a4  iu  thoaglM,  aad  iu  mmqtf  subjca,  the 
work  oartainly  mtnu  aumtiom."" Thg  Tumi. 

LESLIE   FARQUHAR.     By   Ko&alihe   Mascon,   Author  of    "In 

f  JMi  Town. 


"  It  IS  a  pUaMie  to  take  up  sodi  a  caraiaJ  iniibid  work.  .  .  .  Decidedly  '  I>e     - 
Fwqabar '  is  a  book  to  be  read."— JiMiAnwa. 

THE  CAVALIER     By  G.  W.  Cable. 

"A  >ivid  ar.d  faviinatiBg  M.'jnt,  wherein  style  aod  wbetanor  alike  driind  aad  reward 
Lbc  readily  ol  every  \ku<."—J'aJi  AfeUJ  (,MutU 

THE  VALLEY  OF  DECISION.     By  Luith  Wharton,  Author  of 

"  (  r.'  : .!  Inktanccx,"  etc. 

.  .  .  d  le^Iiy  (>rwlianc  work.  It  is  v*ty  lon^,  but  tbe  six  bufkdred  a/td  fifty  pageik  do 
not  weary  or*e.  ...  As  we  read  we  are  remiti'lcd  of  Vernon  Lee,  of  '  John  Int^ks^nt,'  c4 
IV^txacoo,  knd,  in  of<e  lA  the  txKAt  fttxikiiiK  pbssaces  «/f  the  story,  uf  Cayli'.A(rik.'  — /'A^ 

TRISTRAM   OF    BLENT.     By  Akthowy  Hope,  Author  of  "The 

I'f.       :.•  ;     /  /■  ■  '.I.      «.tC- 

"Tbere  J.  vr.;;ir  ii  >  v*  -  ^r.tructioo,  of  ckaractcr,  and  of  dialogue  .      .  c/ten  rpitcraui- 
oAea  paraiioxkal,  but  »(iU  mm%  «Aca  rtiBjlMfally  buincrt^ous."— 7A«  Viitui. 


London  :  JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET,  W. 


PRINTED   AT  Till-:    lODlNlUilUJI    I'llESS, 
1)   AND   11    YOUNU   8THEET. 


I 


BOSTON  COLLEGE 


3  9031  021  94407  9 


