[BHD-cuchulain  —  part 1 of 5]
============================================================

THOMAS   P.    O'NEILL,  JR 

LIBRARY 

BOSTON   COLLEGE 


Ex    Libris 


Heinz  Bluhm  1907-1993 


CUCHULAIN    OF    MUIRTHEMNE 


First  Edition        .        .        .    April  1902  Second  Edition     .        .        .    August  1903 


CUCHULAIN  OF  MUIRTHEMNE :  THE  STORY  OF  THE  MEN  OF  THE  RED  BRANCH  OF  ULSTER  ARRANGED  AND  PUT  INTO  ENGLISH  BY  LADY  GREGORY  WITH  A  PREFACE  BY  W.  B.  YEATS 


NEW    YORK 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

153-157    FIFTH    AVENUE 

1903 


"t)ei|\im  -An  rh6iT)  too  beip  mo  rhuitinci|i,"  a^  CO-  CtJl-Ain,  ''50  mbeit)  cp^Cc  ^suf  iom|A^*6  pOf  ^fi  mo  jniomxjkftxMb-fe  x^me^fs  n^  n-^l^-o-jniorh  -oo  tiinne  n^  5Air5i"6i5  If  ct^eine." 

*'l  SWEAR  BY  THE  OATH  OF  MY  PEOPLE,"  SAID  CUCHULPIN,  *' I  WILL  MAKE  MY  DOINGS  BE  SPOKEN  OF  AMONG  THE  GREAT  DOINGS  OF   HEROES    IN   THEIR   STRENGTH." 


.r>* 


Printed  in  Great  Britain, 


DEDICATION   OF   THE   IRISH   EDITION  TO   THE   PEOPLE   OF   KILTARTAN 

My  Dear  Friends, 

When  I  began  to  gather  these  stories  together,  it  is  of  you  I  was  thinking,  that  you  would  like  to  have  them  and  to  be  reading  them.  For  although  you  have  not  to  go  far  to  get  stories  of  Finn  and  Goll  and  Oisin  from  any  old  person  in  the  place,  there  is  very  little  of  the  history  of  Cuchulain  and  his  friends  left  in  the  memory  of  the  people,  but  only  that  they  were  brave  men  and  good  fighters,  and  that  Deirdre  was  beautiful. 

When  I  went  looking  for  the  stories  in  the  old  writings,  I  found  that  the  Irish  in  them  is  too  hard  for  any  person  to  read  that  has  not  made  a  long  study  of  it.  Some  scholars  have  worked  well  at  them.  Irish-  men and  Germans  and  Frenchmen,  but  they  have  printed  them  in  the  old  cramped  Irish,  with  translations  into  German  or  French  or  English,  and  these  are  not  easy  for  you  to  get,  or  to  understand,  and  the  stories  themselves  are  confused,  every  one  giving  a  different  account  from  the  others  in  some  small  thing,  the  way  there  is  not  much  pleasure  in  reading  them.     It  is  what 


vi  DEDICATION 

I  have  tried  to  do,  to  take  the  best  of  the  stories,  or  what-  ever parts  of  each  will  fit  best  to  one  another,  and  in  that  way  to  give  a  fair  account  of  Cuchulain's  life  and  death.  I  left  out  a  good  deal  I  thought  you  would  not  care  about  for  one  reason  or  another,  but  I  put  in  nothing  of  my  own  that  could  be  helped,  only  a  sentence  or  so  now  and  again  to  link  the  different  parts  together.  I  have  told  the  whole  story  in  plain  and  simple  words,  in  the  same  way  my  old  nurse  Mary  Sheridan  used  to  be  telling  stories  from  the  Irish  long  ago,  and  I  a  child  at  Roxborough. 

And  indeed  if  there  was  more  respect  for  Irish  things  among  the  learned  men  that  live  in  the  college  at  Dublin,  where  so  many  of  these  old  writings  are  stored,  this  work  would  not  have  been  left  to  a  woman  of  the  house,  that  has  to  be  minding  the  place,  and  listening  to  complaints,  and  dividing  her  share  of  food. 

My  friend  and  your  friend  the  Craoibhin  Aoibhin  has  put  Irish  of  to-day  on  some  of  these  stories  that  I  have  set  in  order,  for  I  am  sure  you  will  like  to  have  the  history  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland  told  in  the  language  of  Ireland.  And  I  am  very  glad  to  have  something  that  is  worth  offering  you,  for  you  have  been  very  kind  to  me  ever  since  I  came  over  to  you  from  Kilchriest,  two-and-twenty  years  ago. 

AUGUSTA   GREGORY. 

March  1902. 


PREFACE 

I 

T  THINK  this  book  is  the  best  that  has  come  out  of  Ireland  in  my  time.  Perhaps  I  should  say  that  it  is  the  best  book  that  has  ever  come  out  of  Ireland  ;  for  the  stories  which  it  tells  are  a  chief  part  of  Ireland's  gift  to  the  imagination  of  the  world — and  it  tells  them  perfectly  for  the  first  time.  Translators  from  the  Irish  have  hitherto  retold  one  story  or  the  other  from  some  one  version,  and  not  often  with  any  fine  understanding  of  English,  of  those  changes  of  rhythm  for  instance  that  are  changes  of  the  sense.  They  have  translated  the  best  and  fullest  manuscripts  they  knew,  as  accurately  as  they  could,  and  that  is  all  we  have  the  right  to  expect  from  the  first  translators  of  a  difficult  and  old  literature.  But  few  of  the  stories  really  begin  to  exist  as  great  works  of  imagination  until  somebody  has  taken  the  best  bits  out  of  many  manuscripts.  Sometimes,  as  in  Lady  Gregory's  version  of  Deirdre,  a  dozen  manuscripts  have  to  give  their  best  before  the  beads  are  ready  for  the  necklace.  It  has  been  as  necessary  also  to  leave  out  as  to  add,  for  generations  of  copyists,  who  had  often  but  little  sympathy  with  the  stones  they  copied,  have  mixed  versions  together  in  a  clumsy  fashion,  often  repeating 


viii  PREFACE 

one  incident  several  times,  and  every  century  has  ornamented  what  was  once  a  simple  story  with  its  own  often  extravagant  ornament.  One  does  not  perhaps  exaggerate  when  one  says  that  no  story  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  form  it  had  when  the  story-teller  told  it  in  the  winter  evenings.  Lady  Gregory  has  done  her  work  of  compression  and  selection  at  once  so  firmly  and  so  reverently  that  I  cannot  believe  that  anybody,  except  now  and  then  for  a  scientific  purpose,  will  need  another  text  than  this,  or  than  the  version  of  it  the  Gaelic  League  is  about  to  publish  in  Modern  Irish.  When  she  has  added  her  translations  from  other  cycles,  she  will  have  given  Ireland  its  Mabinogion,  its  Morte  D'Arthur,  its  Nibelungenlied.  She  has  already  put  a  great  mass  of  stories,  in  which  the  ancient  heart  of  Ireland  still  lives,  into  a  shape  at  once  harmonious  and  characteristic ;  and  without  writing  more  than  a  very  few  sentences  of  her  own  to  link  together  incidents  or  thoughts  taken  from  different  manuscripts,  without  adding  more  indeed  than  the  story-teller  must  often  have  added  to  amend  the  hesitation  of  a  moment.  Perhaps  more  than  all  she  had  discovered  a  fitting  dialect  to  tell  them  in.  Some  years  ago  I  wrote  some  stories  of  mediaeval  Irish  life,  and  as  I  wrote  I  was  sometimes  made  wretched  by  the  thought  that  I  knew  of  no  kind  of  English  that  fitted  them  as  the  language  of  Morris'  prose  stories — the  most  beautiful  language  I  had  ever  read — fitted  his  journeys  to  woods  and  wells  beyond  the  world.  I  knew  of  no  language  to  write  about  Ireland  in  but  raw  modern  English  ;  but  now  Lady  Gregory  has  discovered  a  speech  as  beautiful  as  that  of  Morris,  and  a  living  speech  into  the  bargain. 


PREFACE  ix 

As  she  moved  about  among  her  people  she  learned  to  love  the  beautiful  speech  of  those  who  think  in  Irish,  and  to  understand  that  it  is  as  true  a  dialect  of  English  as  the  dialect  that  Burns  wrote  in.  It  is  some  hundreds  of  years  old,  and  age  gives  a  language  authority.  One  finds  in  it  the  vocabulary  of  the  translators  of  the  Bible,  joined  to  an  idiom  which  makes  it  tender,  compassionate,  and  complaisant,  like  the  Irish  language  itself.  It  is  certainly  well  suited  to  clothe  a  literature  which  never  ceased  to  be  folk-lore  even  when  it  was  recited  in  the  Courts  of  Kings. 


II 


Lady  Gregory  could  with  less  trouble  have  made  a  book  that  would  have  better  pleased  the  hasty  reader.  She  could  have  plucked  away  details,  smoothed  out  characteristics  till  she  had  left  nothing  but  the  bare  stories  ;  but  a  book  of  that  kind  would  never  have  called  up  the  past,  or  stirred  the  imagination  of  a  painter  or  a  poet,  and  would  be  as  little  thought  of  in  a  few  years  as  if  it  had  been  a  popular  novel. 

The  abundance  of  what  may  seem  at  first  irrelevant  invention  in  a  story  like  the  death  of  Conaire,  is  essential  if  we  are  to  recall  a  time  when  people  were  in  love  with  a  story,  and  gave  themselves  up  to  imagination  as  if  to  a  lover.  One  may  think  there  are  too  many  lyrical  outbursts,  or  too  many  enigmatical  symbols  here  and  there  in  some  other  story,  but  delight  will  always  overtake  one  in  the  end.  One  comes  to  accept  without  reserve   an  art  that  is  half  epical,  half  lyrical, 


X  PREFACE 

like  that  of  the  historical  parts  of  the  Bible,  the  art  of  a  time  when  perhaps  men  passed  more  readily  than  they  do  now  from  one  mood  to  another,  and  found  it  harder  than  we  do  to  keep  to  the  mood  in  which  one  tots  up  figures  or  banters  a  friend. 


Ill 


The  Church  when  it  was  most  powerful  created  an  imaginative  unity,  for  it  taught  learned  and  unlearned  to  climb,  as  it  were,  to  the  great  moral  realities  through  hierarchies  of  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  through  clouds  of  Saints  and  Angels  who  had  all  their  precise  duties  and  privileges.  The  story-tellers  of  Ireland,  perhaps  of  every  primitive  country,  created  a  like  unity,  only  it  was  to  the  great  aesthetic  realities  that  they  taught  people  to  climb.  They  created  for  learned  and  unlearned  alike,  a  communion  of  heroes,  a  cloud  of  stalwart  witnesses  ;  but  because  they  were  as  much  excited  as  a  monk  over  his  prayers,  they  did  not  think  sufficiently  about  the  shape  of  the  poem  and  the  story.  One  has  to  get  a  little  weary  or  a  little  distrustful  of  one's  subject,  perhaps,  before  one  can  lie  awake  thinking  how  one  will  make  the  most  of  it.  They  were  more  anxious  to  describe  energetic  characters,  and  to  invent  beautiful  stories,  than  to  express  themselves  with  perfect  dramatic  logic  or  in  perfectly-ordered  words.  They  shared  their  characters  and  their  stories,  their  very  images,  with  one  another,  and  handed  them  down  from  genera-  tion   to   generation ;    for    nobody,   even   when   he   had 


PREFACE  xi 

added  some  new  trait,  or  some  new  incident,  thought  of  claiming  for  himself  what  so  obviously  lived  its  own  merry  or  mournful  life.  The  wood-carver  who  first  put  a  sword  into  St  Michael's  hand  would  have  as  soon  claimed  as  his  own  a  thought  which  was  perhaps  put  into  his  mind  by  St  Michael  himself.  The  Irish  poets  had  also,  it  may  be,  what  seemed  a  supernatural  sanction,  for  a  chief  poet  had  to  understand  not  only  innumerable  kinds  of  poetry,  but  how  to  keep  himself  for  nine  days  in  a  trance.  They  certainly  believed  in  the  historical  reality  of  even  their  wildest  imaginations.  And  so  soon  as  Christianity  made  their  hearers  desire  a  chronology  that  would  run  side  by  side  with  that  of  the  Bible,  they  delighted  in  arranging  their  Kings  and  Queens,  the  shadows  of  forgotten  mythologies,  in  long  lines  that  ascended  to  Adam  and  his  Garden.  Those  who  listened  to  them  must  have  felt  as  if  the  living  were  like  rabbits  digging  their  burrows  under  walls  that  had  been  built  by  Gods  and  Giants,  or  like  swallows  building  their  nests  in  the  stone  mouths  of  immense  images,  carved  by  nobody  knows  who.  It  is  no  wonder  that  one  sometimes  hears  about  men  who  saw  in  a  vision  ivy-  leaves  that  were  greater  than  shields,  and  blackbirds  whose  thighs  were  like  the  thighs  of  oxen.  The  fruit  of  all  those  stories,  unless  indeed  the  finest  activities  of  the  mind  are  but  a  pastime,  is  the  quick  intelligence,  the  abundant  imagination,  the  courtly  manners  of  the  Irish  country  people. 


xii  PREFACE 


IV 


William  Morris  came  to  Dublin  when  I  was  a  boy,  and  I  had  some  talk  with  him  about  these  old  stories.  He  had  intended  to  lecture  upon  them,  but  "  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  " — he  put  a  communistic  fervour  of  hatred  into  the  phrase — knew  nothing  about  them.  He  spoke  of  the  Irish  account  of  the  battle  of  Clontarf,  and  of  the  Norse  account,  and  said,  that  one  saw  the  Norse  and  Irish  tempers  in  the  two  accounts.  The  Norseman  was  interested  in  the  way  things  are  done,  but  the  Irishman  turned  aside,  evidently  well  pleased  to  be  out  of  so  dull  a  business,  to  describe  beautiful  supernatural  events.  He  was  thinking,  I  suppose,  of  the  young  man  who  came  from  Aoibhell  of  the  Grey  Rock,  giving  up  immortal  love  and  youth,  that  he  might  fight  and  die  by  Murrugh's  side.  He  said  that  the  Norseman  had  the  dramatic  temper,  and  the  Irishman  had  the  lyrical.  I  think  I  should  have  said  epical  and  romantic  rather  than  dramatic  and  lyrical,  but  his  words,  which  have  so  much  greater  authority  than  mine,  mark  the  distinction  very  well,  and  not  only  between  Irish  and  Norse,  but  between  Irish  and  other  un-Celtic  literatures.  The  Irish  story-teller  could  not  interest  himself  with  an  unbroken  interest  in  the  way  men  like  himself  burned  a  house,  or  won  wives  no  more  wonderful  than  themselves.  His  mind  constantly  escaped  out  of  daily  circumstance,  as  a  bough  that  has  been  held  down  by  a  weak  hand  suddenly  straightens  itself  out.  His  imagination  was  always   running   oflf  to   Tir-nan-oge,   to   the    Land    of 


PREFACE  xiil 

Promise,  which  is  as  near  to  the  country-people  of  to-day,  as  it  was  to  Cuchulain  and  his  companions.  His  behef  in  its  nearness,  cherished  in  its  turn  the  lyrical  temper,  which  is  always  athirst  for  an  emotion,  a  beauty  which  cannot  be  found  in  its  perfection  upon  earth,  or  only  for  a  moment.  His  imagination,  which  had  not  been  able  to  believe  in  Cuchulain's  greatness,  until  it  had  brought  the  Great  Queen,  the  red  eye-browed  goddess  to  woo  him  upon  the  battlefield,  could  not  be  satisfied  with  a  friendship  less  romantic  and  lyrical  than  that  of  Cuchulain  and  Ferdiad,  who  kissed  one  another  after  the  day's  fighting,  or  with  a  love  less  romantic  and  lyrical  than  that  of  Baile  and  Aillinn,  who  died  at  the  report  of  one  another's  deaths,  and  married  in  Tir-nan-oge.  His  art,  too,  is  often  at  its  greatest  when  it  is  most  extravagant,  for  he  only  feels  himself  among  solid  things,  among  things  with  fixed  laws  and  satis-  fying purposes,  when  he  has  reshaped  the  world  according  to  his  heart's  desire.  He  understands  as  well  as  Blake  that  the  ruins  of  time  build  mansions  in  eternity,  and  he  never  allows  anything,  that  we  can  see  and  handle,  to  remain  long  unchanged.  The  characters  must  remain  the  same,  but  the  strength  of  Fergus  may  change  so  greatly,  that  he,  who  a  moment  before  was  merely  a  strong  man  among  many,  becomes  the  master  of  Three  Blows  that  would  destroy  an  army,  did  they  not  cut  off  the  heads  of  three  little  hills  instead,  and  his  sword,  which  a  fool  had  been  able  to  steal  out  of  its  sheath,  has  of  a  sudden  the  likeness  of  a  rainbow.  A  wandering  lyric  moon  must  knead  and  kindle  perpetually  that  moving  world  of  cloaks  made  put  of  the  fleeces  of  Manannan ;    of  armed  men  who 


xiv  PREFACE 

change  themselves  into  sea-birds ;  of  goddesses  who  become  crows  ;  of  trees  that  bare  fruit  and  flower  at  the  same  time.  The  great  emotions  of  love,  terror,  and  friendship  must  alone  remain  untroubled  by  the  moon  in  that  world,  which  is  still  the  world  of  the  Irish  country-people,  who  do  not  open  their  eyes  very  wide  at  the  most  miraculous  change,  at  the  most  sudden  enchantment.  Its  events,  and  things,  and  people  are  wild,  and  are  like  unbroken  horses,  that  are  so  much  more  beautiful  than  horses  that  have  learned  to  run  between  shafts.  One  thinks  of  actual  life,  when  one  reads  those  Norse  stories,  which  were  already  in  decadence,  so  necessary  were  the  proportions  of  actual  life  to  their  efforts,  when  a  dying  man  remembered  his  heroism  enough  to  look  down  at  his  wound  and  say,  "  Those  broad  spears  are  coming  into  fashion " ;  but  the  Irish  stories  make  one  understand  why  the  Greeks  call  myths  the  activities  of  the  daemons.  The  great  virtues,  the  great  joys,  the  great  privations  come  in  the  myths,  and,  as  it  were,  take  mankind  between  their  naked  arms,  and  without  putting  off  their  divinity.  Poets  have  taken  their  themes  more  often  from  stories  that  are  all,  or  half,  mythological,  than  from  history  or  stories  that  give  one  the  sensation  of  history,  under-  standing, as  I  think,  that  the  imagination  which  remembers  the  proportions  of  life  is  but  a  long  wooing,  and  that  it  has  to  forget  them  before  it  becomes  the  torch  and  the  marriage-bed. 


PREFACE  XV 


One  finds,  as  one  expects,  in  the  work  of  men  who  were  not  troubled  about  any  probabilities  or  necessities  but  those  of  emotion  itself,  an  immense  variety  of  incident  and  character  and  of  ways  of  expressing  emotion.  Cuchulain  fights  man  after  man  during  the  quest  of  the  Brown  Bull,  and  not  one  of  those  fights  is  like  another,  and  not  one  is  lacking  in  emotion  or  strangeness  ;  and  when  one  thinks  imagination  can  do  no  more,  the  storyof  the  Two  Bulls,emblematic  of  all  contests,suddenly  lifts  romance  into  prophecy.  The  characters  too  have  a  distinctness  one  does  not  find  among  the  people  of  the  Mabinogion,  perhaps  not  even  among  the  people  of  the  Morte  D' Arthur.  One  knows  one  will  be  long  forgetting  Cuchulain,  whose  life  is  vehement  and  full  of  pleasure,  as  though  he  always  remembered  that  it  was  to  be  soon  over  ;  or  the  dreamy  Fergus  who  betrays  the  sons  of  Usnach  for  a  feast,  without  ceasing  to  be  noble  ;  or  Conall  who  is  fierce  and  friendly  and  trustworthy,  but  has  not  the  sap  of  divinity  that  makes  Cuchulain  mysterious  to  men,  and  beloved  of  women.  Women  indeed,  with  their  lamentations  for  lovers  and  husbands  and  sons,  and  for  fallen  rooftrees  and  lost  wealth,  give  the  stories  their  most  beautiful  sentences  ;  and,  after  Cuchulain,  one  thinks  most  of  certain  great  queens — of  angry,  amorous  Maeve,  with  her  long  pale  face  ;  of  Findabair,  her  daughter,  who  dies  of  shame  and  of  pity  ;  of  Deirdre  who  might  be  some  mild  modern  housewife  but  for  her  prophetic  wisdom.  If  one  does  not  set  Deirdre's  lamentations  among  the 


xvi  PREFACE 

greatest  lyric  poems  of  the  world,  I  think  one  may  be  certain  that  the  wine-press  of  the  poets  has  been  trodden  for  one  in  vain ;  and  yet  I  think  it  may  be  proud  Emer,  Cuchulain's  fitting  wife,  who  will  linger  longest  in  the  memory.  What  a  pure  flame  burns  in  her  always,  whether  she  is  the  newly-married  wife  fighting  for  pre-  cedence, fierce  as  some  beautiful  bird,  or  the  confident  housewife,  who  would  awaken  her  husband  from  his  magic  sleep  with  mocking  words  ;  or  the  great  queen  who  would  get  him  out  of  the  tightening  net  of  his  doom,  by  sending  him  into  the  Valley  of  the  Deaf,  with  Niamh,  his  mistress,  because  he  will  be  more  obedient  to  her  ;  or  the  woman  whom  sorrow  has  sent  with  Helen  and  seult  and  Brunnhilda,  and  Deirdre,  to  share  their  immortality  in  the  rosary  of  the  poets. 

" '  And  oh !  my  love ! '  she  said,  '  we  were  often  in  one  another's  company,  and  it  was  happy  for  us  ;  for  if  the  world  had  been  searched  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  sunset,  the  like  would  never  have  been  found  in  one  place,  of  the  Black  Sainglain  and  the  Grey  of  Macha,  and  Laeg  the  chariot-driver,  and  myself  and  Cuchulain.' 

"  And  after  that  Emer  bade  Conall  to  make  a  wide,  very  deep  grave  for  Cuchulain  ;  and  she  laid  herself  down  beside  her  gentle  comrade,  and  she  put  her  mouth  to  his  mouth,  and  she  said  :  '  Love  of  my  life,  my  friend,  my  sweetheart,  my  one  choice  of  the  men  of  the  earth,  many  is  the  women,  wed  or  unwed,  envied  me  until  to-day ;  and  now  I  will  not  stay  living  after  you.' " 


PREFACE  xvii 


VI 


We  Irish  should  keep  these  personages  much  in  our  hearts,  for  they  lived  in  the  places  where  we  ride  and  go  marketing,  and  sometimes  they  have  met  one  another  on  the  hills  that  cast  their  shadows  upon  our  doors  at  evening.  If  we  will  but  tell  these  stories  to  our  children  the  Land  will  begin  again  to  be  a  Holy  Land,  as  it  was  before  men  gave  their  hearts  to  Greece  and  Rome  and  Judea.  When  I  was  a  child  I  had  only  to  climb  the  hill  behind  the  house  to  see  long,  blue,  ragged  hills  flowing  along  the  southern  horizon.  What  beauty  was  lost  to  me,  what  depth  of  emotion  is  still  perhaps  lacking  in  me,  because  nobody  told  me,  not  even  the  merchant  captains  who  knew  everything,  that  Cruachan  of  the  Enchantments  lay  behind  those  long,  blue,  ragged  hills ! 

W.  B.  YEATS. 

March  1902. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

BIRTH   OF  CUCHULAIN I 

BOY   DEEDS  OF  CUCHULAIN 7 

THE  COURTING  OF  EMER 21 

BRICRIU'S    FEAST,    AND     THE    WAR      OF     WORDS     OF     THE 

WOMEN   OF  ULSTER .48 

THE  CHAMPIONSHIP  OF  ULSTER 62 

THE  HIGH   KING  OF   IRELAND 82 

FATE  OF   THE  CHILDREN   OF  USNACH I04 

THE  DREAM   OF  ANGUS I43 

CRUACHAN 148 

THE  WEDDING   OF  MAINE  MORGOR 159 

THE  WAR  FOR  THE   BULL  OF  CUAILGNE       .  .  .  .175 

THE  AWAKENING  OF  ULSTER 245 

THE  TWO  BULLS 268 

THE  ONLY  JEALOUSY  OF   EMER 276 

ADVICE  TO  A   PRINCE 294 

THE  SONS  OF  DOEL  DERMAIT 297 

BATTLE  OF  ROSNAREE 302 

THE  ONLY  SON  OF  AOIFE 313 

THE  GREAT   GATHERING  OF   MUIRTHEMNE .           .          .           .  320 

DEATH   OF  CUCHULAIN 334 


CUCHULAIN  OF  MUIRTHEMNE 


BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

TN  the  time  long  ago,  Conchubar,  son  of  Ness,  was  King  of  Ulster,  and  he  held  his  court  in  the  palace  of  Emain  Macha.  And  this  is  the  way  he  came  to  be  king.  He  was  but  a  young  lad,  and  his  father  was  not  living,  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  who  was  at  that  time  King  of  Ulster,  asked  his  mother  Ness  in  marriage. 

Now  Ness,  that  was  at  one  time  the  quietest  and  kindest  of  the  women  of  Ireland,  had  got  to  be  un-  kind and  treacherous  because  of  an  unkindness  that  had  been  done  to  her,  and  she  planned  to  get  the  kingdom  away  from  Fergus  for  her  own  son.  So  she  said  to  Fergus :  "  Let  Conchubar  hold  the  kingdom  for  a  year,  so  that  his  children  after  him  may  be  called  the  children  of  a  king ;  and  that  is  the  marriage  portion  I  will  ask  of  you." 

"  You  may  do  that,"  the  men  of  Ulster  said  to  him  ;  "  for  even  though  Conchubar  gets  the  name  of  being  king,  it  is  yourself  that  will  be  our  king  all  the  time."  So  Fergus  agreed  to  it,  and  he  took  Ness  as  his  wife,  and  her  son  Conchubar  was  made  king  in  his  place, 

A 


2  BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

But  all  through  the  year,  Ness  was  working  to  keep  the  kingdom  for  him,  and  she  gave  great  presents  to  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  to  get  them  on  her  side.  And  though  Conchubar  was  but  a  young  lad  at  that  time,  he  was  wise  in  his  judgments,  and  brave  in  battle,  and  good  in  shape  and  in  form,  and  they  liked  him  well.  And  at  the  end  of  the  year,  when  Fergus  asked  to  have  the  kingship  back  again,  they  consulted  together ;  and  it  is  what  they  agreed,  that  Conchubar  was  to  keep  it.  And  they  said  :  "  It  is  little  Fergus  thinks  about  us,  when  he  was  so  ready  to  give  up  his  rule  over  us  for  a  year ;  and  let  Conchubar  keep  the  kingship,"  they  said,  "  and  let  Fergus  keep  the  wife  he  has  got." 

Now  it  happened  one  day  that  Conchubar  was  making  a  feast  at  Emain  Macha  for  the  marriage  of  his  sister  Dechtire  with  Sualtim  son  of  Roig.  And  at  the  feast  Dechtire  was  thirsty,  and  they  gave  her  a  cup  of  wine,  and  as  she  was  drinking  it,  a  mayfly  flew  into  the  cup,  and  she  drank  it  down  with  the  wine.  And  presently  she  went  into  her  sunny  parlour,  and  her  fifty  maidens  along  with  her,  and  she  fell  into  a  deep  sleep.  And  in  her  sleep,  Lugh  of  the  Long  Hand  appeared  to  her,  and  he  said  :  "  It  is  I  myself  was  the  mayfly  that  came  to  you  in  the  cup,  and  it  is  with  me  you  must  come  away  now,  and  your  fifty  maidens  along  with  you."  And  he  put  on  them  the  appearance  of  a  flock  of  birds,  and  they  went  with  him  southward  till  they  came  to  Brugh  na  Boinne,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Sidhe.  And  no  one  at  Emain  Macha  could  get  tale  or  tidings  of  them,  or  know  where  they  had  gone,  or  what  had  happened  them. 

It  was  about  a  year  after  that  time,  there  was  another  feast  in  Emain,  and  Conchubar  and  his  chief  men  were  sitting  at  the  feast.  And  suddenly  they  saw  from  the  window  a  great  flock  of  birds,  that  lit  on  the  ground  and  began  to  eat  up  everything  before  them,  so  that  not  so  much  as  a  blade  of  grass  was  left. 


THE   FLIGHT   OF  THE   BIRDS        3 

The  men  of  Ulster  were  vexed  when  they  saw  the  birds  destroying  all  before  them,  and  they  yoked  nine  of  their  chariots  to  follow  after  them.  Conchubar  was  in  his  own  chariot,  and  there  were  following  with  him  Fergus  son  of  Rogh,  and  Laegaire  Buadach,  the  Battle-  Winner,  and  Celthair  son  of  Uithecar,  and  many  others,  and  Bricriu  of  the  bitter  tongue  was  along  with  them. 

They  followed  after  the  birds  across  the  whole  country  southward,  across  Slieve  Fuad,  by  Ath  Lethan,  by  Ath  Garach  and  Magh  Gossa,  between  Fir  Rois  and  Fir  Ardae ;  and  the  birds  before  them  always.  They  were  the  most  beautiful  that  had  ever  been  seen  ;  nine  flocks  of  them  there  were,  linked  together  two  and  two  with  a  chain  of  silver,  and  at  the  head  of  every  flock  there  were  two  birds  of  different  colours,  linked  together  with  a  chain  of  gold ;  and  there  were  three  birds  that  flew  by  themselves,  and  they  all  went  before  the  chariots,  to  the  far  end  of  the  country,  until  the  fall  of  night,  and  then  there  was  no  more  seen  of  them. 

And  when  the  dark  night  was  coming  on,  Conchubar  said  to  his  people :  "  It  is  best  for  us  to  unyoke  the  chariots  now,  and  to  look  for  some  place  where  we  can  spend  the  night." 

Then  Fergus  went  forward  to  look  for  some  place,  and  what  he  came  to  was  a  very  small  poor-looking  house.  A  man  and  a  woman  were  in  it,  and  when  they  saw  him  they  said  :  "  Bring  your  companions  here  along  with  you,  and  they  will  be  welcome."  Fergus  went  back  to  his  companions  and  told  them  what  he  had  seen.  But  Bricriu  said  :  "  Where  is  the  use  of  going  into  a  house  like  that,  with  neither  room  nor  provisions  nor  coverings  in  it ;  it  is  not  worth  our  while  to  be  going  there." 

Then  Bricriu  went  on  himself  to  the  place  where  the  house  was.  But  when  he  came  to  it,  what  he  saw  was  a  grand,  new,  well-lighted  house ;  and  at 


4  BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

the  door  there  was  a  young  man  wearing  armour,  very  tall  and  handsome  and  shining.  And  he  said  :  "  Come  into  the  house,  Bricriu  ;  why  are  you  looking  about  you  ? "  And  there  was  a  young  woman  beside  him,  fine  and  noble,  and  with  curled  hair,  and  she  said  :  "  Surely  there  is  a  welcome  before  you  from  me."  "  Why  does  she  welcome  me  ?  "  said  Bricriu.  "  It  is  on  account  of  her  that  I  myself  welcome  you,"  said  the  young  man.  "  And  is  there  no  one  missing  from  you  at  Emain  ?  "  he  said.  "  There  is  surely,"  said  Bricriu.  "  We  are  missing  fifty  young  girls  for  the  length  of  a  year."  "  Would  you  know  them  again  if  you  saw  them  ? "  said  the  young  man.  "  If  I  would  not  know  them,"  said  Bricriu,  "  it  is  because  a  year  might  make  a  change  in  them,  so  that  I  would  not  be  sure."  "  Try  and  know  them  again,"  said  the  man,  "  for  the  fifty  young  girls  are  in  this  house,  and  this  woman  beside  me  is  their  mistress,  Dechtire.  It  was  they  themselves,  changed  into  birds,  that  went  to  Emain  Macha  to  bring  you  here."  Then  Dechtire  gave  Bricriu  a  purple  cloak  with  gold  fringes ;  and  he  went  back  to  find  his  companions.  But  while  he  was  going  he  thought  to  himself:  "  Conchubar  would  give  great  treasure  to  find  these  fifty  young  girls  again,  and  his  sister  along  with  them.  I  will  not  tell  him  I  have  found  them.  I  will  only  say  I  have  found  a  house  with  beautiful  women  in  it,  and  no  more  than  that." 

When  Conchubar  saw  Bricriu,  he  asked  news  of  him.  "  What  news  do  you  bring  back  with  you,  Bricriu  ?  "  he  said.  "  I  came  to  a  fine  well-lighted  house,"  said  Bricriu  ;  "  I  saw  a  queen,  noble,  kind,  with  royal  looks,  with  curled  hair  ;  I  saw  a  troop  of  women,  beautiful,  well-dressed  ;  I  saw  the  man  of  the  house,  tall  and  open-handed  and  shining."  "  Let  us  go  there  for  the  night,"  said  Con-  chubar. So  they  brought  their  chariots  and  their  horses  and  their  arms  ;  and  they  were  hardly  in  the  house  when  every  sort  of  food  and  of  drink,  some  they  knew  and 


BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN  5 

some  they  did  not  know,  was  put  before  them,  so  that  they  never  spent  a  better  night.  And  when  they  had  eaten  and  drunk  and  began  to  be  satisfied,  Conchubar  said  to  the  young  man :  "  Where  is  the  mistress  of  the  house  that  she  does  not  come  to  bid  us  welcome  ? "  "  You  cannot  see  her  to-night,"  said  he,  "  for  she  is  in  the  pains  of  childbirth." 

So  they  rested  there  that  night,  and  in  the  morning  Conchubar  was  the  first  to  rise  up ;  but  he  saw  no  more  of  the  man  of  the  house,  and  what  he  heard  was  the  cry  of  a  child.  And  he  went  to  the  room  it  came  from,  and  there  he  saw  Dechtire,  and  her  maidens  about  her,  and  a  young  child  beside  her.  And  she  bade  Conchubar  welcome,  and  she  told  him  all  that  had  happened  her,  and  that  she  had  called  him  there  to  bring  herself  and  the  child  back  to  Emain  Macha.  And  Conchubar  said :  "It  is  well  you  have  done  by  me,  Dechtire ;  you  gave  shelter  to  me  and  to  my  chariots  ;  you  kept  the  cold  from  my  horses ;  you  gave  food  to  me  and  my  people,  and  now  you  have  given  us  this  good  gift.  And  let  our  sister,  Finchoem,  bring  up  the  child,"  he  said.  "  No,  it  is  not  for  her  to  bring  him  up,  it  is  for  me,"  said  Sencha  son  of  Ailell,  chief  judge  and  chief  poet  of  Ulster.  "  For  I  am  skilled  ;  I  am  good  in  disputes  ;  I  am  not  forgetful ;  I  speak  before  any  one  at  all  in  the  presence  of  the  king ;  I  watch  over  what  he  says ;  I  give  judgment  in  the  quarrels  of  kings  ;  I  am  judge  of  the  men  of  Ulster  ;  no  one  has  a  right  to  dispute  my  claim,  but  only  Conchubar." 

"If  the  child  is  given  to  me  to  bring  up,"  said  Blai,  the  distributer,  "he  will  not  suffer  from  want  of  care  or  from  forgetfulness.  It  is  my  messages  that  do  the  will  of  Conchubar;  I  call  up  the  fighting  men  from  all  Ireland  ;  I  am  well  able  to  provide  for  them  for  a  week,  or  even  for  ten  days ;  I  settle  their  business  and  their  disputes  ;  I  support  their  honour ;  1  get  satisfac-  tion for  their  insults." 


6  BIRTH   OF   CUCHULAIN 

"  You  think  too  much  of  yourself,"  said  Fergus.  "  It  is  I  that  will  bring  up  the  child ;  I  am  strong  ;  I  have  knowledge  ;  I  am  the  king's  messenger  ;  no  one  can  stand  up  against  me  in  honour  or  riches  ;  I  am  hardened  to  war  and  battles  ;  I  am  a  good  craftsman ;  I  am  worthy  to  bring  up  a  child.  I  am  the  protector  of  all  the  unhappy  ;  the  strong  are  afraid  of  me ;  I  am  the  helper  of  the  weak." 

"  If  you  will  listen  to  me  at  last,  now  you  are  quiet,"  said  Amergin,  "  I  am  able  to  bring  up  a  child  like  a  king.  The  people  praise  my  honour,  my  bravery,  my  courage,  my  wisdom  ;  they  praise  my  good  luck,  my  age,  my  speaking,  my  name,  my  courage,  and  my  race.  Though  I  am  a  fighter,  I  am  a  poet ;  I  am  worthy  of  the  king's  favour  ;  I  overcome  all  the  men  who  fight  from  their  chariots  ;  I  owe  thanks  to  no  one  except  Conchubar  ;  I  obey  no  one  but  the  king." 

Then  Sencha  said  :  "  Let  Finchoem  keep  the  child  until  we  come  to  Emain,  and  Morann,  the  judge,  will  settle  the  question  when  we  are  there  " 

So  the  men  of  Ulster  set  out  for  Emain,  Finchoem  having  the  child  with  her.  And  when  they  came  there  Morann  gave  his  judgment.  "  It  is  for  Conchubar,"  he  said,  "  to  help  the  child  to  a  good  name,  for  he  is  next  of  kin  to  him  ;  let  Sencha  teach  him  words  and  speak-  ing ;  let  Fergus  hold  him  on  his  knees ;  let  Amergin  be  his  tutor."  And  he  said  :  "  This  child  will  be  praised  by  all,  by  chariot  drivers  and  fighters,  by  kings  and  by  wise  men  ;  he  shall  be  loved  by  many  men ;  he  will  avenge  all  your  wrongs  ;  he  will  defend  your  fords  ;  he  will  fight  all  your  battles." 

And  so  it  was  settled.  And  the  child  was  left  until  he  should  come  to  sensible  years,  with  his  mother  Dechtire  and  with  her  husband  Sualtim.  And  they  brought  him  up  upon  the  plain  of  Muirthemne,  and  the  name  he  was  known  by  was  Setanta,  son  of  Sualtim. 


II 

BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

TT  chanced  one  day,  when  Setanta  was  about  seven  years  old,  that  he  heard  some  of  the  people  of  his  mother's  house  talking  about  King  Conchubar's  court  at  Emain  Macha,  and  of  the  sons  of  kings  and  nobles  that  lived  there,  and  that  spent  a  great  part  of  their  time  at  games  and  at  hurling.  "  Let  me  go  and  play  with  them  there,"  he  said  to  his  mother.  "  It  is  too  soon  for  you  to  do  that,"  she  said,  "  but  wait  till  such  time  as  you  are  able  to  travel  so  far,  and  till  I  can  put  you  in  charge  of  some  one  going  to  the  court,  that  will  put  you  under  Conchubar's  protection."  "  It  would  be  too  long  for  me  to  wait  for  that,"  he  said,  "  but  I  will  go  there  by  myself  if  you  will  tell  me  the  road."  "  It  is  too  far  for  you,"  said  Dechtire,  "  for  it  is  beyond  Slieve  Fuad,  Emain  Macha  is."  "  Is  it  east  or  west  of  Slieve  Fuad  ?  "  he  asked.  And  when  she  had  answered  him  that,  he  set  out  there  and  then,  and  nothing  with  him  but  his  hurling  stick,  and  his  silver  ball,  and  his  little  dart  and  spear ;  and  to  shorten  the  road  for  himself  he  would  give  a  blow  to  the  ball  and  drive  it  from  him,  and  then  he  would  throw  his  hurling  stick  after  it,  and  the  dart  after  that  again,  and  then  he  would  make  a  run  and  catch  them  all  in  his  hand  before  one  of  them  would  have  reached  the  ground. 

So  he  went  on  until  he  came  to  the  lawn  at  Emain 

7 


8        BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

Macha,  and  there  he  saw  three  fifties  of  king's  sons  hurling  and  learning  feats  of  war.  He  went  in  among  them,  and  when  the  ball  came  near  him  he  got  it  between  his  feet,  and  drove  it  along  in  spite  of  them  till  he  had  sent  it  beyond  the  goal.  There  was  great  surprise  and  anger  on  them  when  they  saw  what  he  had  done,  and  Follaman,  King  Conchubar's  son,  that  was  chief  among  them,  cried  out  to  them  to  come  together  and  drive  out  this  stranger  and  make  an  end  of  him.  "  For  he  has  no  right,"  he  said,  "  to  come  into  our  game  without  asking  leave,  and  without  putting  his  life  under  our  protection.  And  you  may  be  sure,"  he  said,  "  that  he  is  the  son  of  some  common  fighting  man,  and  it  is  not  for  him  to  come  into  our  game  at  all."  With  that  they  all  made  an  attack  on  him,  and  began  to  throw  their  hurling  sticks  at  him,  and  their  balls  and  darts,  but  he  escaped  them  all,  and  then  he  rushed  at  them,  and  began  to  throw  some  of  them  to  the  ground.  Fergus  came  out  just  then  from  the  palace,  and  when  he  saw  what  a  good  defence  the  little  lad  was  making,  he  brought  him  in  to  where  Conchubar  was  playing  chess,  and  told  him  all  that  had  happened.  "  This  is  no  gentle  game  you  have  been  playing,"  he  said.  "  It  is  on  them-  selves the  fault  is,"  said  the  boy ;  "  I  came  as  a  stranger,  and  I  did  not  get  a  stranger's  welcome."  "  You  did  not  know  then,"  said  Conchubar,  "  that  no  one  can  play  among  the  boy  troop  of  Emain  unless  he  gets  their  leave  and  their  protection."  "  I  did  not  know  that,  or  I  would  have  asked  it  of  them,"  he  said.  "  What  is  your  name  and  your  family  ? "  said  Conchubar.  My  name  is  Setanta,  son  of  Sualtim  and  of  Dechtire,"  he  said.  When  Conchubar  knew  that  he  was  his  sister's  son,  he  gave  him  a  great  welcome,  and  he  bade  the  boy  troop  to  let  him  go  safe  among  them.  "  We  will  do  that,"  they  said.  But  when  they  went  out  to  play,  Setanta  began  to  break  through  them,  and  to  overthrow  them,  so  that 


THE   SMITH'S   FEAST  9 

they  could  not  stand  against  him.  "What  are  you  wanting  of  them  now  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,"  said  the  boy,  "  I  will  not  lighten  my  hand  off  them  till  they  have  come  under  my  protection  the  same  way  I  have  come  under  theirs."  Then  they  all  agreed  to  give  in  to  this ;  and  Setanta  stayed  in  the  king's  house  at  Emain  Macha,  and  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  had  a  hand  in  bringing  him  up. 

There  was  a  great  smith  in  Ulster  of  the  name  of  Culain,  who  made  a  feast  at  that  time  for  Conchubar  and  for  his  people.  When  Conchubar  was  setting  out  to  the  feast,  he  passed  by  the  lawn  where  the  boy  troop  were  at  their  games,  and  he  watched  them  awhile,  and  he  saw  how  the  son  of  Dechtire  was  winning  the  goal  from  them  all.  "  That  little  lad  will  serve  Ulster  yet,"  said  Con-  chubar ;  "  and  call  him  to  me  now,"  he  said,  "  and  let  him  come  with  me  to  the  smith's  feast."  "  I  cannot  go  with  you  now,"  said  Setanta,  when  they  had  called  to  him,  "  for  these  boys  have  not  had  enough  of  play  yet."  "It  would  be  too  long  for  me  to  wait  for  you,"  said  the  king.  "  There  is  no  need  for  you  to  wait ;  I  will  follow  the  track  of  the  chariots,"  said  Setanta. 

So  Conchubar  went  on  to  the  smith's  house,  and  there  was  a  welcome  before  him,  and  fresh  rushes  were  laid  down,  and  there  were  poems  and  songs  and  recitals  of  laws,  and  the  feast  was  brought  in,  and  they  began  to  be  merry.  And  then  Culain  said  to  the  king  :  "  Will  there  be  any  one  else  of  your  people  coming  after  you  to-night?"  "There  will  not,"  said  Conchubar,  for  he  forgot  that  he  had  told  the  little  lad  to  follow  him.  "  But  why  do  you  ask  me  that  ?  "  he  said.  "  I  have  a  great  fierce  hound,"  said  the  smith,  "and  when  I  take  the  chain  off  him,  he  lets  no  one  come  into  the  one  district  with  himself,  and  he  will  obey  no  one  but  myself,  and  he  has  in  him  the  strength  of  a  hundred."  "  Loose  him  out,"  said  Conchubar,  "  until  he  keeps  a  watch  on 


10      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

the  place."  So  Culain  loosed  him  out,  and  the  dog  made  a  course  round  the  whole  district,  and  then  he  came  back  to  the  place  where  he  was  used  to  lie  and  to  watch  the  house,  and  every  one  was  in  dread  of  him,  he  was  so  fierce  and  so  cruel  and  so  savage. 

Now,  as  to  the  boys  at  Emain,  when  they  were  done  playing,  every  one  went  to  his  father's  house,  or  to  who-  ever was  in  charge  of  him.  But  Setanta  set  out  on  the  track  of  the  chariots,  shortening  the  way  for  himself  as  he  was  used  to  do  with  his  hurling  stick  and  his  ball.  When  he  came  to  the  lawn  before  the  smith's  house,  the  hound  heard  him  coming,  and  began  such  a  fierce  yelling  that  he  might  have  been  heard  through  all  Ulster,  and  he  sprang  at  him  as  if  he  had  a  mind  not  to  stop  and  tear  him  up  at  all,  but  to  swallow  him  at  the  one  mouthful.  The  little  fellow  had  no  weapon  but  his  stick  and  his  ball,  but  when  he  saw  the  hound  coming  at  him,  he  struck  the  ball  with  such  force  that  it  went  down  his  throat,  and  through  his  body.  Then  he  seized  him  by  the  hind  legs  and  dashed  him  against  a  rock  until  there  was  no  life  left  in  him. 

When  the  men  feasting  within  heard  the  outcry  of  the  hound,  Conchubar  started  up  and  said  :  "  It  is  no  good  luck  brought  us  on  this  journey,  for  that  is  surely  my  sister's  son  that  was  coming  after  me,  and  that  has  got  his  death  by  the  hound."  On  that  all  the  men  rushed  out,  not  waiting  to  go  through  the  door,  but  over  walls  and  barriers  as  they  could.  But  Fergus  was  the  first  to  get  to  where  the  boy  was,  and  he  took  him  up  and  lifted  him  on  his  shoulder,  and  brought  him  in  safe  and  sound  to  Conchubar,  and  there  was  great  joy  on  them  all. 

But  Culain  the  smith  went  out  with  them,  and  when  he  saw  his  great  hound  lying  dead  and  broken  there  was  great  grief  in  his  heart,  and  he  came  in  and  said  to  Setanta :  "  There  is  no  good  welcome  for  you  here."  "  What  have  you  against  the  little  lad  ?  "  said  Conchubar. 


THE    HOUND   OF   CULAIN  ii 

"  It  was  no  good  luck  that  brought  him  here,  or  that  made  me  prepare  this  feast  for  yourself,  King,"  he  said  ;  "  for  from  this  out,  my  hound  being  gone,  my  substance  will  be  wasted,  and  my  way  of  living  will  be  gone  astray.  And,  little  boy,"  he  said,  "  that  was  a  good  member  of  my  family  you  took  from  me,  for  he  was  the  protector  of  my  goods  and  my  flocks  and  my  herds  and  of  all  that  I  had."  "Do  not  be  vexed  on  account  of  that,"  said  the  boy,  "  and  I  myself  will  make  up  to  you  for  what  I  have  done."  "  How  will  you  do  that  ? "  said  Conchubar.  "  This  is  how  I  will  do  it :  if  there  is  a  whelp  of  the  same  breed  to  be  had  in  Ireland,  I  will  rear  him  and  train  him  until  he  is  as  good  a  hound  as  the  one  killed  ;  and  until  that  time,  Culain,"  he  said,  "  I  myself  will  be  your  watch-dog,  to  guard  your  goods  and  your  cattle  and  your  house."  "  You  have  made  a  fair  offer,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  could  have  given  no  better  award  myself,"  said  Cathbad  the  Druid.  "  And  from  this  out,"  he  said,  "your  name  will  be  Cuchulain,  the  Hound  of  Culain."  "  I  am  better  pleased  with  my  own  name  of  Setanta,  son  of  Sualtim,"  said  the  boy.  "  Do  not  say  that,"  said  Cathbad,  "  for  all  the  men  in  the  whole  world  will  some  day  have  the  name  of  Cuchulain  in  their  mouths."  "  If  that  is  so,  I  am  content  to  keep  it,"  said  the  boy.  And  this  is  how  he  came  by  the  name  Cuchulain. 

It  was  a  good  while  after  that,  Cathbad  the  Druid  was  one  day  teaching  the  pupils  in  his  house  to  the  north-  east of  Emain.  There  were  eight  boys  along  with  him  that  day,  and  one  of  them  asked  him  :  "  Do  your  signs  tell  of  any  special  thing  this  day  is  favourable  to  ?  "  "If  any  young  man  should  take  arms  to-day,"  said  Cathbad,  "his  name  will  be  greater  than  any  other  name  in  Ireland.     But  his  span  of  life  will  be  short,"  he  said. 

Cuchulain  was  outside  at  play,  but  he  heard  what  Cathbad  said,  and  there  and  then  he  put  off  his  playing 


12      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

suit,  and  he  went  straight  to  Conchubar's  sleeping-room  and  said  :  "  All  good  be  with  you,  King  !  "  "  What  is  it  you  are  wanting  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  What  I  want  is  to  take  arms  to-day."  "  Who  put  that  into  your  head  ?  "  "  Cathbad  the  Druid,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  If  that  is  so,  I  will  not  deny  you,"  said  Conchubar.  Then  he  gave  him  his  choice  of  arms,  and  the  boy  tried  his  strength  on  them,  and  there  were  none  that  pleased  him  or  that  were  strong  enough  for  him  but  Conchubar's  own.  So  he  gave  him  his  own  two  spears,  and  his  sword  and  his  shield. 

Just  then  Cathbad  the  Druid  came  in,  and  there  was  wonder  on  him,  and  he  said  :  ''  Is  it  taking  arms  this  young  boy  is  ? "  "  He  is  indeed,"  said  the  king.  "It  is  sorry  I  would  be  to  see  his  mother's  son  take  arms  on  this  day,"  said  Cathbad.  "  Was  it  not  yourself  bade  him  do  it  ?  "  said  the  king.  "  I  did  not  surely,"  he  said.  "Then  you  have  lied  to  me,  boy,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  told  no  lie.  King,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  was  he  indeed  put  it  in  my  mind  when  he  was  teaching  the  others,  for  when  one  of  them  asked  him  if  there  was  any  special  virtue  in  this  day,  he  said  that  whoever  would  for  the  first  time  take  arms  to-day,  his  name  would  be  greater  than  any  other  in  Ireland,  and  he  did  not  say  any  harm  would  come  on  him,  but  that  his  life  would  be  short."  "  And  what  I  said  is  true,"  said  Cathbad,  "  there  will  be  fame  on  you  and  a  great  name,  but  your  lifetime  will  not  be  long."  "  It  is  little  I  would  care,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  if  my  life  were  to  last  one  day  and  one  night  only,  so  long  as  my  name  and  the  story  of  what  I  had  done  would  live  after  me."  Then  Cathbad  said  :  "  Well,  get  into  a  chariot  now,  and  let  us  see  if  it  was  the  truth  I  spoke." 

Then  Cuchulain  got  into  a  chariot  and  tried  its  strength,  and  broke  it  to  pieces,  and  he  broke  in  the  same  way  the  seventeen  chariots  that  Conchubar  kept  for  the  boy  troop  at  Emain,  and  he  said  :  "  These  chariots 


THE   TAKING   OF   ARMS  13 

are  no  use,  Conchubar,  they  are  not  worthy  of  me."  "  Where  is  Jubair,  son  of  Riangabra  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  Here  I  am,"  he  answered.  "  Make  ready  my  own  chariot,  and  yoke  my  own  horses  to  it  for  this  boy  to  try,"  said  Conchubar.  So  he  tried  the  king's  chariot  and  shook  it  and  strained  it,  and  it  bore  him.  "  This  is  the  chariot  that  suits  me,"  he  said.  "  Now,  Httle  one,"  said  Jubair,  "  let  us  take  out  the  horses  and  turn  them  out  to  graze."  "  It  is  too  early  for  that,  Jubair ;  let  us  drive  on  to  where  the  boy  troop  are,  that  they  may  wish  me  good  luck  on  the  day  of  my  taking  arms."  So  they  drove  on,  and  all  the  lads  shouted  when  they  saw  him — "  Have  you  taken  arms  ?  "  "I  have  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  That  you  may  do  well  in  wounding  and  in  first  killing  and  in  spoil-winning,"  they  said ;  "  but  it  is  a  pity  for  us,  you  to  have  left  playing." 

"  Let  the  horses  go  graze  now,"  said  Jubair.    "  It  is  too  soon  yet,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  tell  me  where  does  that  great  road  that  goes  by  Emain  lead  to  ?  "     "  It  leads  to  Ath-an-Foraire,  the  watchers'  ford  in  Slieve  Fuad,"  said  Jubair.     "  Why  is  it  called  the  watchers'  ford  ?  "     "  It  is  easy  to  tell  that ;  it  is  because  some  choice  champion  of  the  men  of  Ulster  keeps  watch  there  every  day  to  do  battle  for  the  province  with  any  stranger  that  m.ight  come   to   the   boundary   with   a  challenge."     "  Do  you  know  who  is  in  it  to-day  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.     "  I  know  well    it   is    Conall   Cearnach,  the  Victorious,  the  chief  champion   of    the    young   men    of    Ulster   and    of    all  Ireland."      "  We   will    go    on    then    to   the    ford,"    said  Cuchulain.    So  they  went  on  across  the  plain,  and  at  the  water's  edge  they  found  Conall,  and  he  said  :  "  And  are  those  arms  you  have  taken  to-day,  little  boy  ?  "     "  They  are  indeed,"  Jubair  said  for  him.     "  May  they  bring  him  triumph  and  victory  and  shedding  of  first  blood,"  said  Conall.     "  But  I  think,  little  Hound,"  he  said,  "  that  you  are  too  ready  to  take  them  ;  for  you  are  not  fit  as  yet 


i4      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

to  do  a  champion's  work."  "  What  is  it  you  are  doing  here,  Conall  ?  "  said  the  boy.  "  I  am  keeping  watch  and  guard  for  the  province."  "  Rise  out  of  it,  Conall,"  he  said,  "  and  for  this  one  day  let  me  keep  the  watch."  "  Do  not  ask  that,  little  one,"  said  Conall ;  "  for  you  are  not  able  yet  to  stand  against  trained  fighting  men."  "  Then  I  will  go  down  to  the  shallows  of  Lough  Echtra  and  see  if  I  can  redden  my  arms  on  either  friend  or  enemy."  "  Then  I  will  go  with  you  myself,"  said  Conall,  "  to  take  care  of  you  and  to  protect  you,  that  no  harm  may  happen  you."  "  Do  not,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  will  indeed,"  said  Conall,  "  for  if  I  let  you  go  into  a  strange  country  alone,  all  Ulster  would  avenge  it  on  me." 

So  Conall's  horses  were  yoked  to  his  chariot,  and  he  set  out  to  follow  Cuchulain,  for  he  had  waited  for  no  leave,  but  had  set  out  by  himself  When  Cuchulain  saw  Conall  coming  up  with  him  he  thought  to  himself,  "  If  I  get  a  chance  of  doing  some  great  thing,  Conall  will  never  let  me  do  it."  So  he  picked  up  a  stone,  the  size  of  his  fist,  from  the  ground,  and  made  a  good  cast  at  the  yoke  of  Conall's  chariot,  so  that  he  broke  it,  and  the  chariot  came  down,  and  Conall  himself  was  thrown  to  the  ground  sideways.  "  What  did  you  do  that  for  ?  "  he  said.  "  It  was  to  see  could  I  throw  straight,  and  if  there  was  the  making  of  a  good  champion  in  me."  "  Bad  luck  on  your  throwing  and  on  yourself,"  said  Conall.  "  And  any  one  that  likes  may  strike  your  head  off  now,  for  I  will  go  with  you  no  farther."  "  That  is  just  what  I  wanted,"  said  Cuchulain.  And  with  that,  Conall  went  back  to  his  place  at  the  ford. 

As  for  the  lad,  he  went  on  towards  Lough  Echtra  in  the  south.  Then  Jubair  said  :  "  If  you  will  listen  to  me,  little  one,  I  would  like  that  we  would  go  back  now  to  Emain  ;  for  at  this  time  the  carving  of  the  food  is  beginning  there,  and  it  is  all  very  well  for  you  that  have  your  place  kept  for  you  between   Conchubar's   knees, 


THE   DUN   OF   NECHTAN'S   SONS     15 

But  as  to  myself,"  he  said,  "it  is  among  the  chariot-  drivers  and  the  jesters  and  the  messengers  I  am,  and  I  must  find  a  place  and  fight  for  myself  where  I  can."  "What  is  that  mountain  before  us?"  said  Cuchulain.  "That  is  Slieve  Mourne,  and  that  is  Finncairn,  the  white  cairn,  on  its  top."  "  Let  us  go  to  it,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  We  would  be  too  long  going  there,"  said  Jubair.  "  You  are  a  lazy  fellow,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  and  this  my  first  adventure,  and  the  first  journey  you  have  made  with  me."  "  And  that  it  may  be  my  last,"  said  Jubair,  "if  ever  I  get  back  to  Emain  again."  They  went  on  then  to  the  cairn.  "  Good  Jubair,"  said  the  boy,  "  show  me  now  all  that  we  can  see  of  Ulster,  for  I  do  not  know  my  way  about  the  country  yet."  So  Jubair  showed  him  from  the  cairn  all  there  was  to  see  of  Ulster,  the  hills  and  the  plains  and  the  duns  on  every  side.  "What  is  that  sloping  square  plain  before  us  to  the  south?"  "That  is  Magh  Breagh,  the  fine  meadow."  "  Show  me  the  duns  and  strong  places  of  that  plain."  So  Jubair  showed  him  Teamhair  and  Tailte,  Cleathra  and  Cnobhach  and  the  Brugh  of  Angus  on  the  Boyne,  and  the  dun  of  Nechtan  Sceine's  sons.  "  Are  those  the  sons  of  Nechtan  that  say  in  their  boasting  they  have  killed  as  many  Ulstermen  as  there  are  living  in  Ulster  to-day  ?  "  "  They  are  the  same,"  said  Jubair.  "  On  with  us  then  to  that  dun,"  said  Cuchulain.  "No  good  will  come  to  you  through  saying  that,"  said  Jubair;  "and  whoever  may  go  there  I  will  not  go,"  he  said.  "  Alive  or  dead,  you  must  go  there  for  all  that,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Then  if  so,  it  is  alive  I  will  go  there,"  said  Jubair,  "  and  it  is  dead  I  will  be  before  I  leave  it." 

They  went  on  then  to  the  dun  of  Nechtan's  sons,  and  when  they  came  to  the  green  lawn,  Cuchulain  got  out  of  the  chariot,  and  there  was  a  pillar-stone  on  the  lawn,  and  an  iron  collar  about  it,  and  there  was  Ogham  writing  on  it  that  said  no  man  that  came  there,  and  he  carrying 


r6      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

arms,  should  leave  the  place  without  giving  a  challenge  to  some  one  of  the  people  of  the  dun.  When  Cuchulain  had  read  the  Ogham,  he  put  his  arms  around  the  stone  and  threw  it  into  the  water  that  was  there  at  hand.  "  I  don't  see  it  is  any  better  there  than  where  it  was  before,"  said  Jubair ;  "  and  it  is  likely  this  time  you  will  get  what  you  are  looking  for,  and  that  is  a  quick  death."  "  Good  Jubair,"  said  the  boy,  "  spread  out  the  coverings  of  the  chariot  now  for  me,  until  I  sleep  for  a  while."  "  It  is  no  good  thing  you  are  going  to  do,"  said  Jubair,  "to  be  going  to  sleep  in  an  enemy's  country."  He  put  out  the  coverings  then,  and  Cuchu-  lain lay  down  and  fell  asleep. 

It  was  just  at  that  time,  Foill,  son  of  Nechtan  Sceine,  came  out,  and  when  he  saw  the  chariot,  he  called  out  to  Jubair,  "  Let  you  not  unyoke  those  horses."  "  I  was  not  going  to  unyoke  them,"  said  Jubair;  "the  reins  are  in  my  hands  yet."  "  What  horses  are  they  ?  "  "  They  are  Conchubar's  two  speckled  horses."  "  So  I  thought  when  I  saw  them,"  said  Foill.  "  And  who  is  it  has  brought  them  across  our  boundaries  ? "  "A  young  little  lad,"  said  Jubair,  "  that  has  taken  arms  to-day  for  luck,  and  it  is  to  show  himself  off  he  has  come  across  Magh  Breagh."  "  May  he  never  have  good  luck,"  said  Foill,  "  and  if  he  were  a  fighting  man,  it  is  not  alive  but  dead  he  would  go  back  to  Emain  to-day."  "  Indeed  he  is  not  able  to  fight,  or  it  could  not  be  expected  of  him,"  said  Jubair,  "and  he  but  a  child  that  should  be  in  his  father's  house."  At  that  the  boy  lifted  his  head  from  the  ground,  and  it  is  red  his  face  was,  and  his  whole  body,  at  hearing  so  great  an  insult  put  on  him,  and  he  said  :  "  I  am  indeed  well  able  to  fight."  But  Foill  said  :  "  I  am  more  inclined  to  think  you  are  not."  "  You  will  soon  know  what  to  think,"  said  the  boy,  "  and  let  us  go  down  now  to  the  ford.  But  go  first  and  get  your  armour,"  he  said,  "  for  I  would  not  like  to  kill  an  un- 


NECHTAN'S   SONS  17 

armed  man."  There  was  anger  on  Foill  then,  and  he  went  running  to  get  his  arms.  "  You  must  have  a  care  now,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  that  is  Foill,  son  of  Nechtan,  and  neither  point  of  spear  or  edge  of  sword  can  harm  him."  "  That  suits  me  very  well,"  said  the  boy.  With  that  out  came  Foill  again,  and  Cuchulain  stood  up  to  him,  and  took  his  iron  ball  in  his  hand,  and  hurled  it  at  his  head,  and  it  went  through  the  forehead  and  out  at  the  back  of  his  head,  and  his  brains  along  with  it,  so  that  the  air  could  pass  through  the  hole  it  made.  And  then  Cuchulain  struck  off  his  head. 

Then  Tuachel,  the  second  son  of  Nechtan,  came  out  on  the  lawn.  "  It  is  likely  you  are  making  a  great  boast  of  what  you  are  after  doing,"  he  said.  "  I  see  nothing  to  boast  of  in  that,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  a  single  man  to  have  fallen  by  me."  "  You  will  not  have  long  to  boast  of  it,"  said  Tuachel,  "  for  I  myself  am  going  to  make  an  end  of  you  on  the  moment."  "  Then  go  back  and  bring  your  arms,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  only  a  coward  would  come  out  without  arms."  He  went  back  into  the  house  then,  and  Jubair  said  :  "  You  must  have  a  care  now,  for  that  is  Tuachel,  son  of  Nechtan,  and  if  he  is  not  killed  by  the  first  stroke,  or  the  first  cast,  or  the  first  thrust,  he  cannot  be  killed  at  all,  tor  there  is  no  way  of  getting  at  him  after  that."  "  You  need  not  be  telling  me  that,  Jubair,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  Conchubar's  great  spear,  the  Venomous,  I  will  take  in  my  hand,  and  that  is  the  last  thrust  that  will  be  made  at  him,  for  after  that,  there  is  no  physician  will  heal  his  wounds  for  ever." 

Then  Tuachel  came  out  on  the  lawn,  and  Cuchulain  took  hold  of  the  great  spear,  and  made  a  cast  at  him,  that  went  through  his  shield  and  broke  three  of  his  ribs,  and  made  a  hole  through  his  heart.  And  then  he  struck  his  head  off,  before  the  body  reached  the  ground. 

Then  Fainnle,  the  youngest  of  the  three  sons  of  Nechtan,  came  out.     "  Those  were  foolish  fellows,"  he 

B 


i8       BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

said,  "  to  come  at  you  the  way  they  did.  But  come  out  now,  after  me,"  he  said,  "into  the  water  where  your  feet  will  not  touch  the  bottom,"  and  with  that  he  made  a  plunge  into  the  water.  "  Mind  yourself  well  now,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  that  is  Fainnle,  the  Swallow,  and  it  is  why  that  name  was  put  on  him,  he  travels  across  water  with  the  swiftness  of  a  swallow,  and  there  is  not  one  of  the  swimmers  of  the  whole  world  can  come  near  him."  "  It  is  not  to  me  you  should  be  saying  that,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  you  know  the  river  Callan  that  runs  through  Emain,  and  it  is  what  I  used  to  do,"  he  said,  "  when  the  boy  troop  would  break  off  from  their  games  and  plunge  into  the  river  to  swim,  I  used  to  take  a  boy  of  them  on  each  shoulder  and  a  boy  on  each  hand,  and  I  would  bring  them  through  the  river  without  so  much  as  to  wet  my  back."  With  that  he  made  a  leap  into  the  water,  where  it  was  very  deep,  and  himself  and  Fainnle  wrestled  together,  and  then  he  got  a  grip  of  him,  and  gave  him  a  blow  of  Conchubar's  sword,  and  struck  his  head  off,  and  he  let  his  body  go  away  down  the  stream. 

Then  he  and  Jubair  went  into  the  house  and  destroyed  what  was  in  it,  and  they  set  fire  to  it,  and  left  it  burning,  and  turned  back  towards  Slieve  Fuad,  and  they  brought  the  heads  of  the  three  sons  of  Nechtan  along  with  them. 

Presently  they  saw  a  herd  of  wild  deer  before  them.  "  What  sort  of  cattle  are  those  ?  "  said  the  boy.  "  They  are  not  cattle,  but  the  wild  deer  of  the  dark  places  of  Slieve  Fuad."  "  Make  the  horses  go  faster,"  said  Cuchu-  lain, "  until  we  can  see  them  better."  But  with  all  their  galloping  the  horses  could  not  come  up  with  the  wild  deer.  Then  Cuchulain  got  down  from  the  chariot  and  raced  and  ran  after  them  until  two  stags  lay  moaning  and  panting  from  the  hardness  of  their  run  through  the  wet  bog,  and  he  bound  them  to  the  back  of  the  chariot  with  the  thongs  of  it.  Then  they  went  on  till  they  came  to  the  plain  of  Emain,  and  there  they  saw  a  flock  of  white 


THE   RETURN   TO   EMAIN  19 

swans  that  were  whiter  than  the  swans  of  Conchubar's  lake,  and  Cuchulain  asked  where  they  came  from.  "  They  are  wild  swans,"  said  Jubair,  "  that  are  come  from  the  rocks  and  the  islands  of  the  great  sea  to  feed  on  the  low  levels  of  the  country."  "  Would  it  be  best  to  take  them  alive  or  to  kill  them  ?  "  "  It  would  be  best  to  take  them  alive,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  many  a  one  kills  them,  and  many  a  one  makes  casts  at  them,  but  you  would  hardly  find  any  one  at  all  would  bring  them  in  alive."  With  that,  Cuchulain  put  a  little  stone  in  his  sling  and  made  a  cast,  and  brought  down  eight  birds  of  them,  and  then  he  put  a  bigger  stone  in,  and  with  it  he  brought  down  sixteen  more.  "  Get  out  now,  Jubair,"  he  said,  "  and  bring  me  the  birds  here."  "  I  will  not,"  said  Jubair,  "  for  it  would  not  be  easy  to  stop  the  horses  the  way  they  are  going  now,  and  if  I  leap  out,  the  iron  wheels  of  the  chariot  will  cut  through  me,  or  the  horns  of  the  stags  will  make  a  hole  in  me."  "  You  are  no  good  of  a  warrior,  Jubair ;  but  give  me  the  reins  and  I  will  quiet  the  horses  and  the  stags."  So  then  Jubair  went  and  brought  in  the  swans,  and  tied  them,  and  they  alive,  to  the  chariot  and  to  the  harness.  And  it  is  like  that  they  went  on  till  they  came  to  Emain. 

It  was  Levarcham,  daughter  of  Aedh,  the  conversation  woman  and  messenger  to  the  king,  that  was  there  at  that  time,  and  was  sometimes  away  in  the  hills,  was  the  first  to  see  them  coming.  "  There  is  a  chariot-fighter  coming,  Conchubar,"  she  said,  "  and  he  is  coming  in  anger.  He  has  the  bleeding  heads  of  his  enemies  with  him  in  the  chariot,  and  wild  stags  are  bound  to  it,  and  white  birds  are  bearing  him  company.  By  the  oath  of  my  people  !  "  she  said,  "  if  he  comes  on  us  with  his  anger  still  upon  him,  the  best  of  the  men  of  Ulster  will  fall  by  his  hand."  "  I  know  that  chariot-fighter,"  said  Conchubar.  "  It  is  the  young  lad,  the  son  of  Dechtire,  that  went  over  the  boundaries  this  very  day.     He  has  surely  reddened  his 


20      BOY   DEEDS   OF   CUCHULAIN 

hand,  and  if  his  anger  cannot  be  cooled,  the  young  men  of  Emain  will  be  in  danger  from  him,"  he  said. 

Then  they  all  consulted  together,  and  it  is  what  they  agreed,  to  send  out  three  fifties  of  the  women  of  Emain  to  meet  him,  and  they  uncovered.  When  the  boy  saw  the  women  coming,  there  was  shame  on  him,  and  he  leaned  down  his  head  into  the  cushions  of  the  chariot,  and  hid  his  face  from  them.  And  the  wildness  went  out  of  him,  and  his  feasting  clothes  were  brought,  and  water  for  washing  ;  and  there  was  a  great  welcome  before  him. 

This  is  the  story  of  the  boy  deeds  of  Cuchulain,  as  it  was  told  by  Fergus  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve  at  the  time  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 


Ill 

THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

TIT' HEN  Cuchulain  was  growing  out  of  his  boyhood  ^  ^  at  Emain  Macha,  all  the  women  of  Ulster  loved  him  for  his  skill  in  feats,  for  the  lightness  of  his  leap,  for  the  weight  of  his  wisdom,  for  the  sweetness  of  his  speech,  for  the  beauty  of  his  face,  for  the  loveliness  of  his  looks,  for  all  his  gifts.  He  had  the  gift  of  caution  in  fighting,  until  such  time  as  his  anger  would  come  on  him,  and  the  hero  light  would  shine  about  his  head  ;  the  gift  of  feats,  the  gift  of  chess-playing,  the  gift  of  draught-playing,  the  gift  of  counting,  the  gift  of  divining,  the  gift  of  right  judgment,  the  gift  of  beauty.  And  all  the  faults  they  could  find  in  him  were  three,  that  he  was  too  young  and  smooth-faced,  so  that  young  men  who  did  not  know  him  would  be  laughing  at  him,  that  he  was  too  daring,  and  that  he  was  too  beautiful. 

The  men  of  Ulster  took  counsel  together  then  about  Cuchulain,  for  their  women  and  their  maidens  loved  him  greatly,  and  it  is  what  they  settled  among  themselves,  that  they  would  seek  out  a  young  girl  that  would  be  a  fitting  wife  for  him,  the  way  that  their  own  wives  and  their  daughters  would  not  be  making  so  much  of  him.  And  besides  that  they  were  afraid  he  might  die  young,,  and  leave  no  heir  after  him. 

So  Conchubar  sent  out  nine  men  into  each  of  the  provinces  of  Ireland  to  look  for  a  wife  for  Cuchulain,  to  see  if  in  any  dun  or  in  any  chief  place,  they  could  find  the 

21 


22  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

daughter  of  a  king  or  of  an  owner  of  land  or  a  house-  holder, who  would  be  pleasing  to  him,  that  he  might  ask  her  in  marriage. 

All  the  messengers  came  back  at  the  end  of  a  year,  but  not  one  of  them  had  found  a  young  girl  that  would  please  Cuchulain.  And  then  he  himself  went  out  to  court  a  young  girl  he  knew  in  Luglochta  Loga,  the  Garden  of  Lugh,  Emer,  the  daughter  of  Forgall  Manach,  the  Wily. 

He  set  out  in  his  chariot,  that  all  the  chariots  of  Ulster  could  not  follow  by  reason  of  its  swiftness,  and  of  the  chariot  chief  who  sat  in  it.  And  he  found  the  young  girl  on  her  playing  field,  with  her  companions  about  her,  daughters  of  the  landowners  that  lived  near  Forgall's  dun,  and  they  learning  needlework  and  fine  embroidery  from  Emer.  And  of  all  the  young  girls  of  Ireland,  she  was  the  one  Cuchulain  thought  worth  courting ;  for  she  had  the  six  gifts — the  gift  of  beauty,  the  gift  of  voice,  the  gift  of  sweet  speech,  the  gift  of  needlework,  the  gift  of  wisdom,  the  gift  of  chastity.  And  Cuchulain  had  said  that  no  woman  should  marry  him  but  one  that  was  his  equal  in  age,  in  appearance,  and  in  race,  in  skill  and  handiness  ;  and  one  who  was  the  best  worker  with  her  needle  of  the  young  girls  of  Ireland,  for  that  would  be  the  only  one  would  be  a  fitting  wife  for  him.  And  that  is  why  it  was  Emer  he  went  to  ask  above  all  others. 

And  it  was  in  his  rich  clothes  he  went  out  that  day,  his  crimson  five-folded  tunic,  and  his  brooch  of  inlaid  gold,  and  his  white  hooded  shirt,  that  was  embroidered  with  red  gold.  And  as  the  young  girls  were  sitting  together  on  their  bench  on  the  lawn,  they  heard  coming  towards  them  the  clatter  of  hoofs,  the  creaking  of  a  chariot,  the  cracking  of  straps,  the  grating  of  wheels,  the  rushing  of  horses,  the  clanking  of  arms.  "  Let  one  of  you  see,"  said  Emer,  "  what  is  it  that  is  coming  towards  us."     And 


CUCHULAIN'S   RIDDLES  23 

Fiall,  daughter  of  Forgall,  went  out  and  met  him,  and  he  came  with  her  to  the  place  where  Emer  and  her  com-  panions were,  and  he  wished  a  blessing  to  them.  Then  Emer  lifted  up  her  lovely  face  and  saw  Cuchulain,  and  she  said,  "  May  the  gods  make  smooth  the  path  before  you."  "  And  you,"  he  said,  "  may  you  be  safe  from  every  harm."  "  Where  are  you  come  from  ? "  she  asked  him.  And  he  answered  her  in  riddles,  that  her  companions  might  not  understand  him,  and  he  said,  "  From  Intide  Emna."  "  Where  did  you  sleep  ?  "  "  We  slept,"  he  said,  "  in  the  house  of  the  man  that  tends  the  cattle  of  the  plain  of  Tethra."  "  What  was  your  food  there  ?  "  "  The  ruin  of  a  chariot  was  cooked  for  us,"  he  said.  "  Which  way  did  you  come  ?  "  "  Between  the  two  mountains  of  the  wood."  "  Which  way  did  you  take  after  that  ?  "  "  That  is  not  hard  to  tell,"  he  said.  "  From  the  Cover  of  the  Sea,  over  the  Great  Secret  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan,  and  the  Foam  of  the  horses  of  Emain,  over  the  Morrigu's  Garden,  and  the  Great  Sow's  back ;  over  the  Valley  of  the  Great  Dam,  between  the  God  and  his  Druid ;  over  the  Marrow  of  the  Woman,  between  the  Boar  and  his  Dam  ;  over  the  Washing-place  of  the  horses  of  Dea ;  between  the  King  of  Ana  and  his  servant,  to  Mandchuile  of  the  Four  Corners  of  the  World  ;  over  Great  Crime  and  the  Remnants  of  the  Great  Feast ;  between  the  Vat  and  the  Little  Vat,  to  the  Gardens  of  Lugh,  to  the  daughters  of  Tethra,  the  nephew  of  the  King  of  the  Fomor."  "  And  what  account  have  you  to  give  of  yourself?"  said  Emer.  "  I  am  the  nephew  of  the  man  that  disappears  in  another  in  the  wood  of  Badb,"  said  Cuchulain. 

"  And  now,  maiden,"  he  said,  "  what  account  have  you  to  give  of  yourself?"  "That  is  not  hard  to  tell,"  said  Emer,  "  for  what  should  a  maiden  be  but  Teamhair  upon  the  hills,  a  watcher  that  sees  no  one,  an  eel  hiding  in  the  water,  a  rush  out  of  reach.  The  daughter  of  a  king  should  be  a  flame  of  hospitality,  a  road  that  cannot  be 


24  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

entered.  And  I  have  champions  that  follow  me,"  she  said,  "to  keep  me  from  whoever  would  bring  me  away  against  their  will,  and  against  the  will  and  the  know-  ledge of  Forgall,  the  dark  king." 

"  Who  are  the  champions  that  follow  you,  maiden  ?  "  said  Cuchulain. 

"It  is  not  hard  to  tell  you  that,"  said  Emer.  "  Two  of  the  name  of  Lui ;  two  Luaths  ;  Luath  and  Lath  Goible,  sons  of  Tethra  ;  Triath  and  Trescath  ;  Brion  and  Bolor  ;  Bas,  son  of  Omnach  ;  the  eight  Condla,  and  Cond,  son  of  Forgall.  Every  man  of  them  has  the  strength  of  a  hundred  and  the  feats  of  nine.  And  it  would  be  hard  for  me,"  she  said,  "  to  tell  of  all  the  many  powers  Forgall  has  himself  He  is  stronger  than  any  labouring  man,  more  learned  than  any  Druid,  more  quick  of  mind  than  any  poet.  You  will  have  more  than  your  games  to  do  when  you  fight  against  Forgall,  for  many  have  told  of  his  power  and  of  the  strength  of  his  doings." 

"  Why  do  you  not  count  me  as  a  strong  man  as  good  as  those  others  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  Why  would  I  not  indeed,  if  your  doings  had  been  spoken  of  like  theirs  ?  "  she  said.  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  I  will  make  my  doings  be  spoken  of  among  the  great  doings  of  heroes  in  their  strength."  "  What  is  your  strength,  then  ?  "  said  Emer.  "  That  is  easily  told  ;  when  my  strength  in  fighting  is  weakest  I  defend  twenty ;  a  third  part  of  my  strength  is  enough  for  thirty  ;  in  my  full  strength  I  fight  alone  against  forty  ;  and  a  hundred  are  safe  under  my  protection.  For  dread  of  me,  fighting  men  avoid  fords  and  battles  ;  armies  and  armed  men  go  backward  from  the  fear  of  my  face." 

"  That  is  a  good  account  for  a  young  boy,"  said  Emer,  "  but  you  have  not  reached  yet  to  the  strength  of  chariot  chiefs."  "  But,  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  well  I  have  been  reared  by  Conchubar,  my  dear  foster-father.  It  is  not  as  a  countryman  strives  to  bring  up  his  children. 


HIS   TEACHERS  25 

between  the  flags  and  the  kneading  trough,  between  the  fire  and  the  wall,  on  the  floor  of  the  one  room,  that  Conchubar  has  brought  me  up ;  but  it  is  among  chariot  chiefs  and  heroes,  among  jesters  and  Druids,  among  poets  and  learned  men,  among  landowners  and  farmers  of  Ulster  I  have  been  reared,  so  that  I  have  all  their  manners  and  their  gifts." 

''  Who  are  these  men,  then,  that  have  brought  you  up  to  do  the  things  you  are  boasting  of?"  said  Emer. 

"  That  is  easily  told,"  he  said.  "  Fair-speaking  Sencha  taught  me  wisdom  and  right  judgment ;  Blai,  lord  of  lands,  my  kinsman,  took  me  to  his  house,  so  that  I  have  entertained  the  men  of  Conchubar's  province ;  Fergus  brought  me  up  to  fights  and  to  battles,  so  that  I  am  able  to  use  my  strength.  I  stood  by  the  knee  of  Amergin  the  poet,  he  was  my  tutor,  so  that  I  can  stand  up  to  any  man,  I  can  make  praises  for  the  doings  of  a  king.  Finchoem  helped  to  rear  me,  so  that  Conall  Cearnach  is  my  foster-brother.  Cathbad  of  the  Gentle  Face  taught  me,  for  the  sake  of  Dechtire,  so  that  I  understand  the  arts  of  the  Druids,  and  I  have  learned  all  the  goodness  of  knowledge.  All  the  men  of  Ulster  have  had  a  hand  in  bringing  me  up,  chariot-  drivers  and  chiefs  of  chariots,  kings  and  chief  poets,  so  that  I  am  the  darling  of  the  whole  army,  so  that  I  fight  for  the  honour  of  all  alike.  And  as  to  yourself,  Emer,"  he  said,  "what  way  have  you  been  reared  in  the  Garden  of  Lugh?" 

"  It  is  easy  to  tell  you  that,"  said  Emer.  "  I  was  brought  up,"  she  said, "  in  ancient  virtues,  in  lawful  behaviour,  in  the  keeping  of  chastity,  in  stateliness  of  form,  in  the  rank  of  a  queen,  in  all  noble  ways  among  the  women  of  Ireland."  "  These  are  good  virtues  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  And  why,  then,  would  it  not  be  right  for  us  two  to  become  one  ?  For  up  to  this  time,"  he  said,  "  I  have  never  found  a  young  girl 


26  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

able  to  hold  talk  with  me  the  way  you  have  done."  "  Have  you  no  wife  already  ? "  said  Emer.  "  I  have  not,  indeed."  "  I  may  not  marry  before  my  sister  is  married,"  she  said  then,  "  for  she  is  older  than  myself."  "  Truly,  it  is  not  with  your  sister,  but  with  yourself,  I  have  fallen  in  love,"  said  Cuchulain. 

While  they  were  talking  like  this,  Cuchulain  saw  the  breasts  of  the  maiden  over  the  bosom  of  her  dress,  and  he  said  :  "  Fair  is  this  plain,  the  plain  of  the  noble  yoke."  And  Emer  said,  "  No  one  comes  to  this  plain  who  does  not  overcome  as  many  as  a  hundred  on  each  ford,  from  the  ford  at  Ailbine  to  Banchuig  Arcait." 

"  Fair  is  the  plain,  the  plain  of  the  noble  yoke,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  No  one  comes  to  this  plain,"  said  she,  "  who  does  not  go  out  in  safety  from  Samhain  to  Oilmell,  and  from  Oilmell  to  Beltaine,  and  again  from  Beltaine  to  Bron  Trogain." 

"  Everything  you  have  commanded,  so  it  will  be  done  by  me,"  said  Cuchulain. 

"  And  the  offer  you  have  made  me,  it  is  accepted,  it  is  taken,  it  is  granted,"  said  Emer. 

With  that  Cuchulain  left  the  place,  and  they  talked  no  more  with  one  another  on  that  day. 

When  he  was  driving  across  the  plain  of  Bregia,  Laeg,  his  chariot-driver,  asked  him,  "  What,  now,  was  the  meaning  of  the  words  you  and  the  maiden  Emer  were  speaking  together  ?  "  "  Do  you  not  know,"  said  Cuchu-  lain, "  that  I  came  to  court  Emer  ?  And  it  is  for  this  reason  we  put  a  cloak  on  our  words,  that  the  young  girls  with  her  might  not  understand  what  I  had  come  for.  For  if  Forgall  knew  it,  he  would  not  consent  to  it,  but  to  you,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  I  will  tell  the  meaning  of  our  talk. 

" '  Where  did  you  come  from,'  said  she.  '  From  Intide  Emna,'  said  I,  and  I  meant  by  that,  from  Emain  Macha.  For  it  took  its  name  from  Macha,  daughter  of  Aed  the  Red,  one  of  the  three  kings  of  Ireland.     When  he  died 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  RIDDLES  27 

Macha  asked  for  the  kingship,  but  the  sons  of  Dithorba  said  they  would  not  give  kingship  to  a  woman.  So  she  fought  against  them  and  routed  them,  and  they  went  as  exiles  to  the  wild  places  of  Connaught.  And  after  a  while  she  went  in  search  of  them,  and  she  took  them  by  treachery,  and  brought  them  all  in  one  chain  to  Ulster.  The  men  of  Ulster  wanted  to  kill  them,  but  she  said,  '  No,  for  that  would  be  a  disgrace  on  my  good  government.  But  let  them  be  my  servants,'  she  said,  '  and  let  them  dig  a  rath  for  me,  that  shall  be  the  chief  seat  of  Ulster  for  ever.'  Then  she  marked  out  the  rath  for  them  with  the  gold  pin  on  her  neck,  and  its  name  came  from  that ;  a  brooch  in  the  neck  of  Macha. 

"  The  man,  in  whose  house  we  slept,  is  Ronca,  the  fisherman  of  Conchubar.  'A  man  that  tends  cattle,'  I  said.  For  he  catches  fish  on  his  line  under  the  sea,  and  the  fish  are  the  cattle  of  the  sea,  and  the  sea  is  the  plain  of  Tethra,  a  king  of  the  kings  of  the  Fomor. 

" '  Our  food  was  the  ruin  of  a  chariot,'  I  said.  For  a  foal  was  cooked  for  us  on  the  hearth,  and  it  is  the  horse  that  holds  up  the  chariot. 

" '  Between  the  two  mountains  of  the  wood,'  I  said.  These  are  the  two  mountains  between  which  we  came,  Slieve  Fuad  to  the  west,  and  Slieve  Cuilinn  to  the  east  of  us,  and  we  were  in  Oircil  between  them,  the  wood  that  is  between  the  two. 

"  *  The  road,'  I  said, '  from  the  Cover  of  the  Sea.'  That  is  from  the  plain  of  Muirthemne.  And  it  is  from  this  it  got  its  name ;  there  was  at  one  time  a  magic  sea  on  it,  with  a  sea  turtle  in  it  that  was  used  to  suck  men  down,  until  the  Dagda  came  with  his  club  of  anger  and  sang  these  words,  so  that  it  ebbed  away  on  the  moment : — 

'  Silence  on  your  hollow  head  ;  Silence  on  your  dark  body  ;  Silence  on  your  dark  brow.' 

" '  Over  the  Great  Secret  of  the  men  of  Dea,'  I  said.    That 


28  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

is  a  wonderful  secret  and  a  wonderful  whisper,  because  it  was  there  that  the  gathering  to  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh  was  first  whispered  of  bytheTuatha  De  Danaan. 

" '  Over  the  horses  of  Emain/  I  said.  When  Ema  Nemed,  son  of  Nama,  reigned  over  the  Gael,  he  had  his  two  horses  reared  for  him  in  Sidhe  Ercman  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan,  and  when  those  horses  were  let  loose  from  the  Sidhe,  a  bright  stream  burst  out  after  them,  and  the  foam  spread  over  the  land  for  a  great  length  of  time,  and  was  there  to  the  end  of  a  year,  so  that  the  water  was  called  Uanib,  that  is,  foam  on  the  water,  and  it  is  Uanib  to-day. 

"'The  Back  of  the  Great  Sow,'  I  said.  That  is  Drimne  Breg,  the  Ridge  of  Bregin.  For  the  shape  of  a  sow  appeared  to  the  sons  of  Milid  on  every  hill  and  on  every  height  in  Ireland,  when  they  came  over  the  sea,  and  wanted  to  land  by  force,  after  a  spell  had  been  cast  on  it  by  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan. 

" '  The  Valley  of  the  Great  Dam,'  I  said,  '  between  the  God  and  his  Druid.'  That  is,  between  Angus  Og  of  the  Sidhe  of  the  Brugh  and  his  Druid,  to  the  west  of  the  Brugh,  and  between  them  was  the  one  woman,  the  wife  of  the  Smith.  That  is  the  way  I  went,  between  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe  of  the  Brugh  where  Angus  is,  and  the  Sidhe  of  Bresal,  the  Druid. 

" '  Over  the  Marrow  of  the  Woman/  I  said.  That  is  the  Boinne,  and  it  gets  its  name  from  Boann,  the  wife  of  Nechtan,  son  of  Labraid.  She  went  down  to  the  hidden  well  at  the  bottom  of  the  dun  with  the  three  cup-bearers  of  Nechtan,  Flex  and  Lex  and  Luam.  No  one  came  back  from  that  well  without  blemish  un-  less the  three  cup-bearers  went  with  him.  But  the  queen  went  out  of  pride  and  overbearing  to  the  well,  and  it  is  what  she  said,  that  nothing  would  spoil  her  shape  or  put  a  blemish  on  her.  She  passed  left-hand-  wise  round  the  well,  to  mock  at  its  powers.     Then  three 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  RIDDLES  29 

waves  broke  over  her  and  bruised  her  two  knees  and  her  right  hand  and  one  of  her  eyes,  and  she  ran  out  of  the  dun  to  escape  until  she  came  to  the  sea,  and  wherever  she  ran,  the  water  followed  after  her.  Segain  was  its  name  on  the  dun  ;  the  River  Segsa  from  the  dun  to  the  Pool  of  Mochua ;  the  hand  of  the  wife  of  Nechtan  and  the  knee  of  the  wife  of  Nechtan  after  that ;  the  Boinne  in  Meath  ;  Arcait  it  is  called  from  the  Finda  to  the  Troma ;  the  Marrow  of  the  Woman  from  the  Troma  to  the  sea. 

" '  The  Boar,'  I  said,  '  and  his  Dam.'  That  is,  between  Cleitech  and  Fessi.  For  Cleitech  is  the  name  for  a  boar,  but  it  is  also  the  name  for  a  king,  the  leader  of  great  hosts,  and  Fessi  is  the  name  for  the  great  sow  of  a  farmer's  house. 

" '  The  King  of  Ana,'  I  said, '  and  his  servant'  That  is  Cerna,  through  which  we  passed,  and  that  is  its  name  since  Enna  Aignech  put  Cerna,  king  of  Ana,  to  death  on  that  hill,  and  he  put  his  steward  to  death  in  the  east  of  that  place. 

" '  The  Washing  of  the  Horses  of  Dea,'  I  said.  That  is  Ange,  for  in  it  the  men  of  Dea  washed  their  horses  when  they  came  from  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh.  And  it  was  called  Ange,  because  the  Tuatha  De  Danaan  washed  their  horses  in  it. 

"'The  Four-cornered  Mandchuile,'  I  said.  That  is  Muincille.  It  is  there  Mann,  the  farmer,  was,  and  there  he  made  spells  in  his  great  four-cornered  chambers  underground,  to  keep  off  the  plague  from  the  cattle  of  Ireland  in  the  time  of  Bresel  Brec,  king  of  Leinster. 

"  *  Great  Crime,'  I  said.  That  is  Ailbine.  There  was  a  king  here  in  Ireland,  Ruad,  son  of  Rigdond  of  Munster.  He  had  an  appointment  of  meeting  with  foreigners,  and  he  set  out  for  the  meeting  round  the  south  of  Alban  with  three  ships,  and  thirty  men  were  in  each  ship.  But  the  ships  were  stopped,  and  were  held  from  below  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  and  throwing  jewels  and  precious 


30  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

things  into  the  sea  did  not  get  them  off.  Then  lots  were  cast  among  them  who  should  go  into  the  sea  and  find  out  what  was  holding  them.  The  lot  fell  on  the  king  himself,  Ruad,  son  of  Rigdond,  and  he  leaped  into  the  sea,  and  it  closed  over  him.  He  lit  upon  a  large  plain,  where  nine  beautiful  women  met  him,  and  they  confessed  that  it  was  they  themselves  had  stopped  the  ships,  the  way  that  he  might  come  to  them.  And  he  stopped  with  them  nine  days,  and  they  gave  him  nine  vessels  of  gold  ;  and  through  the  length  of  that  time  his  men  were  not  able  to  go  on,  through  the  power  of  the  women.  When  he  was  going  away,  a  woman  of  them  said  she  would  bear  him  a  son,  and  that  he  must  come  back  to  them  and  bring  away  his  son,  when  he  would  be  coming  from  the  east. 

"  Then  he  joined  his  men,  and  they  went  on  their  voyage,  and  they  stopped  away  seven  years,  and  then  they  came  back  by  a  different  way,  and  they  did  not  go  near  the  same  spot.  They  landed  in  the  bay,  and  the  sea-women  came  up  to  them  there,  and  the  men  heard  them  playing  music  in  their  brazen  ship.  And  then  the  women  came  to  the  shore,  and  they  put  the  boy  out  of  the  ship  on  the  land  where  the  men  were.  And  the  harbour  was  stony  and  rocky,  and  the  boy  slipped  and  fell  on  one  of  the  rocks,  so  that  he  died  there.  And  the  women  saw  it,  and  they  cried  all  to-  gether, '  Olbine,  Olbine,'  that  is  '  Great  Crime.'  And  it  is  from  that  it  is  called  Ailbine. 

" '  The  Remnants  of  the  Great  Feast,'  I  said.  That  is  Tailne.  It  was  there  the  great  feast  was  given  to  Lugh,  son  of  Ethlenn,  to  comfort  him  after  the  battle  of  Magh  Tuireadh,  for  that  was  his  wedding  feast  of  kingship. 

" '  In  the  Garden  of  Lugh,  to  the  daughters  of  Tethra's  nephew,'  I  said  ;  for  Forgall  Manach  is  sister's  son  of  Tethra,  king  of  the  Fomor. 

"As  to  the  account  of  myself  I  gave  her,  there  are 


THE  MEANING  OF  THE  RIDDLES  31 

two  rivers  in  the  land  of  Ross  ;  Conchubar  is  the  name  of  one  of  them,  and  it  mixes  with  the  other ;  and  I  am  the  nephew  of  Conchubar ;  and  as  to  the  plague  that  comes  on  dogs,  it  is  wild  fierceness,  and  truly  I  am  a  strong  fighter  of  that  plague,  for  I  am  wild  and  fierce  in  battles  and  in  fights.  And  the  Wood  of  Badb,  that  is  the  land  of  Ross,  the  Wood  of  the  Morrigu,  the  Battle  Crow,  the  Goddess  of  Battle. 

"  And  when  she  said  that  no  man  should  come  to  the  plain  of  her  breasts  until  he  had  killed  three  times  nine  men  with  one  blow,  and  yet  had  saved  one  man  from  each  nine,  it  is  what  she  meant,  that  three  brothers  of  her  own  will  be  guarding  her,  Ibur  and  Seibur  and  Catt,  and  a  company  of  nine  with  each  of  them.  And  it  is  what  I  must  do,  I  must  strike  a  blow  on  each  nine,  from  which  eight  will  die,  but  no  stroke  will  reach  any  of  her  brothers  among  them  ;  and  I  must  carry  her  and  her  foster-sister,  with  their  share  of  gold  and  silver,  out  of  the  dun  of  Forgall. 

"'Go  out  from  Samhain  to  Oimell,'  she  said.  That  is,  that  I  shall  fight  without  harm  to  myself  from  Samhain,  the  end  of  summer,  to  Oimell,  the  beginning  of  spring  ;  and  from  the  beginning  of  spring  to  Beltaine,  and  from  that  to  Bron  Trogain.  For  Oi,  in  the  language  of  poetry,  is  a  name  for  sheep,  and  Oimell  is  the  time  v/hen  the  sheep  come  out  and  are  milked,  and  Suain  is  a  gentle  sound,  and  it  is  at  Samhain  that  gentle  voices  sound  ;  and  Beltaine  is  a  favouring  fire ;  for  it  is  at  that  time  the  Druids  used  to  make  fires  with  spells  and  to  drive  the  cattle  between  them  against  the  plagues  every  year.  And  Bron  Trogain,  that  is  the  beginning  of  autumn,  for  it  is  then  the  earth  is  in  labour,  that  is,  the  earth  under  fruit,  Bron  Trogain,  the  trouble  of  the  earth." 

Then  Cuchulain  went  on  his  way,  and  he  slept  that  night  in  Emain  Macha. 


32  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

When  Forgall  came  back  to  his  dun,  and  his  lords  of  land  with  him,  their  daughters  were  telling  them  of  the  young  man  that  had  come  in  a  splendid  chariot,  and  how  himself  and  Emer  had  been  talking  together,  and  they  could  not  understand  their  talk  with  one  another.  The  lords  of  land  told  this  to  Forgall,  and  it  is  what  he  said,  "  You  may  be  sure  it  is  the  mad  boy  from  Emain  Macha  has  been  here,  and  he  and  the  girl  have  fallen  in  love  with  one  another.  But  they  will  gain  nothing  by  that,"  he  said  ;  "  for  it  is  I  will  hinder  them." 

With  that  Forgall  went  out  to  Emain,  with  the  appearance  of  a  foreigner  on  him,  and  he  gave  out  that  he  was  sent  by  the  king  of  the  Gall,  to  speak  with  Conchubar,  and  to  bring  him  a  present  of  golden  treasures,  and  wine  of  the  Gall,  and  many  other  things.  And  he  brought  some  of  his  men  with  him,  and  there  was  a  great  welcome  before  them. 

And  on  the  third  day,  Cuchulain  and  Conall  and  other  chariot  chiefs  of  Ulster  were  praised  before  him,  and  he  said  it  was  right  for  them  to  be  praised,  and  that  they  did  wonderful  feats,  and  Cuchulain  above  them  all.  But  he  said  that  if  Cuchulain  would  go  to  Scathach,  the  woman-warrior  that  lived  in  the  east  of  Alban,  his  skill  would  be  more  wonderful  still,  for  he  could  not  have  perfect  knowledge  of  the  feats  of  a  warrior  without  that. 

But  his  reason  for  saying  this  was  that  he  thought  if  Cuchulain  set  out,  he  would  never  come  back  again,  through  the  dangers  he  would  put  around  him  on  the  journey,  and  through  the  wildness  and  the  fierceness  of  the  people  about  Scathach. 

So  then  Forgall  v/ent  home,  and  Cuchulain  rose  up  in  the  morning,  and  made  ready  to  set  out  for  Alban,  and  Laegaire  Buadach,  the  Battle  Winner,  and  Conall  Cear-  nach  said  they  would  go  with  him.     But  first  Cuchulain 


CUCHULAIN'S   JOURNEY  33 

went  across  the  plain  of  Bregia  to  visit  Emer,  and  to  talk  with  her  before  going  in  the  ship.  And  she  told  him  how  it  was  Forgall  had  gone  to  Emain,  and  had  advised  him  to  go  and  learn  warriors'  feats,  the  way  they  two  might  not  meet  again.  Then  each  of  them  promised  to  be  true  to  the  other  till  they  would  meet  again,  unless  death  should  come  between  them,  and  they  said  farewell  to  one  another,  and  Cuchulain  turned  towards  Alban. 

When  they  came  there,  they  stopped  for  a  while  at  the  forge  of  Donall,  the  smith,  and  then  they  set  out  to  go  to  the  east  of  Alban.  But  before  they  had  gone  far,  a  vision  came  before  their  eyes  of  Emain  Macha,  and  Laegaire  and  Conall  were  not  able  to  pass  by  it,  and  they  turned  back.  It  was  Forgall  raised  that  vision,  to  draw  them  away  from  Cuchulain,  that  he  might  be  in  the  more  danger,  being  alone.  Then  Cuchulain  went  on  by  himself  on  a  strange  road,  and  he  was  sad  and  tired  and  down-hearted  for  the  loss  of  his  comrades,  but  he  held  to  his  word  that  he  would  not  go  back  to  Emain  without  finding  Scathach,  even  if  he  should  die  in  the  attempt. 

But  now  he  was  astray  and  ignorant,  and  not  know-  ing which  way  to  take,  and  he  saw  a  terrible  grqat  beast  like  a  lion  coming  towards  him,  and  it  watching  him,  but  it  did  not  try  to  harm  him.  Whatever  way  he  went,  the  beast  went  before  him,  and  then  it  stopped  and  turned  its  side  to  him.  So  he  made  a  leap  and  was  on  its  back,  and  he  did  not  guide  it,  but  went  what-  ever way  it  chose.  They  travelled  like  that  through  four  days,  till  they  came  to  the  end  of  the  bounds  of  men,  and  to  an  island  where  lads  were  rowing  in  a  small  loch ;  and  the  lads  began  to  laugh  when  they  saw  a  beast  of  that  sort,  and  a  man  riding  it.  And  then  Cuchulain  leaped  off,  and  the  beast  left  him,  and  he  bade  it  farewell. 

He  passed  on  till  he  came  to  a  large  house  in  a  deep 

C 


34  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

valley,  and  a  comely  young  girl  in  it,  and  she  spoke  to 

him,  and  bade  him  welcome.     "  A  welcome  before  you, 

Cuchulain,"  she  said.     He  asked  her  how  did  she  know 

him,  and  she  said,  "  I  was  a  foster-child  of  Wulfkin,  the 

Saxon,  the  time  you  came  there  to  learn  sweet  speech 

from  him."     And  she  gave  him  meat  and  drink,  and  he 

went  away  from  her.     Then  he  met  with  a  young  man, 

and  he  gave  him  the  same  welcome,  and  he   said   his 

name     was    Eochu,    and    they    talked    together,    and 

Cuchulain  asked  him  what  was  the  way  to  Scathach's 

dun.     The   young   man   told    him   the  way,  across  the 

Plain  of  Ill-Luck,  that  lay  before  him,  and  he  said  that 

on  the  near  side  of  the  plain  the  feet  of  men  would  stick 

fast,  and  on  the  far  side  every  blade  of  grass  would  rise 

and  hold  them  fast  on  its  points.     And  he  gave  him  a 

wheel,  and  bade  him  to  follow  its  track  across  the  one 

half  of  the  plain.     And  he  gave  him  an  apple  along 

with  that,  and  bade  him  to  throw  it,  and  to  follow  the 

way  it  went,  till  he  would  reach  the  end  of  the  plain. 

And  he  told  him  many  other  things  that  would  happen 

him,  and  how  he  would  win  a  great  name  at  the  last. 

And  then  each  of  them  wished  a  blessing  to  the  other, 

and  Cuchulain  did  as  he  bade  him,  and  so  he  got  across 

the  plain  and  went  on  his  journey.     And  then,  as  the 

young  man  had  told  him,  he  came  to  a  valley,  and  it 

full  of  monsters,  sent  there  by  Forgall  to  destroy  him, 

and  only   one   narrow   path   through   it,   but   he  went 

through  it  safely.     And  after  that  his  road  led  through 

a  terrible,  wild  mountain.     Then  he  came  to  the  place 

where    Scathach's    scholars   were,  and  among  them  he 

saw  Ferdiad,  son   of  Daman,  and  Naoise,  Ainnle,  and 

Ardan,  the  three  sons  of  Usnach,  and  when  they  knew 

that   he   was   from    Ireland    they   welcomed   him   with 

kisses,  and  asked  for  news  of  their  own  country.     He 

asked    them    where   was    Scathach.      "  In    that    island 

beyond,"  they  said,     "  What  way  must  I  take  to  reach 


CROSSING   THE    BRIDGE  35 

her  ?  "  he  asked.  "  By  the  bridge  of  the  cliff,"  they  said,  "  and  no  man  can  cross  it  till  he  has  proved  himself  a  champion,  and  many  a  king's  son  has  got  his  death  there." 

And  this  is  the  way  the  bridge  was  :  the  two  ends  of  it  were  low,  and  the  middle  was  high,  and  whenever  any  one  would  leap  on  it,  the  first  time  it  would  narrow  till  it  was  as  narrow  as  the  hair  of  a  man's  head,  and  the  second  time  it  would  shorten  till  it  was  as  short  as  an  inch,  and  the  third  time  it  would  get  slippery  till  it  was  as  slippery  as  an  eel  of  the  river,  and  the  fourth  time  it  would  rise  up  on  high  against  you  till  it  was  as  tall  as  the  mast  of  a  ship. 

All  the  warriors  and  people  on  the  lawn  came  down  to  see  Cuchulain  making  his  attempt  to  cross  the  bridge,  and  he  tried  three  times  to  do  it,  and  he  could  not,  and  the  others  were  laughing  at  him,  that  he  should  think  he  could  cross  it,  and  he  so  young.  Then  his  anger  came  on  him,  and  the  hero  light  shone  round  his  head,  and  it  was  not  the  appearance  of  a  man  that  was  on  him,  but  the  appearance  of  a  god  ;  and  he  leaped  upon  the  end  of  the  bridge  and  made  the  hero's  salmon  leap,  so  that  he  landed  on  the  middle  of  it,  and  he  reached  the  other  end  of  the  bridge  before  it  could  raise  itself  fully  up,  and  threw  himself  from  it,  and  was  on  the  ground  of  the  island  where  Scathach's  sunny  house  was,  and  it  having  seven  great  doors,  and  seven  great  windows  between  every  two  doors,  and  three  times  fifty  couches  between  every  two  windows,  and  three  times  fifty  young  girls,  with  scarlet  cloaks  and  beautiful  blue  clothing  on  them,  waiting  on  Scathach. 

And  Scathach's  daughter,  Uacthach,  was  sitting  by  a  window,  and  when  she  saw  the  young  man,  and  he  a  stranger,  and  comeliest  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  making  his  attempt  to  cross  the  bridge,  she  loved  him,  and  her  face  and  her  colour  began  to   change   continually,  so 


36  THE   COURTING  OF   EMER 

that  now  she  would  be  as  white  as  a  Httle  flower,  and  then  again  she  would  grow  crimson  red.  And  in  her  needlework  that  she  was  doing,  she  would  put  the  gold  thread  where  the  silver  thread  should  be,  and  the  silver  thread  in  the  place  where  the  gold  thread  should  be.  And  when  Scathach  saw  that,  she  said  :  "  I  think  this  young  man  has  pleased  you."  And  Uacthach  said :  "  There  would  be  great  grief  on  me  indeed,  were  he  not  to  return  alive  to  his  own  people,  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  they  may  be,  for  I  know  there  is  surely  some  one  to  whom  it  would  be  great  anguish  to  know  the  way  he  is  now." 

Then,  when  Cuchulain  had  crossed  the  bridge,  he  went  up  to  the  house,  and  struck  the  door  with  the  shaft  of  his  spear,  so  that  it  went  through  it.  And  when  Scathach  was  told  that,  she  said,  "  Truly  this  must  be  some  one  who  has  finished  his  training  in  some  other  place."  Then  Uacthach  opened  the  door  for  him,  and  he  asked  for  Scathach,  and  Uacthach  told  him  where  she  was,  and  what  he  had  best  do  when  he  found  her.  So  he  went  out  to  the  place  where  she  was  teaching  her  two  sons.  Guar  and  Cett,  under  the  great  yew-tree ;  and  he  took  his  sword  and  put  its  point  between  her  breasts,  and  he  threatened  her  with  a  dreadful  death  if  she  would  not  take  him  as  her  pupil,  and  if  she  would  not  teach  him  all  her  own  skill  in  arms.     So  she  promised  him  she  would  do  that. 

Now  it  was  while  Cuchulain  was  with  Scathach  that  a  great  king  in  Munster,  Lugaid,  son  of  Ros,  went  northward  with  twelve  chariot  chiefs  to  look  for  a  wife  among  the  daughters  of  the  men  of  Mac  Rossa,  but  they  had  all  been  promised  before. 

And  when  Forgall  Manach  heard  this,  he  went  to  Emain,  and  he  told  Lugaid  that  the  best  of  the  maidens  of  Ireland,  both  as  to  form  and  behaviour  and  handi-  work^ was  in   his  house  unwed.     Lugaid  said  he  was 


THE   WARWITH    AOIFE  37 

well  pleased  to  hear  that,  and  Forgall  promised  him  his  daughter  Emer  in  marriage.  And  to  the  twelve  chariot  chiefs  that  were  with  him,  he  promised  twelve  daughters  of  twelve  lords  of  land  in  Bregia,  and  Lugaid  went  back  with  him  to  his  dun  for  the  wedding. 

But  whem  Emer  was  brought  to  Lugaid  to  sit  by  his  side,  she  laid  one  of  her  hands  on  each  side  of  his  face,  and  she  said  on  the  truth  of  her  good  name  and  of  her  life,  that  it  was  Cuchulain  she  loved,  although  her  father  was  against  him,  and  that  no  one  that  was  an  honour-  able man  should  force  her  to  be  his  wife. 

Then  Lugaid  did  not  dare  take  her,  for  he  was  in  dread  of  Cuchulain,  and  so  he  returned  home  again. 

As  to  Cuchulain,  after  he  had  been  a  good  time  with  Scathach,  a  war  began  between  herself  and  Aoife,  queen  of  the  tribes  that  were  round  about.  The  armies  were  going  out  to  fight,  but  Cuchulain  was  not  with  them,  for  Scathach  had  given  him  a  sleeping-  drink  that  would  keep  him  safe  and  quiet  till  the  fight  would  be  over,  for  she  was  afraid  some  harm  would  come  to  him  if  he  met  Aoife,  for  she  was  the  greatest  woman-warrior  in  the  world,  and  she  understood  en-  chantments and  witchcraft.  But  after  one  hour,  Cuchu-  lain started  up  out  of  his  sleep,  for  the  sleeping-drink  that  would  have  held  any  other  man  for  a  day  and  a  night,  held  him  for  only  that  length  of  time.  And  he  followed  after  the  army,  and  he  met  with  the  two  sons  of  Scathach,  and  they  three  went  against  the  three  sons  of  Ilsuanach,  three  of  the  best  warriors  of  Aoife,  and  it  was  by  Cuchulain  they  were  killed,  one  after  the  other. 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow  the  fight  was  begun  again,  and  the  two  sons  of  Scathach  were  going  up  the  path  of  feats  to  fight  against  three  others  of  the  best  champions  of  Aoife,  Cire,  Bire,  and  Blaicne,  sons  of  Ess  Enchenn.  When  Scathach  saw  them  going  up  she   gave  a   sigh,  for  she  was  afraid  for  her  two  sons, 


38  THE    COURTING   OF   EM  ER 

but  just  then  Cuchulain  came  up  with  them,  and  he  leaped  before  them  on  to  the  path  of  feats,  and  met  the  three  champions,  and  all  three  fell  by  him. 

When  Aoife  saw  that  her  best  champions  were  after  being  killed,  she  challenged  Scathach  to  fight  against  herself,  but  Cuchulain  went  out  in  her  place.  And  before  he  went,  he  asked  Scathach,  "  What  things  does  Aoife  think  most  of  in  all  the  world  ?  "  "  Her  two  horses  and  her  chariot  and  her  chariot-driver,"  said  Scathach. 

So  then  Cuchulain  and  Aoife  attacked  one  another  and  began  a  fierce  fight,  and  she  broke  Cuchulain's  spear  in  pieces,  and  his  sword  she  broke  off  at  the  hilt.  Then  Cuchulain  called  out,  '*  Look,  the  chariot  and  the  horses  and  the  driver  of  Aoife  are  fallen  down  into  the  valley  and  are  lost ! "  At  that  Aoife  looked  about  her,  and  Cuchulain  took  a  sudden  [hold  of  her,  and  lifted  her  on  his  shoulders,  and  brought  her  down  to  where  the  army  was,  and  laid  her  on  the  ground,  and  held  his  sword  to  her  breast,  and  she  begged  for  her  life,  and  he  gave  it  to  her.  And  after  that  she  made  peace  with  Scathach,  and  bound  her-  self by  sureties  not  to  go  against  her  again.  And  she  gave  her  love  to  Cuchulain  ;  and  out  of  that  love  great  sorrow  came  afterwards. 

And  as  Cuchulain  was  going  home  by  the  narrow  path,  he  met  an  old  hag,  and  she  blind  of  the  left  eye.  She  asked  him  to  leave  room  for  her  to  pass  by,  but  he  said  there  was  no  room  on  that  path,  unless  he  would  throw  himself  down  the  great  sea-cliff  that  was  on  the  one  side  of  it.  But  she  asked  him  again  to  leave  the  road  to  her,  and  he  would  not  refuse,  and  he  dropped  down  the  cliff,  with  only  his  one  hand  keeping  a  hold  of  the  path.  Then  she  came  up,  and  as  she  passed  him,  she  gave  a  hit  of  her  foot  at  his  hand,  the  way  he  would  leave  his  hold  and  drop  into  the  sea.     But   at   that,   he   gave   a   leap   up   again   on  the 


DEVORGILL  39 

path,  and  struck  off  the  hag's  head.  For  she  was  Ess  Enchenn,  the  mother  of  the  last  three  warriors  that  had  fallen  by  him,  and  it  was  to  destroy  him  she  had  come  out  to  meet  him,  for  she  knew  that  under  his  rules  of  championship,  he  would  make  way  for  her  when  she  asked  it. 

After  that,  he  stayed  for  another  while  with  Scathach,  until  he  had  learned  all  the  arts  of  war  and  all  the  feats  of  a  champion  ;  and  then  a  message  came  to  him  to  come  back  to  his  own  country,  and  he  bade  her  fare-  well. And  Scathach  told  him  what  would  happen  him  in  the  time  to  come,  for  she  had  the  Druid  gift ;  and  she  told  him  there  were  great  dangers  before  him,  and  that  he  would  have  to  fight  against  great  armies,  and  he  alone;  and  that  he  would  scatter  his  enemies,  so  that  his  name  would  come  again  to  Alban  ;  but  that  his  life  would  not  be  long,  for  he  would  die  in  his  full  strength. 

Then  Cuchulain  went  on  board  his  ship  to  set  out  for  Ireland,  and  in  the  same  ship  with  him  were  Lugaid  and  Luan,  the  two  sons  of  Loch,  and  Ferbaeth  and  Larin  and  Ferdiad,  and  Durst,  son  of  Derb. 

On  the  night  of  Samhain  they  came  to  the  island  of  Rechrainn,  and  Cuchulain  left  his  ship  and  came  to  the  strand.  And  there  he  heard  a  sound  of  crying,  and  he  saw  a  beautiful  young  girl,  and  she  sitting  there  alone.  He  asked  her  who  was  she,  and  what  ailed  her,  and  she  said  she  was  Devorgill,  daughter  of  the  king  of  Rechrainn,  and  that  every  year  he  was  forced  to  pay  a  heavy  tax  to  the  Fomor,  and  this  year,  when  he  could  not  pay  it,  they  made  him  leave  her  there  near  the  sea,  till  they  would  come  and  bring  her  away  in  place  of  it. 

"  Where  do  these  men  come  from  ? "  said  Cuchulain.  "  From  that  far  country  over  there,"  she  said,  "  and  let  you  not  stop  here  or  they  will  see  you  when  they  come."  But  Cuchulain  would  not  leave  her,  and  presently  three 


40  THE   COURTING   OF   EMER 

fierce  men  of  the  Fomor  landed  in  the  bay,  and  made  straight  for  the  spot  where  the  girl  was.  But  before  they  had  time  to  lay  a  hand  on  her,  Cuchulain  leaped  on  them  and  he  killed  the  three  of  them,  one  after  the  other.  The  last  man  wounded  him  in  the  arm,  and  the  girl  tore  a  strip  from  her  dress,  and  gave  it  to  him  to  bind  round  the  wound.  And  then  she  ran  to  her  father's  house  and  told  him  all  that  had  happened.  After  that  Cuchulain  came  to  the  king's  house,  like  any  other  guest,  and  his  companions  with  him,  and  Conall  Cearnach  and  Laegaire  Buadach  were  there  before  them,  where  they  had  been  sent  from  Emain  Macha  to  collect  tribute.  For  at  that  time  a  tribute  was  paid  to  Ulster  from  the  islands  of  the  Gall. 

And  they  were  all  talking  about  the  escape  Devorgill  had,  and  some  were  boasting  that  it  was  they  themselves  had  saved  her,  for  she  could  not  be  sure  who  it  was  had  come  to  her,  because  of  the  dusk  of  the  evening.  Then  there  was  water  brought  for  them  all  to  wash  before  they  would  go  to  the  feast ;  and  when  it  came  to  Cuchulain's  turn  to  bare  his  arms,  she  knew  by  the  strip  of  her  dress  that  was  bound  about  it,  that  it  was  he  had  saved  her.  "  I  will  give  the  girl  to  you  as  your  wife,"  said  the  king,  "  and  I  myself  will  pay  her  wedding  portion."  *'  Not  so,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  I  must  make  no  delay  in  going  back  to  Ireland." 

So  then  he  made  his  way  back  to  Emain  Macha,  and  he  told  his  whole  story  and  all  that  had  happened  him.  And  as  soon  as  he  had  rested  from  the  journey,  he  set  out  to  look  for  Emer  at  her  father's  house.  But  Forgall  and  his  sons  had  heard  he  was  come  home  again,  and  they  had  made  the  place  so  strong,  and  they  kept  so  good  a  watch  round  it,  that  for  the  whole  length  of  a  year  he  could  not  get  so  much  as  a  sight  of  her. 

It  was  one  day  at  that  time  he  went  down  to  the  shore  of  Lough  Cuan  with  Laeg,  his  chariot-driver,  and 


THEFIGHTFOREMER  41 

with  Lugaid.  And  when  they  were  there,  they  saw  two  birds  coming  over  the  sea.  Cuchulain  put  a  stone  in  his  sling,  and  made  a  cast  at  the  birds,  and  hit  one  of  them.  And  when  they  came  to  where  the  birds  were,  they  found  in  their  place  two  women,  and  one  of  them  the  most  beautiful  in  the  world,  and  they  were  Devorgill,  daughter  of  the  king  of  Rechrainn,  that  had  come  from  her  own  country  to  find  Cuchulain,  and  her  serving-maid  along  with  her  ;  and  it  was  Devorgill  that  Cuchulain  had  hit  with  the  stone.  "  It  is  a  bad  thing  you  have  done,  Cuchulain,'\she  said,  "for  it  was  to  find  you  I  came,  and  now  you  have  wounded  me."  Then  Cuchulain  put  his  mouth  to  the  wound  and  sucked  out  the  stone  and  the  blood  along  with  it.  And  he  said,  "  You  cannot  be  my  wife,  for  I  have  drunk  your  blood.  But  I  will  give  you  to  my  comrade,"  he  said,  "  to  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes."  And  so  it  was  done,  and  Lugaid  gave  her  his  love  all  through  her  life,  and  when  she  died  he  died  of  the  grief  that  was  on  him  after  her. 

After  that,  Cuchulain  got  his  scythe  chariot  made  ready,  and  he  set  out  again  for  Forgall's  dun.  And  when  he  got  there,  he  leaped  with  his  hero  leap  over  the  three  walls,  so  that  he  was  inside  the  court,  and  there  he  made  three  attacks,  so  that  eight  men  fell  from  each  attack,  but  one  escaped  in  every  troop  of  nine  ;  that  is  the  three  brothers  of  Emer,  Seiburand  Ibur  and  Catt.  And  Forgall  made  a  leap  from  the  wall  of  the  court  to  escape  Cuchulain,  and  he  fell  in  the  leap  and  got  his  death  from  the  fall. 

And  then  Cuchulain  went  out  again,  and  brought  Emer  with  him  and  her  foster-sister,  and  their  two  loads  of  gold  and  silver. 

And  then  they  heard  cries  all  around  them,  and  Scenmend,  Forgall's  sister,  came  following  them  with  her  men,  and  came  up  with  them  at  the  ford ;  and  Cuchulain   killed  her  in  the   fight,  and  it  is  from  that 


42  THE    COURTING   OF   EMER 

it  is  called  the  Ford  of  Scenmend.  And  her  men  came  up  with  them  again  at  the  next  ford,  and  he  killed  a  hundred  of  them  there.  "  It  is  a  great  thing  you  have  done,"  said  Emer.  "  You  have  killed  a  hundred  strong  armed  men  ;  and  Glondath,  the  Ford  of  Deeds,  is  the  name  that  shall  be  on  it  for  ever."  Then  they  came  to  Racban,  the  white  field,  and  he  gave  three  great  angry  blows  to  his  enemies  there,  so  that  streams  of  blood  went  over  it  on  every  side.  "  This  white  hill  is  a  hill  of  red  sods  to-day,  through  your  work,  Cuchulain,"  said  Emer.  And  from  that  time  it  has  been  called  the  Ford  of  the  Sods. 

Then  they  were  overtaken  again  at  another  ford  on  the  Boinne,  and  Emer  quitted  the  chariot,  and  Cuchulain  followed  his  enemies  along  the  banks,  so  that  the  sods  were  flying  from  the  feet  of  ^the  horses  across  the  ford  northward  ;  and  then  he  turned  and  followed  them  northward,  so  that  the  sods  flew  over  the  ford  southward.  And  from  that  it  is  called  Ath  na  Imfuait,  the  Ford  of  the  Two  Clods.  And  at  each  of  these  fords  Cuchulain  killed  a  hundred,  and  so  he  kept  his  word  to  Emer,  and  he  came  safely  out  of  it  all,  and  they  came  to  Emain  Macha,  toward  the  fall  of  night. 

And  then  Cuchulain  was  given  the  headship  of  the  young  men  of  Ulster,  of  the  warriors,  the  poets,  the  trumpeters,  the  musicians,  the  three  pipers,  the  three  jesters  to  say  sharp  words  ;  the  three  distributers  of  fame.  It  is  of  them  the  poet  spoke,  and  set  out  their  names,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : — ''  The  young  men  of  Ireland,  when  they  were  in  the  Red  Branch,  it  is  they  were  the  fairest  of  all  hosts."  And  of  Cuchulain  he  said,  "  He  is  as  hard  as  steel  and  as  bright,  Cuchulain,  the  victorious  son  of  Dcchtire." 

And  then  Cuchulain  took  Emer  for  his  wife,  after  that  long  courting,  and  all  the  hardships  he  had  gone  through.  And  he  brought  her  into  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch, 


EMAINMACHA  43 

and  Conchubar  and  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  gave  her  a  great  welcome. 

It  was  at  Emain  Macha,  that  was  sometimes  called  Macha  of  the  Spears,  Conchubar,  the  High  King,  had  the  Eachrais  Uladh,  the  Assembly  House  of  Ulster,  and  it  was  there  he  had  his  chief  palace. 

A  fine  palace  it  was,  having  three  houses  in  it,  the  Royal  House,  and  the  Speckled  House,  and  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch. 

In  the  Royal  House  there  were  three  times  fifty  rooms,  and  the  walls  were  made  of  red  yew,  with  copper  rivets.  And  Conchubar's  own  room  was  on  the  ground,  and  the  walls  of  it  faced  with  bronze,  and  silver  up  above,  with  gold  birds  on  it,  and  their  heads  set  with  shining  carbuncles  ;  and  there  were  nine  partitions  from  the  fire  to  the  wall,  and  thirty  feet  the  height  of  each  partition.  And  there  was  a  silver  rod  before  Conchubar  with  three  golden  apples  on  it,  and  when  he  shook  the  rod  or  struck  it,  all  in  the  house  would  be  silent. 

It  was  in  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  were  kept  the  heads  and  the  weapons  of  beaten  enemies,  and  in  the  Speckled  House  were  kept  the  swords  and  the  shields  and  the  spears  of  the  heroes  of  Ulster.  And  it  was  called  the  Speckled  House  because  of  the  brightness  and  the  colours  of  the  hilts  of  the  swords,  and  the  bright  spears,  green  or  grey,  with  rings  and  bands  of  silver  and  gold  about  them,  and  the  gold  and  silver  that  were  on  the  rims  and  the  bosses  of  the  shields,  and  the  brightness  of  the  drinking-cups  and  the  horns. 

It  was  the  custom  with  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch,  if  one  of  them  heard  a  word  of  insult,  to  get  satisfaction  for  it  on  the  moment.  He  would  get  up  in  the  feasting  hall  itself,  and  make  his  attack  ;  and  it  was  to  prevent  that,  the  arms  were  kept  together  in  one  place.  Con-  chubar's shield,  the  Ochain,  that  is  the  Moaning  One,  was  hanging  there  ;  whenever  Conchubar  would  be  in 


44  THE    COURTING   OF   EMER 

danger,  it  would  moan,  and  all  the  shields  of  Ulster  would  moan  in  answer  to  it.  And  Conall  Cearnach's  Lam-tapaid,  the  Quick  Hand,  was  in  it.  And  Fergus's  Leochain,  and  Dubthach's  Uathach,  and  Laegaire's  Nithach ;  and  Sencha's  Sciath-arglan  and  Celthair's  Comla  Catha,  the  Gate  of  Battle,  and  a  great  many-  others  along  with  these. 

And  Cuchulain's  shield  was  there,  and  the  way  he  got  it  was  this. 

There  was  a  law  made  by  the  men  of  the  Red  Branch  that  the  carved  device  on  every  shield  should  be  different  from  every  other.  And  the  name  of  the  man  that  used  to  make  the  shields  was  Mac  Enge.  Cuchulain  went  to  him  after  coming  back  from  Scathach,  and  bade  him  make  him  a  shield,  and  put  some  new  device  on  it.  "  I  cannot  do  that,"  iaid  Mac  Enge,  "  for  all  I  can  do  I  have  done  already  on  the  shields  of  the  men  of  Ulster."  There  was  anger  on  Cuchulain  then,  and  he  threatened  Mac  Enge  with  death,  was  he,  or  was  he  not,  under  Conchubar's  protection. 

Mac  Enge  was  greatly  put  out  at  what  had  happened,  and  he  was  thinking  what  was  best  for  him  to  do,  when  he  saw  a  man  coming  towards  him.  "There  is  some  trouble  on  you,"  he  said.  "  There  is,  indeed,"  said  the  shield-maker,  "  for  I  am  in  danger  of  death  unless  I  make  a  shield  for  Cuchulain."  "  Clear  out  your  work-  shop," said  the  strange  man,  "  and  spread  ashes  a  foot  deep  on  the  floor." 

And  when  this  was  done,  Mac  Enge  saw  the  man  coming  over  the  outer  wall  to  him  again,  and  a  fork  in  his  hand,  and  it  having  two  prongs.  And  he  put  one  of  the  prongs  in  the  ashes,  and  with  the  other  he  made  the  pattern  that  was  to  be  cut  on  Cuchulain's  shield.  And  so  Cuchulain  got  it,  and  the  name  it  had  was  Dubhan,  the  Black  One. 

And  as  to  Cuchulain's  sword  that  was  hanging  along 


THEGAEBULG  45 

with  the  shield,  its  name  was  the  Cruaidin  Cailid-  cheann ;  that  is,  the  Hard,  Hard  Headed.  And  it  had  a  hilt  of  gold  with  ornaments  of  silver,  and  if  the  point  of  the  sword  would  be  bent  back  to  its  hilt,  it  would  come  as  straight  as  a  rod  back  again.  It  would  cut  a  hair  on  the  water,  or  it  would  cut  a  hair  off  the  head  without  touching  the  skin,  or  it  would  cut  a  man  in  two,  and  the  one  half  of  him  would  not  miss  the  other  for  some  time  after. 

And  as  to  Cuchulain's  spear,  the  Gae  Bulg,  whether  it  was  or  was  not  kept  in  the  Speckled  House,  this  is  the  way  he  came  by  it.  There  were  two  monsters  fighting  in  the  sea  one  time,  the  Curruid  and  the  Coinchenn  their  names  were,  and  at  the  last  the  Coinchenn  made  for  the  strand  to  escape,  but  the  other  followed  him  and  killed  him  there. 

Then  Bolg,  son  of  Buan,  a  champion  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  world,  found  the  bones  of  the  Coinchenn  on  the  strand,  and  he  made  a  spear  with  them.  And  he  gave  it  to  a  great  fighting  man,  the  son  of  Jubar,  and  it  went  from  one  to  another  till  it  came  to  the  woman  -  champion,  Aoife.  And  Aoife  gave  it  to  Cuchulain,  and  he  brought  it  to  Ireland.  And  it  was  with  it  he  killed  his  own  son,  and  his  friend  Ferdiad  afterwards. 

There  were  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  men  belong-  ing to  Conchubar's  household ;  and  one  among  them  served  the  supper  every  night,  and  when  the  year  came  round,  he  would  take  his  turn  again.  And  it  is  not  a  small  thing  that  supper  was  :  beef  and  pork  and  beer  for  every  man.  But  the  three  days  before  and  the  three  days  after  Samhain,  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  used  to  come  together,  and  to  eat  together  in  Conchubar's  palace,  and  Conchubar  himself  took  charge  of  the  supper  at  that  feast ;  for  every  man  that  did  not  come    on    Samhain    night,    his    wits    would    go    from 


46  THE    COURTING   OF   EMER 

him,  and  it  was  as  well  to  make  his  grave  and  to  put  his  memorial  stone  over  him  the  next  day. 

And  there  were  a  great  many  poets  and  learned  men  used  to  come  to  Conchubar's  court,  for  they  were  made  welcome  there  when  they  were  driven  out  of  other  places.  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  was  among  them,  and  his  son,  bright-faced  Geanann,  and  Sencha,  and  Ferceirtne,  that  was  very  learned,  and  Morann,  that  could  not  give  a  wrong  judgment,  for  if  he  did,  the  collar  round  his  neck  would  tighten  ;  and  many  others. 

Adhna  was  the  chief  poet  there  at  one  time,  and  after  he  died  Athairne  was  made  chief  poet  of  Ulster  in  his  place.  But  Neidhe,  Adhna's  son,  came  back  from  Alban,  expecting  to  be  made  chief  poet.  And  it  was  the  waves  of  the  sea,  breaking  on  the  strand  where  he  was,  that  told  him  of  his  father's  death.  And  when  he  got  to  Emain,  he  went  into  the  palace  and  sat  down  in  the  chief  poet's  chair,  that  he  found  empty,  and  put  the  chief  poet's  cloak  about  him,  that  was  lying  there,  and  that  was  ornamented  with  beautiful  birds'  feathers.  And  then  Athairne  came  in  and  found  him  there,  and  they  began  an  argument  with  one  another  in  the  language  of  poetry,  and  Conchubar  and  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  came  in  to  listen  to  them,  and  some  of  the  other  poets  joined  in  the  argument. 

And  Neidhe  proved  himself  to  be  the  best,  but  if  he  did,  as  soon  as  it  was  given  in  his  favour,  he  came  down  from  the  chair,  and  took  off  the  cloak  and  put  it  about  Athairne,  and  said  that,  his  father  being  dead,  he  would  take  him  for  his  master. 

So  Athairne  was  chief  poet,  but  no  one  had  any  great  liking  for  him,  for  he  was  too  fond  of  riches,  and  was  no  way  hospitable  or  open-handed.  It  was  he  went  to  Midhir,  and  brought  away  secretly  his  three  cranes  of  churlishness  and  denial,  the  way  none  of  the  men  of  Ireland  would  get  a  good  reception  if 


THEREDBRANCH  47 

they  would  come  to  ask  anything  at  his  house.  "  Do  not  come,  do  not  come,"  the  first  crane  would  say.  "  Get  away,  get  away,"  the  second  would  say.  "  Go  past  the  house,  past  the  house,"  the  third  would  say  to  any  one  that  came  near  it. 

It  was  after  that  argument  between  Athairne  and  Neidhe,  king  Conchubar  made  a  change  in  the  laws.  For  it  had  been  a  law  that  no  one  that  was  not  a  poet  could  be  a  judge.  But  the  language  of  the  poets  was  hard  to  understand,  and  the  king  was  vexed  when  he  could  understand  but  a  small  part  of  their  argument.  So  he  said  that  from  that  time  out,  any  fitting  man  might  be  made  judge,  was  he  or  was  he  not  a  poet.  And  all  the  people  agreed  to  that,  and  the  new  law  turned  out  very  well  in  the  end. 

And  the  twelve  chief  heroes  of  Conchubar's  Red  Branch  were  these :  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh ;  Conall  Cearnach,  the  Victorious  ;  Laegaire  Buadach,  the  Battle-  Winner  ;  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim  ;  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthact,  chief  of  Fernmaige ;  Celthair,  son  of  Uthecar;  Dubthach  Doel  Uladh,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster ;  Muinremar,  son  of  Geirgind ;  Cethern,  son  of  Findtain  ;  and  Naoise,  Ainnle,  and  Ardan,  the  three  sons  of  Usnach. 


IV 


BRICRIU'S  FEAST,  AND  THE  WAR  OF  WORDS  OF  THE  WOMEN  OF  ULSTER 

DRICRIU  of  the  Bitter  Tongue  made  a  great  feast  one  time  for  Conchubar,  son  of  Ness,  and  for  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster.  He  was  the  length  of  a  year  getting  the  feast  ready,  and  he  built  a  great  house  to  hold  it  in  at  Dun-Rudraige.  He  built  it  in  the  likeness  of  the  House  of  the  Red  Branch  in  Emain,  but  it  was  entirely  beyond  all  the  buildings  of  that  time  in  shape  and  in  substance,  in  plan  and  in  ornament,  in  pillars  and  in  facings,  in  doors  and  in  carvings,  so  that  it  was  spoken  of  in  all  parts.  It  was  on  the  plan  of  the  drinking-hall  at  Emain  it  was  made  inside,  and  it  having  nine  divisions  from  hearth  to  wall,  and  every  division  faced  with  bronze  that  was  overlaid  with  gold,  thirty  feet  high.  In  the  front  part  of  the  hall  there  was  a  royal  seat  made  for  Conchubar,  high  above  all  the  other  seats  of  the  house.  It  was  set  with  carbuncles  and  other  precious  stones  of  all  colours,  that  shone  like  gold  and  silver,  so  that  they  made  the  night  the  same  as  the  day ;  and  round  about  it  were  the  twelve  seats  of  the  twelve  heroes  of  Ulster. 

Good  as  the  material  was,  the  work  done  on  it  was  as  good.  It  took  six  horses  to  bring  home  every  beam,  and  the  strength  of  six  men  to  fix  every  pole,  and  thirty  of  the  best  skilled  men  in  Ireland  were  ordering  it  and  directing  it, 

48 


BRICRIU'S    INVITATION  49 

Then  Bricriu  made  a  sunny  parlour  for  himself,  on  a  level  with  Conchubar's  seat  and  the  seats  of  the  heroes  of  valour,  and  it  had  every  sort  of  ornament,  and  windows  of  glass  were  put  on  every  side  of  it,  the  way  he  could  see  the  hall  from  his  seat,  for  he  knew  the  men  of  Ulster  would  not  let  him  stop  inside. 

When  he  had  finished  building  the  hall  and  the  sunny  parlour,  and  had  furnished  them  with  quilts  and  coverings,  beds  and  pillows,  and  with  a  full  supply  of  meat  and  drink,  so  that  nothing  was  wanting,  he  set  out  for  Emain  Macha  to  see  Conchubar  and  the  chief  men  of  Ulster. 

It  happened  that  day  they  were  all  gathered  together  at  Emain  Macha,  and  they  made  him  welcome,  and  they  put  him  to  sit  beside  Conchubar,  and  he  said  to  Conchu-  bar and  to  them  all,  "  Come  with  me  to  a  feast  I  have  made  ready."  "  I  am  willing  to  go,"  said  Conchubar,  "  if  the  men  of  Ulster  are  willing." 

But  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  and  the  others,  said :  "  We  will  not  go,  for  if  we  do,  our  dead  will  be  more  than  our  living,  after  Bricriu  has  set  us  to  quarrel  with  one  another."  "  It  will  be  worse  for  you  if  you  do  not  come,"  said  Bricriu.  "What  will  you  do  if  they  do  not  go  with  you  ? "  said  Conchubar.  "  I  will  stir  up  strife,"  said  Bricriu,  "  between  the  kings  and  the  leaders,  and  the  heroes  of  valour,  and  the  swordsmen,  till  every  one  makes  an  end  of  the  other,  if  they  will  not  come  with  me  to  use  my  feast."  "  We  will  not  go  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  you,"  said  Conchubar.  "  I  will  stir  up  anger  between  father  and  son,  so  that  they  will  be  the  death  of  one  another,"  said  Bricriu  ;  "  if  I  fail  in  doing  that,  I  will  make  a  quarrel  between  mother  and  daughter ;  if  that  fails,  I  will  put  the  two  breasts  of  every  woman  of  Ulster  striking  one  against  the  other,  and  destroying  one  another."  "  It  is  better  for  us  to  go,"  said  Fergus.  "  Let  us  consult  with  the  chief  men  of  Ulster,"  said  Sencha,  son  of  Ailell.     "Some  harm  will  come  of  it," 

D 


50  BRICRIU'S    FEAST 

said  Conchubar,  "  if  we  do  not  consult  together  against  this  man." 

On  that,  all  the  chief  men  met  together  in  council,  and  it  is  what  Sencha  advised  :  "  It  is  best  for  you  to  get  securities  from  Bricriu,  as  you  have  to  go  along  with  him ;  and  put  eight  swordsmen  around  him,  to  make  him  leave  the  house  as  soon  as  he  has  laid  out  the  feast  for  you."  So  Ferbenn  Ferbeson,  son  of  Conchubar,  brought  the  answer  to  Bricriu.  "  I  am  satisfied  to  do  that,"  said  Bricriu.  With  that  the  men  of  Ulster  set  out  from  Emain,  host,  troop,  and  company  under  king,  chief,  and  leader,  and  it  was  a  good  march  they  all  made  together  to  Dun-Rudraige. 

Then  Bricriu  set  himself  to  think  how  with  the  securi-  ties that  were  given  for  him,  he  could  best  manage  to  set  the  men  of  Ulster  one  against  the  other.  After  he  had  been  thinking  a  while,  he  went  over  to  Laegaire  Buadach,  son  of  Connad,  son  of  Iliath.  "  All  good  be  with  you,  Laegaire,  Winner  of  Battles,  you  mighty  mallet  of  Bregia,  you  hot  hammer  of  Meath,  you  flame-red  thunderbolt,  what  hinders  you  from  getting  the  championship  of  Ireland  for  ever?"  "If  I  want  it  I  can  get  it,"  said  Laegaire.  "  You  will  be  head  of  all  the  champions  of  Ireland,"  said  Bricriu,  "if  you  do  as  I  advise."  "  I  will  do  that,  indeed,"  said  Laegaire. 

"  Well,"  said  Bricriu,  "  if  you  can  get  the  Champion's  Portion  at  the  feast  in  my  house,  the  championship  of  Ireland  will  be  yours  for  ever.  And  the  Champion's  Portion  of  my  house  is  worth  fighting  for,"  he  said,  ''  for  it  is  not  the  portion  of  a  fool's  house.  There  goes  with  it  a  vat  of  good  wine,  with  room  enough  in  it  to  hold  three  of  the  brave  men  of  Ulster ;  with  that  a  seven-year-old  boar,  that  has  been  fed  since  it  was  born  on  no  other  thing  but  fresh  milk,  and  fine  meal  in  spring-time,  curds  and  sweet  milk  in  summer,  the  kernel  of  nuts  and  wheat 


BRICRIU'S   TREACHERY  51 

in  harvest,  beef  and  broth  in  the  winter ;  with  that  a  seven-year-old  bullock  that  never  had  in  its  mouth,  since  it  was  a  sucking  calf,  either  heather  or  twig  tops,  but  only  sweet  milk  and  herbs,  meadow  hay  and  corn  ;  along  with  that,  five-score  wheaten  cakes  made  with  honey.  That  is  the  Champion's  Portion  of  my  house.  And  since  you  are  yourself  the  best  hero  among  the  men  of  Ulster,"  he  said,  "  it  is  but  right  to  give  it  to  you  ;  and  that  is  my  wish,  you  to  get  it.  And  at  the  end  of  the  day,  when  the  feast  is  spread  out,  let  your  chariot-driver  rise  up,  and  it  is  to  him  the  Champion's  Portion  will  be  given."  "  There  will  be  dead  men  if  that  is  not  done,"  said  Laegaire.  Then  Bricriu  laughed,  for  he  liked  to  hear  that. 

When  he  had  done  stirring  up  Laegaire  Buadach,  he  went  on  till  he  met  with  Conall  Cearnach.  "  May  good  be  with  you,  Conall,"  he  said.  "  It  is  you  are  the  hero  of  fights  and  of  battles  ;  it  is  many  victories  you  have  won  up  to  this  over  the  heroes  of  Ulster.  By  the  time  the  men  of  Ulster  cross  the  boundary  of  a  strange  country,  it  is  three  days  and  three  nights  in  advance  of  them  you  are,  over  many  a  ford  and  river ;  it  is  you  who  protect  their  rear  coming  back  again,  so  that  no  enemy  can  get  past  you  or  through  you,  or  over  you.  What  would  hinder  you  from  being  given  the  Champion's  Portion  of  Emain  to  hold  for  ever  ? "  Great  as  was  his  treachery  with  Laegaire,  he  showed  twice  as  much  in  what  he  said  to  Conall  Cearnach. 

When  he  had  satisfied  himself  that  Conall  was  stirred  up  to  a  quarrel,  he  went  on  to  Cuchulain.  "  May  all  good  be  with  you,  Cuchulain,  conqueror  of  Bregia,  bright  banner  of  the  Life,  darling  of  Emain,  beloved  by  wives  and  by  maidens,  Cuchulain  is  no  nickname  for  you  to-day,  for  you  are  the  champion  of  the  men  of  Ulster  ;  it  is  you  keep  off  their  great  quarrels  and  disputes  ;  it  is  you  get  justice  for  every  man  of  them ;  it  is  you  have  what  all  the  men  of  Ulster  are  wanting  in  ;  all  the  men 


52  BRICRIU'S    FEAST 

of  Ulster  acknowledge  that  your  bravery,  your  valour,  and  your  deeds  are  beyond  their  own.  Why,  then,  would  you  leave  the  Champion's  Portion  for  some  other  one  of  the  men  of  Ulster,  when  not  one  of  them  would  be  able  to  keep  it  from  you  ?  " 

"  By  the  god  of  my  people,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  whoever  comes  to  try  and  keep  it  from  me  will  lose  his  head."  With  that  Bricriu  left  them  and  followed  after  the  army,  as  if  he  had  done  nothing  to  stir  up  a  quarrel  at  all. 

After  that  they  came  to  the  feasting-houses  and  went  in,  and  every  one  took  his  place,  king,  prince,  landowner,  swordsman,  and  young  fighting  man.  One  half  of  the  house  was  set  apart  for  Conchubar  and  his  following,  and  the  other  half  was  kept  for  the  wives  of  the  heroes  of  Ulster. 

And  there  were  attending  on  Conchubar  in  the  front  part  of  the  house  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh  ;  Celthair,  son  of  Uthecar ;  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthact ;  the  two  sons  of  the  king,  Fiacha  and  Fiachaig ;  Fergus,  son  of  Leti ;  Cuscraid,  the  Stutterer  of  Macha  ;  Sencha,  son  of  Ailell ;  the  three  sons  of  Fiachach,  that  is  Rus  and  Dare  and  Imchad  ;  Muinremar,  son  of  Geirgind  ;  Errge  Echbel ;  Amergin,  son  of  Ecit  ;  Mend,  son  of  Salchah  ;  Dubthach  Doel  Uladh,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster ;  Feradach  Find  Fectnach ;  Fedelmid,  son  of  Hair  Cheting ;  Furbaide  Ferbend  ;  Rochad,  son  of  Fathemon  ;  Laegaire  Buadach  ;  Conall  Cearnach ;  Cuchulain  ;  Conrad,  son  of  Mornai ;  Ere,  son  of  Fedelmid  ;  lollan,  son  of  Fergus  ;  Fintan,  son  of  Nial ;  Cethern,  son  of  Fintan  ;  Factna,  son  of  Sencad  ;  Conla  the  False  ;  Ailell  the  Honey-Tongued  ;  the  chief  men  of  Ulster,  with  the  young  men  and  the  song-  makers. 

While  the  feast  was  being  spread  out,  the  musicians  and  players  made  music  for  them.  As  soon  as  Bricriu  had  spread  the  feast  with  its  well-tasting,  savoury  meats,  he  was  ordered  by  his  sureties  to  leave  the  hall  on  the 


THE   CHAMPION'S   PORTION        53 

moment ;  and  they  rose  up  with  their  drawn  swords  in  their  hands  to  put  him  out.  So  he  and  his  followers  went  out,  and  when  he  was  on  the  threshold  of  the  house  he  turned  and  called  out :  "  The  Champion's  Portion  of  my  house  is  not  the  portion  of  a  fool's  house ;  let  it  be  given  to  whoever  you  think  the  best  hero  of  Ulster."     And  with  that  he  left  them. 

Then  the  distributers  rose  up  to  divide  the  food,  and  the  chariot-driver  of  Laegaire  Buadach,  Sedlang,  son  of  Riangabra,  rose  up  and  said  to  them,  "  Let  you  give  the  Champion's  Portion  to  Laegaire,  for  he  has  the  best  right  to  it  of  all  the  young  heroes  of  Ulster." 

Then  Id,  son  of  Riangabra,  chariot-driver  to  Conall  Cearnach,  rose  up,  and  bade  them  to  give  it  to  his  master.  But  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  said,  "  It  is  to  Cuchulain  it  must  be  brought ;  and  it  is  no  disgrace  for  all  the  men  of  Ulster  to  give  it  to  him,  for  it  is  he  is  the  bravest  of  you  all."  "  That  is  not  true,"  said  Conall,  and  Laegaire  said  the  same. 

With  that  they  got  up  upon  the  floor,  and  put  on  their  shields  and  took  hold  of  their  swords,  and  they  attacked  and  struck  at  one  another  till  the  one  half  of  the  hall  was  as  if  on  fire  with  the  clashing  of  swords  and  spears,  and  the  other  half  was  as  white  as  chalk  with  the  whiteness  of  the  shields.  There  was  fear  on  the  whole  gathering ;  all  the  men  were  put  from  their  places,  and  there  was  great  anger  on  Conchubar  himself  and  on  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  to  see  the  injustice  and  the  hard-  ship of  two  men  fighting  against  one,  Conall  and  Laegaire  both  together  attacking  Cuchulain  ;  but  there  was  no  one  among  the  men  of  Ulster  dared  part  them  till  Sencha  spoke  to  Conchubar.  "  It  is  time  for  you  to  part  these  men,"  he  said. 

With  that,  Conchubar  and  Fergus  came  between  them,  and  the  fighters  let  their  hands  drop  to  their  sides.        "  Will   you    do    as    1    advise  ? "    said    Sencha. 


54  BRICRIU'S   FEAST 

"  We  will  do  it,"  they  said.  "  Then  my  advice  is,"  said  Sencha,  "  for  this  night  to  divide  the  Champion's  Portion  among  the  whole  gathering,  and  after  that  to  let  it  be  settled  according  to  the  judgment  of  Ailell,  king  of  Connaught,  for  it  will  be  better  for  the  men  of  Ulster,  this  business  to  be  settled  in  Cruachan." 

So  with  that  they  sat  down  to  the  feast  again,  and  gathered  round  the  fire  and  drank  and  made  merry. 

All  this  time  Bricriu  and  his  wife  were  in  their  upper  room,  and  from  there  he  had  seen  how  things  were  going  on  in  the  great  hall.  And  he  began  to  search  his  mind  how  he  could  best  stir  up  the  women  to  quarrel  with  one  another  as  he  had  stirred  up  the  men.  When  he  had  done  searching  his  mind,  it  just  chanced  as  he  could  have  wished,  that  Fedelm  of  the  Fresh  Heart  came  from  the  hall  with  fifty  women  after  her,  laughing  and  merry.  Bricriu  went  to  meet  her.  "  All  good  be  with  you  to-night,  wife  of  Laegaire  Buadach.  Fedelm  of  the  Fresh  Heart  is  no  nickname  for  you,  with  respect  to  your  appearance  and  your  wisdom  and  your  family.  Conchubar,  king  of  Ulster,  is  of  your  kindred  ;  Laegaire  Buadach  is  your  husband.  I  would  not  think  well  of  it  that  any  of  the  women  of  Ulster  should  go  before  you  into  the  hall,  for  it  is  at  your  heel  that  all  the  other  women  of  Ulster  should  walk.  If  you  go  first  into  the  hall  to-night,  you  will  be  queen  over  them  all  for  ever  and  ever." 

Fedelm  went  on  after  that,  the  length  of  three  ridges  from  the  hall. 

After  that  there  came  out  Lendabair,  the  Favourite,  daughter  of  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthact,  wife  of  Conall  Cearnach. 

Bricriu  came  over  to  her,  and  he  said,  "  Good  be  with  you,  Lendabair ;  and  that  is  no  nickname,  for  you  are  the  favourite  and   the  darling  of  the   men   of  the 


THE    RACE    OF  THE    WOMEN        55 

whole  world,  because  of  the  brightness  of  your  beauty.  As  far  as  your  husband  is  beyond  the  whole  world  in  bravery  and  in  comeliness,  so  far  are  you  before  the  women  of  Ulster."  Great  as  his  deceit  was  in  what  he  said  to  Fedelm,  it  was  twice  as  great  in  what  he  said  to  Lendabair. 

Then  Emer  came  out  and  fifty  women  after  her.  "  Health  be  with  you,  Emer,  daughter  of  Forgall  Manach,  wife  of  the  best  man  in  Ireland  !  Emer  of  the  Beautiful  Hair  is  no  nickname  for  you  ;  the  kings  and  princes  of  Ireland  are  quarrelling  with  one  another  about  you.  So  far  as  the  sun  outshines  the  stars  of  heaven,  so  far  do  you  outshine  the  women  of  the  whole  world  in  form,  and  shape,  and  birth,  in  youth,  and  beauty,  and  nicety,  in  good  name,  and  wisdom,  and  speech."  However  great  his  deceit  was  towards  the  other  women,  it  was  twice  as  much  towards  Emer. 

The  three  women  went  on  then  till  they  met  at  one  spot,  three  ridges  from  the  house,  but  none  of  them  knew  that  Bricriu  had  been  speaking  to  the  other.  They  set  out  then  to  go  back  to  the  house.  Their  walk  was  even  and  quiet  and  easy  on  the  first  ridge ;  hardly  did  one  of  them  put  her  foot  before  the  other.  But  on  the  next  ridge  their  steps  were  closer  and  quicker ;  and  when  they  came  to  the  ridge  next  the  house,  it  was  hardly  one  of  them  could  keep  up  with  the  other,  so  that  they  took  up  their  skirts  nearly  to  their  knees,  each  one  trying  to  get  first  into  the  hall,  because  of  what  Bricriu  had  said  to  them,  that  whoever  would  be  first  to  enter  the  house,  would  be  queen  of  the  whole  province.  And  such  was  the  noise  they  made  in  their  race,  that  it  was  like  the  noise  of  forty  chariots  coming.  The  whole  palace  shook,  and  all  the  men  started  up  for  their  arms,  striking  against  one  another. 

"  Stop,"  said  Sencha,  "  it  is  not  enemies  that  are  coming,  it  is  Bricriu   has  set   the   women   quarrelling 


56  BRICRIU'S   FEAST 

By  the  god  of  my  people  !  "  he  said,  "  unless  the  hall  is  shut  against  them,  those  that  are  dead  among  us  will  be  more  than  those  that  are  living."  With  that  the  doorkeepers  shut  the  doors.  But  Emer  was  quicker  than  the  other  women,  and  outran  them,  and  put  her  back  against  the  door,  and  called  to  the  doorkeepers  before  the  other  women  came  up,  so  that  the  men  rose  up,  each  of  them  to  open  the  door  before  his  own  wife,  so  that  she  might  be  the  first  to  come  within. 

"  It  is  a  bad  night  this  will  be,"  said  Conchubar ;  and  he  struck  the  silver  rod  he  had  in  his  hand  against  the  bronze  post  of  the  hall,  and  they  all  sat  down.  "  Quiet  yourselves,"  said  Sencha  ;  "  it  is  not  a  war  of  arms  we  are  going  to  have  here,  it  is  a  war  of  words."  Each  woman  then  put  herself  under  the  protection  of  her  husband  outside,  and  then  there  followed  the  war  of  words  of  the  women  of  Ulster. 

Fedelm  of  the  Fresh  Heart  was  the  first  to  speak,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  The  mother  who  bore  me  was  free,  noble,  equal  to  my  father  in  rank  and  in  race  ;  the  blood  that  is  in  me  is  royal ;  I  was  brought  up  like  one  of  royal  blood.  I  am  counted  beautiful  in  form  and  in  shape  and  in  appearance ;  I  was  brought  up  to  good  behaviour,  to  courage,  to  mannerly  ways.  Look  at  Lacgaire,  my  husband,  and  what  his  red  hand  does  for  Ulster.  It  was  by  himself  alone  its  boundaries  were  kept  from  the  enemies  that  were  as  strong  as  all  Ulster  put  together  ;  he  is  a  defence  and  a  protection  against  wounds ;  he  is  beyond  all  the  heroes ;  his  victories  are  greater  than  their  victories.  Why  should  not  I,  Fedelm,  the  beautiful,  the  lovely,  the  joyful,  be  the  first  to  step  into  the  drinking-hall  to-night?" 

Then  Lendabair  spoke,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"  I  myself  have  beauty  too,  and  good  sense  and  good 


THE   WAR   OF  WORDS  57 

carnage ;  it  is  I  should  walk  into  the  hall  with  free,  even  steps  before  all  the  women  of  Ulster. 

"  For  my  husband  is  pleasant  Conall  of  the  great  shield,  the  Victorious  ;  he  is  proud,  going  with  brave  steps  up  to  the  spears  of  the  fight ;  he  is  proud  coming  back  to  me  after  it,  with  the  heads  of  his  enemies  in  his  hands. 

"  He  brings  his  hard  sword  into  the  battle  for  Ulster  ;  he  defends  every  ford  or  he  destroys  it  to  keep  out  the  enemy ;  he  is  a  hero  will  have  a  stone  raised  over  him. 

"  The  son  of  noble  Amergin,  who  can  speak  against  his  courage  or  his  deeds?  It  is  Conall  who  leads  the  heroes. 

"  All  eyes  look  on  the  glory  of  Lendabair ;  why  would  she  not  go  first  into  the  hall  of  the  king?" 

Then  Emer  spoke,  and  it  is  what  she  said : 

"There  is  no  woman  comes  up  to  me  in  appearance,  in  shape,  in  wisdom  ;  there  is  no  one  comes  up  to  me  for  goodness  of  form,  or  brightness  of  eye,  or  good  sense,  or  kindness,  or  good  behaviour. 

"  No  one  has  the  joy  of  loving  or  the  strength  of  loving  that  I  have  ;  all  Ulster  desires  me ;  surely  I  am  a  nut  of  the  heart.  If  I  were  a  light  woman,  there  would  not  be  a  husband  left  to  any  of  you  to-morrow. 

"  And  my  husband  is  Cuchulain.  It  is  he  is  not  a  hound  that  is  weak  ;  there  is  blood  on  his  spear,  there  is  blood  on  his  sword,  his  white  body  is  black  with  blood,  his  soft  skin  is  furrowed  with  sword  cuts,  there  are  many  wounds  on  his  thigh. 

"  But  the  flame  of  his  eyes  is  turned  westward  ;  he  is  the  strong  protector  ;  his  chariot  is  red,  its  cushions  are  red ;  he  fights  from  over  the  ears  of  horses,  from  over  the  breath  of  men  ;  he  leaps  in  the  air  like  a  salmon  when  he  makes  his  hero  leap ;  he  does  strange  feats,  the  dark  feat,  the  blind  feat,  the  feat  of  nine ;  he  breaks 


58  BRICRIU'S   FEAST 

down  armies  in  the  hard  fight ;  he  saves  the  life  of  proud  armies ;  he  finds  joy  in  the  terror  of  the  ignorant. 

"  Your  fine  heroes  of  Ulster  are  not  worth  a  stalk  of  grass  compared  with  my  husband,  Cuchulain,  letting  on  to  have  a  woman's  sickness  on  them ;  he  is  like  the  clear  red  blood,  they  are  like  the  scum  and  the  leavings,  worth  no  more  than  a  stalk  of  grass. 

"Your  fine  women  of  Ulster,  they  are  shaped  like  cows  and  led  like  cows,  when  they  are  put  beside  the  wife  of  Cuchulain." 

"When  the  men  in  the  hall  heard  what  the  women  said,  Laegaire  and  Conall  made  a  rush  at  the  wall,  and  broke  a  plank  out  of  it  at  their  own  height,  to  let  their  own  wives  in.  But  Cuchulain  raised  up  that  part  of  the  house  that  was  opposite  to  his  place,  so  that  the  stars  and  the  sky  could  be  seen  through  the  wall.  By  that  opening  Emer  came  in  with  the  fifty  women  that  waited  on  her,  and  with  them  the  women  that  waited  on  the  other  two.  None  of  the  other  women  could  be  compared  at  all  with  Emer,  and  no  one  at  all  could  be  compared  with  her  husband.  And  then  Cuchulain  let  the  wall  he  had  lifted  fall  suddenly  again,  so  that  seven  feet  of  it  went  into  the  ground,  and  the  whole  house  shook,  and  Bricriu's  upper  room  was  laid  flat  in  such  a  way  that  Bricriu  himself  and  his  wife  were  thrown  into  the  dirt  among  the  dogs.  "  My  grief,"  cried  Bricriu,  "  enemies  are  come  in ! "  And  he  got  up  quickly  and  took  a  turn  round,  and  he  saw  that  the  hall  was  now  crooked  and  leaning  entirely  to  one  side.  He  clapped  his  hands  together  and  went  inside,  but  he  was  so  covered  with  dirt  that  none  of  the  Ulster  people  could  know  him,  it  was  only  by  his  way  of  speaking  they  made  out  who  he  was. 

Then  he  said,  from  the  middle  of  the  floor,  "  It  is  a   pity   I    ever   made  a  feast  for  you,  men  of  Ulster. 


THE    CROOKED   WALL  59 

My  house  is  more  to  me  than  everything  else  I  have.  I  put  geasa^  that  is,  bonds,  on  you,  not  to  drink  or  to  eat  or  to  sleep  till  you  leave  my  house  the  same  way  as  you  found  it."  At  that,  all  the  men  of  Ulster  went  out  and  tried  to  pull  the  house  straight,  but  they  did  not  raise  it  by  so  much  as  a  hand's  breadth. 

"  What  are  we  to  do  ?  "  they  said.  "  There  is  nothing  for  you  to  do,"  said  Sencha,  "but  to  ask  the  man  that  pulled  it  crooked  to  set  it  straight  again." 

Upon  that  they  bid  Cuchulain  to  put  the  wall  up  straight  again,  and  Bricriu  said,  "O  king  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland,  unless  you  can  set  it  up  straight,  there  is  no  man  in  the  world  can  do  it."  And  all  the  men  of  Ulster  begged  and  prayed  of  Cuchulain  to  settle  the  matter.  And  that  they  might  not  have  to  go  without  food  or  drink,  Cuchulain  rose  up  and  tried  to  lift  the  house  with  a  tug,  and  he  failed.  Anger  came  on  him  then,  and  the  hero  light  shone  about  him,  and  he  put  out  all  his  strength,  and  strained  himself  till  a  man's  foot  could  find  place  between  each  of  his  ribs,  and  he  lifted  the  house  up  till  it  was  as  straight  as  it  was  before.  After  that  they  enjoyed  the  feast,  with  the  chief  men  on  the  one  side  round  about  Conchubar,  High  King  of  Ulster,  and  their  wives  on  the  other  side — Fedelm  of  the  Nine  Shapes  (nine  shapes  she  could  take  on,  and  each  shape  more  beautiful  than  the  other),  and  Findchoem,  daughter  of  Cathbad,  wife  of  Amergin  of  the  Iron  Jaw,  and  Devorgill,  wife  of  Lugaid  of  the  Red  Stripes,  besides  Emer,  and  Fedelm  of  the  Fresh  Heart,  and  Lendabair ;  and  it  would  be  too  long  to  count  and  to  tell  of  all  the  other  noble  women  besides. 

There  was  soon  a  buzzing  of  words  in  the  hall  again,  with  the  women  praising  their  men,  as  if  to  stir  up  another  quarrel  between  them.     Then    Sencha,  son  of 


6o  BRICRIU'S    FEAST 

Ailell,  got  up  and  shook  his  bell  branch,  and  they  all  stopped  to  listen  to  him,  and  then  to  quiet  the  women  he  said  : 

"  Have  done  with  this  word-fighting,  lest  you  drive  the  men  of  Ulster  to  grow  white-faced  in  the  anger  and  the  pride  of  battle  with  one  another. 

"  It  is  through  the  fault  of  women  the  shields  of  men  are  broken,  heroes  go  out  to  fight  and  struggle  with  one  another  in  their  anger. 

"  It  is  the  folly  of  women  brings  men  to  do  these  things,  to  bruise  what  they  cannot  bind  up  again,  to  strike  down  what  they  cannot  raise  up  again.  Wives  of  heroes,  keep  yourself  from  this." 

But  Emer  answered  him,  and  it  is  what  she  said  : 

"It  is  right  for  me  to  speak,  Sencha,  and  I  the  wife  of  the  comely,  pleasant  hero,  who  is  beyond  all  others  in  beauty,  in  wisdom,  in  speaking,  since  the  learning  that  was  easy  to  him  is  done  with. 

'■  No  one  can  do  his  feats,  the  over-breath  feat,  the  apple  feat,  the  ghost  feat,  the  screw  feat,  the  cat  feat,  the  red-whirling  feat,  the  barbed-spear  feat,  the  quick  stroke,  the  fire  of  the  mouth,  the  hero's  cry,  the  wheel  feat,  the  sword-edge  feat ;  no  one  can  throw  himself  against  hard-spiked  places  the  way  he  does. 

"  There  is  no  one  is  his  equal  in  youth,  in  form,  in  brightness,  in  birth,  in  mind,  in  voice,  in  bravery,  in  boldness,  in  fire,  in  skill ;  no  one  is  his  equal  in  hunt-  ing, in  running,  in  strength,  in  victories,  in  greatness.  There  is  no  man  to  be  found  who  can  be  put  beside  Cuchulain." 

"  If  it  is  truth  you  are  speaking,  Emer,"  said  Conall  Cearnach,  "  let  this  lad  of  feats  stand  up,  that  we  may  see  them." 

"  I  will  not,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  tired  and  broken  to-day,  I  will  do  no  more  till  after  I  have  had  food  and  sleep."     It  was  true  what  he  said,  for  it  was  on 


THE   GREY   OF   MACHA  6i 

that  morning  he  had  met  with  the  Grey  of  Macha  by  the  side  of  the  grey  lake  at  Slieve  Fuad.  When  it  came  out  of  the  lake,  Cuchulain  slipped  his  hands  round  the  neck  of  the  horse,  and  the  two  of  them  struggled  and  wrestled  with  one  another,  and  in  that  way  they  went  all  round  Ireland,  till  late  in  the  day  he  brought  the  horse  home  to  Emain.  It  was  in  the  same  way  he  got  the  Black  Sainglain  from  the  black  lake  of  Sainglen. 

And  Cuchulain  said :  "  To-day  myself  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  have  gone  through  the  great  plains  of  Ireland,  Bregia  of  Meath,  the  seashore  marsh  of  Muirthemne  Macha,  through  Moy  Medba,  Currech  Cleitech  Cerna,  Lia  of  Linn  Locharn,  Per  Femen  Fergna,  Curros  Dom-  nand,  Ros  Roigne,  and  Eo.  And  now  I  would  sooner  eat  and  sleep  than  do  any  other  thing.  But  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,"  he  said,  "  I  would  be  ready  to  fight  with  any  man  of  you  if  I  had  but  my  fill  of  food  and  of  sleep."  "  Well,"  said  Bricriu,  "  this  has  gone  on  long  enough.  Let  food  and  drink  be  brought,  and  let  the  women's  war  be  put  a  stop  to  till  the  feast  is  done." 

They  did  so,  and  it  was  a  pleasant  time  they  had  till  the  end  of  three  days  and  three  nights. 


THE  CHAMPIONSHIP  OF  ULSTER 

A  FTER  they  were  gone  back  to  Emain  after  Bricriu's  feast,  a  quarrel  began  between  Conall  and  Lacgaire  and  Cuchulain  about  the  Champion's  Portion,  and  Conchubar  and  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  came  between  them  to  settle  it.  And  Conchubar  bade  them  to  go  to  Cruachan  in  Connaught,  to  have  the  matter  judged  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve.  "  And  if  that  fails  you,"  he  said,  "  what  you  have  to  do  is  to  go  to  Curoi,  son  of  Daire,  at  Slieve  Mis,  in  Munster.  And  it  is  a  true  judgment  he  will  give,  for  he  is  just  and  fair-  minded,  his  house  is  open  to  guests,  his  hand  is  good  in  battle,  in  leading  he  is  a  king.  He  will  give  you  a  right  judgment,  but  it  is  only  a  brave  man  will  ask  it  from  him,  for  he  is  wise  in  all  sorts  of  enchantments,  and  can  do  things  that  no  other  man  can  do." 

"  We  will  go  first  to  Cruachan,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  agree  to  that,"  said  Laegaire.  "  Let  us  go  then,"  said  Conall  Cearnach.  "  Let  horses  be  brought,  and  your  chariot  yoked,  Conall,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  and  go  on  the  first."  "  I  would  not  like  that,"  said  Conall.  "  That  is  no  wonder,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  every  one  knows  the  awkwardness  of  your  horses,  and  the  unsteadiness  of  your  chariot ;  it  is  so  heavy  that  each  of  the  wheels  raises  the  sod  on  each  side  wherever  it  goes,  the  way 

62 


CUCHULAIN   AND   THE   WOMEN   63 

that  for  the  length  of  a  year  it  is  easy  for  the  men  of  Ulster  to  know  the  track  it  has  left  after  it." 

"  Do  you  hear  that,  Laegaire  ?  "  said  Conall.  "  It  is  for  you  to  go  first."  "  Do  not  begin  to  mock  at  me,"  said  Laegaire,  "  for  I  am  good  at  crossing  fords,  and  I  am  ready  to  go  up  and  face  a  storm  of  spears  before  any  man.  But  do  not  put  me  beside  chariot  kings  till  I  practise  going  through  hard  and  narrow  places,  and  racing  against  single  chariots,  till  the  champion  of  a  single  chariot  will  be  afraid  to  pass  me." 

With  that  Laegaire  had  his  chariot  yoked,  and  leaped  into  it.  He  drove  over  Magh  da  Gabal,  the  Plain  of  the  Two  Forks,  over  Bernaid  na  Foraire,  the  Gap  of  the  Watch,  over  the  Ford  of  Carpat  Fergus,  over  the  Ford  of  the  Morrigu,  to  Caerthund  Cluana  da  Dam,  the  Rowan  Meadow  of  the  Two  Oxen,  in  the  Fews  of  Firbuide ;  by  the  four  ways,  past  Dundealgan,  across  Magh  Slicech,  the  Peeled  Plain,  westward  by  Bregia.  And  it  was  not  long  till  Conall  Cearnach  followed  after  him,  and  many  of  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  with  them. 

But  Cuchulain  stayed  behind  the  others,  amusing  the  women  of  Ulster  with  his  feats.  He  did  nine  feats  with  apples,  nine  with  spears,  and  nine  with  knives,  without  ever  letting  one  touch  the  other.  And  he  took  three  times  fifty  needles  from  the  women,  and  threw  them  up,  one  after  the  other,  so  that  each  needle  went  into  the  eye  of  the  other,  and  in  that  way  they  were  all  joined  together.  Then  he  gave  every  woman  her  needle  back  into  her  own  hand. 

But  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  went  to  look  for  him,  and  reproached  him,  and  said  :  "  You  pitiful  squinter,  your  couragehas  gone  from  you !  The  Champion's  Portion  is  lost  to  you,  the  men  of  Ulster  have  got  to  Cruachan  before  this."  "  I  never  thought  of  it,  my  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  but  yoke  the  chariot  for  me  now."  So  Laeg  yoked  it,  and  they  set  out  on  their  journey.     By 


64       CHAMPIONSHIP    OF    ULSTER 

that  time  the  men  of  Ulster  were  come  to  Magh  Breagh,  the  Fine  Meadow ;  but  Cuchulain,  after  he  was  roused  up  by  Laeg,  travelled  so  fast,  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  and  the  Black  Sainglain  went  racing  in  such  a  way  with  his  chariot  across  the  whole  province  of  Conchubar,  across  Slieve  Fuad  and  the  plain  of  Bregia,  that  he  came  up  with  the  others  before  they  came  to  Cruachan. 

The  noise  the  whole  troop  made  was  so  great,  going  at  such  speed  as  they  did,  that  a  great  shaking  came  on  Cruachan,  and  the  arms  fell  from  the  racks  to  the  ground,  and  the  whole  of  the  dun  began  to  shake,  so  that  every  man  was  trembling  like  a  rush  in  a  stream.  On  that  Maeve  said  :  "  Since  the  day  I  first  came  to  Cruachan  I  never  before  heard  thunder,  there  being  no  clouds  in  the  sky."  Then  Findabair  of  the  Fair  Eye-  brows, daughter  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  went  up,  for  she  had  a  bird's  sight,  to  her  sunny  parlour  over  the  great  door  of  the  fort,  to  tell  them  what  was  coming.  "  Dear  mother,"  she  said,  "  I  see  a  chariot  coming  over  the  plain."  "  Tell  me  what  is  its  appearance,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  the  colour  of  its  horses,  and  the  appearance  of  the  man  that  sits  in  it."  "  I  see  well,"  said  Findabair,  "  the  two  horses  that  are  in  the  chariot.  Two  fiery  dappled  greys,  of  the  one  colour,  shape,  and  goodness,  having  the  one  speed,  keeping  the  one  pace  ;  their  ears  pricked,  their  heads  high,  their  nostrils  broad,  foreheads  broad,  manes  and  tails  curled,  thin-sided,  wide-chested,  gallop-  ing together.  The  chariot  is  made  of  fine  wood  with  wicker-work  newly  polished,  the  yoke  curved,  with  silver  ornaments  on  it ;  it  has  two  black  wheels,  soft  looped  yellow  reins.  I  see  in  the  chariot  a  big  stout  man,  with  reddish  yellow  hair,  with  long  forked  beard.  He  has  a  soft  purple  coat  about  him,  and  it  striped  with  bright  gold.  His  bronze  shield  is  edged  with  gold  ;  there  is  a  five-pronged  javelin  at  his  wrist,  a  cover  of  strange  birds'  feathers  over  his  head." 


CONALLCEARNACH  65 

"  I  know  well  who  that  man  is,"  said  Maeve,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  A  companion  of  kings,  an  old  be-  stower  of  victories,  a  storm  of  war,  a  flame  of  judgment,  a  long  knife  of  victory  that  will  cut  us  to  pieces,  mighty  Laegaire  of  the  Red  Hand.  His  sword  cuts  through  men  as  a  knife  cuts  through  a  leek ;  his  stroke  is  the  back  stroke  of  the  wave  to  the  land.  And  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,"  she  said,  "  if  it  is  in  anger  and  for  fighting  Laegaire  Buadach  is  coming  at  us,  that  as  leeks  are  cut  close  to  the  ground  with  a  sharp  knife,  the  same  way  we  will  be  cut  down,  as  many  of  us  as  are  in  Cruachan,  unless  v/e  smooth  down  his  anger  by  giving  in  to  everything  he  asks." 

"  Good  mother,"  said  Findabair,  "  I  see  another  chariot  as  good  as  the  first  coming  over  the  plain."  "  Tell  me  what  is  its  appearance,"  said  Maeve. 

"  I  see,"  she  said,  "  yoked  to  the  chariot,  on  the  one  side  a  red  horse,  taking  strong,  high  strides  across  fords  and  splashes,  over  banks  and  gaps,  over  plains  and  hollows,  with  the  quickness  of  birds  that  the  quick  eye  loses  in  following.  On  the  other  side  a  bay  horse  of  great  strength  ;  it  is  at  full  speed  he  races  over  the  plain,  between  stones  and  hard  places ;  he  finds  no  hindrance  in  the  land  of  oaks,  hurrying  on  his  way.  A  chariot  of  fine  wood  with  wicker-work,  on  two  wheels  of  bright  bronze ;  its  pole  bright  with  silver,  its  frame  very  high  and  creaking,  having  a  curved,  firm  yoke,  with  looped  yellow  reins. 

"  In  the  chariot  a  fair  man,  with  wavy,  hanging  hair ;  his  face  white  and  red,  his  vest  clean  and  white,  his  cloak  blue  and  crimson,  his  shield  brown  with  yellow  bosses,  its  edge  worked  with  bronze.  In  his  hand  a  bright  spear ;  a  cover  of  the  feathers  of  strange  birds  over  the  wicker  frame  of  his  chariot." 

"  I  know  who  that  man  is,"  said  Maeve,  and  she  said  then :  "  The   growling  of  a  lion  ;  a  flame  that  can  cut 


66      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

like  a  sharpened  stone ;  he  heaps  head  on  head,  battle  on  battle.  As  a  trout  is  cut  upon  red  sandstone,  so  would  the  son  of  Finchoem  cut  us  if  he  came  on  us  in  anger. 

"  For,  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  she  said,  "  as  a  speckled  fish  is  beaten  upon  a  shining  red  stone  with  iron  rods,  so  would  we  be  broken  by  Conall  Cearnach,  if  he  came  against  us." 

"  I  see  another  chariot  coming  over  the  plain,"  said  Findabair.  "  Tell  me  what  its  appearance  is,"  said  Maeve.  "  I  see  two  horses  of  the  one  size  and  beauty,  the  one  fierceness  and  speed,  with  ears  pricked,  heads  high,  spirited  and  powerful,  with  fine  nostrils,  wide  fore-  heads, mane  and  tail  curled,  leaping  together.  The  one  grey,  handsome,  with  broad  thighs,  eager,  leaping,  thundering,  and  trampling.  As  he  goes,  his  fierce  hoofs  throw  up  sods  of  earth  like  a  flock  of  swift  birds  after  him.  As  he  gallops  on  his  way,  he  breathes  out  a  blast  of  hot  breath,  a  fire  comes  from  his  curbed  jaws.  The  other,  dark,  small-headed,  well-shaped,  broad-  hoofed,  thin-sided,  high-couraged,  broad-backed,  sure-  footed, spirited ;  he  takes  long  strides  in  the  race ;  he  leaps  over  streams,  he  throws  off  heaviness,  he  crosses  the  plains  of  the  middle  valley.  They  come  together  with  fast,  joyful  steps,  moving  over  the  plain  like  a  swift  mountain  mist,  or  like  the  speed  of  a  hill  hind,  or  like  a  hare  on  level  ground,  or  like  the  rushing  of  a  loud  wind  in  winter. 

''The  chariot  is  of  fine  wood  with  wicker-work,  having  two  iron  wheels,  a  bright  silver  pole  with  bronze  ornaments,  a  frame  very  high  and  creaking  strengthened  with  iron,  a  curved  yoke  overlaid  with  gold,  two  soft  looped  yellow  reins. 

"  I  see  in  the  chariot  a  dark,  sad  man,  comeliest  of  the  men  of  Ireland.  A  pleated  crimson  tunic  about  him,  fastened  at  the  breast  with  a  brooch  of  inlaid  gold  ;  a  long-sleeved  linen  cloak  on  him  with  a  white  hood 


CUCHULAIN   AND   LAEG  67 

embroidered  with  flame-red  gold.  His  eyebrows  as  black  as  the  blackness  of  a  spit,  seven  lights  in  his  eyes,  seven  colours  about  his  head,  love  and  fire  in  his  look.  Across  his  knees  there  lies  a  gold-hilted  sword,  there  is  a  blood-red  spear  ready  to  his  hand,  a  sharp- tempered  blade  with  a  shaft  of  wood.  Over  his  shoulders  a  crimson  shield  with  a  rim  of  silver,  overlaid  with  shapes  of  beasts  in  gold. 

"  There  is  before  him  in  the  chariot  a  driver,  a  very  thin,  tall,  freckled  man ;  very  bright  red  hair,  kept  back  from  his  face  with  a  golden  thread,  a  cup  of  gold  at  each  side  of  his  head.  A  short  cloak  about  him  with  sleeves  opening  at  the  two  elbows ;  in  his  hand  a  goad  of  red  gold  to  guide  his  horses." 

"  That  is  truly  a  drop  before  a  downpour,"  said  Maeve.  "  I  know  well  who  that  man  is."  And  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  Like  the  sound  of  an  angry  sea,  like  a  great  moving  wave,  with  the  madness  of  a  wild  beast  that  is  vexed,  he  leaps  through  his  enemies  in  the  crash  of  battle,  they  hear  their  death  in  his  shout.  He  heaps  deed  upon  deed,  head  upon  head  ;  his  is  a  name  to  be  put  in  songs.  As  fresh  malt  is  ground  in  the  mill,  so  shall  we  be  ground  by  Cuchulain. 

"  For  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  she  said,  "  that  as  a  mill  of  ten  spokes  grinds  very  hard  malt,  so  he,  with  only  himself,  would  grind  us  to  dust  and  to  gravel,  if  we  had  the  whole  province  with  us,  unless  his  anger  and  his  heat  go  down. 

"And  what  way  are  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ulster  coming  ?  "  she  said.  And  Findabair  answered  her,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  Hand  to  hand,  arm  to  arm,  side  to  side,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  wheel  to  wheel,  axle  to  axle,  that  is  the  way  they  are  coming.  Their  horses  are  coming  on  us  like  thunder  on  the  roof,  like  heavy  waves  stirred  by  the  storm  ;  the  trampling  of  their  feet  makes  the  earth  sh^ke  under  them," 


68       CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

And  Maeve  said,  "  Let  our  women  be  ready  before  them  with  vats  of  cold  water ;  let  the  beds  be  made  ready,  bring  the  best  of  food,  the  best  of  ale.  Open  the  courtyard,  have  a  welcome  before  them,  and  surely  they  will  not  harm  us." 

Then  Maeve  went  out  by  the  high  door  of  the  dun  into  the  courtyard,  and  three  times  fifty  young  girls  attending  her,  with  three  vats  of  cold  water  to  cool  the  heat  of  the  three  heroes  in  front  of  the  rest.  And  she  gave  them  their  choice,  would  each  man  have  a  house  for  himself,  or  would  they  have  one  house  for  the  three  ?  "  A  house  for  each  to  himself,"  said  Cuchulain.  And  when  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ulster  came,  Ailell  and  Maeve  with  their  whole  household  went  out  and  bade  them  welcome.  "We  are  well  pleased  with  the  wel-  come," said  Sencha  for  them. 

After  that,  they  all  came  into  the  fort  and  into  the  palace.  They  went  round  from  one  door  to  the  other,  and  there  was  room  for  them  all,  and  the  musicians  were  playing  music  while  everything  was  being  made  ready.  And  Conchubar,  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  were  in  Ailell's  division,  with  nine  others  along  with  them,  and  there  was  a  great  feast  made  ready  then,  and  they  stopped  there  the  length  of  three  days  and  three  nights. 

At  the  end  of  that  time  Ailell  asked  Conchubar  what  was  the  business  that  had  brought  them  there.  And  Sencha  told  him  the  whole  story,  about  the  quarrel  of  the  women  as  to  who  should  walk  first,  and  the  quarrel  of  their  husbands  for  the  Champion's  Portion.  "  And  they  were  not  satisfied  to  be  judged  by  any  one  but  yourself,"  he  said.  Ailell  did  not  seem  to  be  well  pleased  at  that.  "  Indeed,  it  was  no  friend  of  mine  that  left  this  judgment  on  me,"  he  said.  "There  is  no  better  judge  than  yourself,"  said  Sencha.  "Well,"  said  Ailell,  "you  must  give  me  time  to  think  upon  it."  "  Do  not  make  too  much   delay,"  said  Sencha,  "  for  we   cannot   spare 


THETHREECATS  69 

our  heroes  long  from  us."  "  Three  days  and  three  nights  will  be  enough  for  me,"  said  Ailell.  "  That  much  will  not  break  friendship,"  said  Sencha. 

With  that  the  men  of  Ulster  went  home  to  Emain,  leaving  Laegaire  and  Conall  and  Cuchulain  to  be  judged  by  Ailell,  and  they  left  their  blessing  with  Ailell  and  with  Maeve,  and  their  curse  with  Bricriu,  because  it  was  he  had  first  started  the  quarrel. 

That  night  the  three  heroes  were  given  as  good  a  feast  as  before,  but  they  were  put  to  eat  it  in  a  room  by  themselves.  When  night  came  on,  three  enchanted  monsters,  with  the  shape  of  cats,  were  let  out  from  the  cave  that  was  in  the  hill  of  the  Sidhe  at  Cruachan,  to  attack  them.  When  Conall  and  Laegaire  saw  them,  they  got  up  into  the  rafters,  leaving  their  food  after  them,  and  there  they  stayed  till  morning.  Cuchulain  did  not  leave  his  place,  but  when  one  of  the  monsters  came  to  attack  him,  he  gave  a  blow  of  his  sword  at  its  head  ;  but  the  sword  slipped  off  as  if  from  a  stone.  Then  the  monster  stayed  quiet,  and  Cuchulain  sat  there  through  the  night  watching  it.  With  the  break  of  day  the  cats  were  gone,  and  Ailell  came  in  and  saw  what  way  the  three  heroes  were.  "  Are  you  not  satisfied  to  give  the  Championship  to  Cuchulain,  after  this  ?  "  he  said.  "  We  are  not,"  said  Conall  and  Laegaire  ;  "  it  is  not  against  beasts  we  are  used  to  fight,  but  against  men." 

Then  Maeve  said  to  them,  "  Go  and  spend  the  night  with  my  foster-father,  Ercol,  and  his  wife  Garmna."  So  they  went,  but  first  they  were  given  their  choice  of  food  for  their  horses.  Conall  and  Laegaire  chose  oats  two  years  old  for  theirs,  but  Cuchulain  chose  barley  grain  for  his.  Then  they  set  out,  racing  all  the  way,  and  Cuchulain  winning  the  race. 

Ercol  and  Garmna  bade  them  welcome,  and  they  knew  it  was  to  try  them  they  had  been  sent  there,  so 


JO      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

they  sent  them  out  that  night,  one  after  the  other,  to  fight  with  the  witches  of  the  valley. 

Laegaire  went  first,  but  he  could  not  stand  against  them,  and  he  came  back,  and  left  his  arms  and  his  clothes  with  them. 

Then  Conall  went,  and  he  was  driven  back,  and  left  his  spear  with  them,  but  he  brought  his  sword  that  was  his  best  weapon  away  with  him. 

Then  Cuchulain  went  down  into  the  valley  and  the  witches  screamed  at  him  and  attacked  him,  and  he  and  they  fought  together  till  his  spear  was  in  splinters,  his  shield  broken  and  his  ^clothes  torn  off  him.  The  witches  were  beating  him  and  getting  the  better  of  him,  but  Laeg  saw  it,  and  he  called  out.  "  O  Cuchulain,"  he  said^  "  you  poor  coward,  you  squinting  clown  !  Your  courage  is  gone  from  you,  witches  to  be  beating  you  !  "  Then  great  anger  came  on  Cuchulain,  and  he  turned  on  the  witches  and  cut  and  gashed  them  till  the  valley  was  filled  with  their  blood,  and  he  brought  away  their  cloaks  of  battle  with  him,  and  went  back  to  the  house  where  his  comrades  were.  And  Garmna  and  her  daughter  Buan  made  much  of  him  and  bade  him  welcome. 

They  slept  there  that  night,  and  the  next  day  Ercol  challenged  them  to  come  one  by  one,  each  man  with  his  horse,  to  fight  against  himself  and  his  horse.  Laegaire  was  the  first  to  go  against  him,  and  his  horse  was  killed  by  Ercol's  horse,  and  he  himself  was  overcome  by  Ercol,  so  that  he  took  to  flight,  and  did  not  stop  till  he  got  back  to  Cruachan,  and  he  brought  the  story  there  that  both  his  companions  had  been  killed  by  Ercol.  Conall  was  the  next  to  run  away,  after  his  horse  being  killed  by  Ercol's  horse ;  and  his  servant  Rathand  was  drowned  in  the  river  as  he  ran,  and  it  takes  its  name  after  him,  Snam  Rathand,  from  that  day. 

But  the  Grey  of  Macha  killed  Ercol's  horse,  and  Cuchulain   put   down    Ercol   and   tied  him   behind  his 


MAEVE'S   TREACHERY  71 

chariot  and  set  out  for  Cruachan.  And  Buan,  Garmna's  daughter,  ran  out  after  the  chariot  for  love  of  Cuchulain  to  follow  him.  And  she  knew  the  track  of  his  chariot,  for  it  was  no  roundabout  track  it  used  to  take,  but  to  be  breaking  through  gaps  or  going  over  them  ;  and  in  following  it  at  last  she  gave  a  great  leap  and  fell,  and  her  forehead  struck  against  a  rock,  and  she  died  ;  and  it  is  from  this  the  place  was  given  the  name  of  Buan's  Grave. 

And  when  Conall  and  Cuchulain  got  back  to  Cruachan,  they  found  the  people  of  the  dun  keening  them,  for  by  the  report  Laegaire  brought,  they  were  sure  they  had  been  killed. 

Then  Ailell  went  to  his  inner  room,  and  leaned  his  back  against  the  wall,  for  he  was  not  quiet  in  his  mind,  and  he  knew  there  was  danger  in  whatever  judgment  he  might  give  ;  and  he  had  not  eaten  or  slept  for  three  days  and  three  nights.  Then  Maeve  said  to  him,  "  It  is  a  coward  you  are,  and  if  you  do  not  settle  this  matter  I  will  settle  it  myself"  "  It  is  hard  for  me  to  give  judg-  ment," said  Ailell,  "  it  is  a  misfortune  for  any  one  to  have  to  do  it."  "  It  is  easy  enough,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  Laegaire  and  Conall  Cearnach  are  as  different  as  bronze  and  silver,  and  Conall  Cearnach  and  Cuchulain  are  as  different  as  silver  and  red  gold." 

After  a  while,  when  Maeve  had  searched  her  mind,  Laegaire  Buadach  was  called  to  her.  "  Welcome,  Laegaire  Buadach,"  she  said, "  it  is  right  for  you  to  have  the  Cham-  pion's Portion.  We  give  you  the  headship  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland  from  this  out,  and  the  Champion's  Portion,  and  along  with  that  this  cup  of  bronze,  having  a  bird  in  raised  silver  on  the  bottom.  Take  it  with  you  as  a  token  of  the  judgment,  but  let  no  one  see  it  till  you  come  to  Conchubar  and  his  Red  Branch  at  the  end  of  the  day.  When  the  Champion's  Portion  is  set  out,  then  bring  out  your  cup  in  the  presence  of  all  the  great  men 


72       CHAMPIONSHIP    OF   ULSTER 

of  Ulster,  and  not  one  of  them  will  dispute  it  with  you  any  more,  for  they  will  know  by  this  token  that  the  Championship  has  been  given  to  you."  With  that,  the  cup  was  given  to  him  with  its  full  of  rich  wine,  and  he  drank  it  off  at  a  draught.  "  Now  you  have  the  Champion-  ship," said  Maeve  ;  "  and  I  wish  you  may  enjoy  it  a  hundred  years  at  the  head  of  all  Ulster." 

So  Laegaire  left  her,  and  Conall  Cearnach  was  called  up  to  the  queen.  "  Welcome,  Conall  Cearnach,"  she  said  ;  "  it  is  right  for  us  to  give  you  the  Champion's  Portion,  and  a  silver  cup  along  with  it,  having  a  bird  on  the  bottom  in  raised  gold."  And  she  said  the  same  to  him  as  she  had  said  to  Laegaire  before. 

Then  Conall  went  away,  and  a  messenger  was  sent  to  bring  Cuchulain.  "  Come  up  to  speak  with  the  king  and  queen,"  said  the  messenger. 

Cuchulain  was  playing  chess  at  the  time  with  Laeg,  his  chariot-driver.  "  I  am  not  a  fool  to  be  mocked  at,"  he  said,  and  he  hurled  one  of  the  chessmen  at  the  messenger,  and  hit  him  between  the  eyes,  so  that  it  is  hardly  he  could  get  back  to  Ailell  and  Maeve. 

"  By  my  word,"  said  Maeve,  "  this  Cuchulain  is  hard  to  deal  with."  And  then  she  came  down  herself  to  Cuchulain,  and  put  her  two  arms  round  his  neck.  "  Give  your  flattery  to  some  other  one,"  said  Cuchulain. 

But  Maeve  said,  "Great  son  of  Ulster,  flame  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland,  there  is  no  flattery  in  our  mind  when  it  is  you  we  have  to  do  with.  P'or  if  all  the  heroes  of  Ireland  should  come  here,  it  is  to  you  we  would  give  the  Champion's  Portion,  for  as  to  bravery  and  a  great  name,  and  as  to  youth  and  great  deeds,  it  is  well-known  that  you  are  far  beyond  all  the  men  of  Ireland." 

Cuchulain  rose  up  then,  and  went  with  Maeve  into  the  palace,  and  Ailell  gave  him  a  great  welcome.  And  he  was  given  a  gold  cup  full  of  wine,  and  it  having  on  the  bottom  of  it  a  bird  in  precious  stones.     "  Now,  you 


THETHREECUPS  73 

have  the  Championship,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  it  is  my  wish  you  may  enjoy  it  a  hundred  years  at  the  head  of  all  the  heroes  of  Ulster."  "And  besides  that,"  Ailell  and  Maeve  said,  "  it  is  our  judgment,  that  as  much  as  you  are  beyond  the  heroes  of  Ulster,  so  far  is  your  wife  beyond  their  wives.  And  we  think  it  right  that  she  should  walk  before  all  the  women  of  Ulster  when  they  go  together  into  the  drinking-hall." 

Then  Cuchulain  drank  at  one  draught  the  full  of  the  cup,  and  bade  farewell  to  the  king  and  the  queen  and  the  whole  household.  And  he  went  till  he  came  to  Emain  Macha  at  the  end  of  the  day.  And  there  was  no  one  among  the  men  of  Ulster  would  venture  to  ask  news  of  any  of  the  three  until  the  time  came  to  eat  and  to  drink  in  the  great  hall. 

When  the  feast  was  laid  out,  they  all  stopped  thqir  arguing  and  their  talking,  and  gave  themselves  up  to  eating  and  to  enjoyment.  It  was  Sualtim,  son  of  Roig,  father  of  Cuchulain,  was  attending  the  feast  that  night,  and  Conchubar's  great  vat  had  been  filled  for  it.  The  distributers  began  serving  out  the  meat,  but  at  first  they  kept  back  the  Champion's  Portion.  Then  Dubthach  of  the  Chafer  Tongue  said,  "  Why  is  not  the  Champion's  Portion  given  to  one  of  these  three  heroes  that  are  come  back  from  Cruachan  ?  They  must  surely  have  brought  some  token  with  them,  that  we  may  know  which  one  is  to  have  it." 

Upon  that,  Laegaire  Buadach  rose  up  and  held  out  the  bronze  cup  with  the  silver  bird  on  it.  "  The  Champion's  Portion  is  mine,"  he  said,  "and  no  one  can  dispute  it  with  me." 

"  That  is  not  so,"  said  Conall  Cearnach  ;  "  here  is  my  token.  Yours  is  a  bronze  cup  but  mine  is  a  silver  cup.  You  see  by  the  difference  in  them  it  is  to  me  the  Champion's  Portion  belongs." 

"  It  belongs  to  neither  of  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  and 


74      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

he  rose  up  and  he  said,  "  It  was  only  to  deceive  you  and  to  keep  up  the  quarrel  between  us,  the  king  and  queen  we  went  to  gave  you  those.  It  is  to  me  the  Champion's  Portion  belongs,  for  you  see  my  token,  that  it  is  far  above  the  others." 

With  that  he  lifted  high  up  the  cup  of  red  gold,  with  the  bird  on  it  of  precious  stones,  and  all  the  men  in  the  feasting-hall  saw  it.  "  It  is  I  myself  that  will  get  the  Championship,"  he  said,  "  if  I  get  fair  play."  "  It  is  yours  indeed,"  said  Conchubar,  and  Fergus,  and  all  the  chief  men.  "  It  is  yours  by  the  judgment  of  Ailell  and  Maeve."  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said  Laegaire,  "  that  the  cup  you  have  with  you  was  not  given  to  you,  but  bought.  You  gave  riches  and  treasures  for  it  to  Ailell  and  Maeve,  the  way  the  Championship  would  not  go  to  any  other  person  ;  but  by  my  hand  of  valour,"  he  said,  "that  judgment  shall  not  stand." 

Then,  with  their  swords  drawn,  they  sprang  at  one  another,  but  Conchubar  went  between  them,  and  then  they  let  down  their  hands  and  sheathed  their  swords.  "It  is  best,"  said  Sencha,  "for  you  to  go  to  Curoi  for  judgment."     "  We  agree  to  that,"  said  they. 

So  on  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  the  three — Cuchu-  lain,  Conall,  and  Laegaire — set  out  for  Curoi's  dun.  At  the  gate  of  the  dun  they  unyoked  their  chariots,  and  they  went  into  the  courtyard,  and  Blanad,  daughter  of  Mind,  Curoi's  wife,  gave  them  a  good  welcome.  Curoi  was  not  at  home  that  night,  but  knowing,  by  his  en-  chantments, they  would  come,  he  had  left  instructions  with  his  wife  how  to  entertain  them  ;  and  she  did  ac-  cording to  his  wish,  giving  them  water  for  washing,  and  drinks  for  refreshing,  and  beds  of  the  best,  so  that  they  were  well  satisfied. 

When  bedtime  came,  Blanad  told  them  they  were  each  to  take  a  night  to  watch  the  fort,  till  Curoi  would 


THE   GREAT   SHADOW  75 

come  back.  "  And  it  is  what  he  said,  that  you  should  take  your  turn  according  to  age." 

Now  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  Curoi  was,  he  made  a  spell  every  night  over  the  dun,  so  that  it  went  round  like  a  mill,  and  no  entrance  could  be  found  in  it  after  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

The  first  night  Laegaire  Buadach  took  the  watch,  for  he  was  the  oldest  of  the  three.  As  he  was  keeping  watch,  towards  the  end  of  the  night  he  saw  a  great  shadow  coming  towards  him  from  the  sea  westward.  Very  huge  and  ugly  and  terrible  he  thought  it,  and  it  took  the  shape  of  a  giant  and  reached  up  to  the  sky,  and  the  shining  of  the  sea  could  be  seen  between  its  legs.  It  is  how  it  came,  its  hands  full  of  what  had  the  appearance  of  stripped  oaks,  and  each  of  them  enough  for  a  load  for  six  horses  ;  and  he  hurled  one  of  them  at  Laegaire,  but  it  went  past  him.  He  did  this  two  or  three  times,  but  the  beam  did  not  reach  either  the  skin  or  the  shield  of  Laegaire.  Then  Laegaire  hurled  a  spear  at  him,  and  it  did  not  hit  him. 

He  stretched  out  his  hand  then  to  Laegaire,  and  the  length  of  it  reached  across  the  three  ridges  that  were  between  them  while  they  were  throwing  at  one  another,  and  he  gripped  hold  of  him.  Big  and  strong  as  Laegaire  was,  he  fitted  like  a  child  of  a  year  old  into  his  hand.  The  giant  turned  him  round  between  his  two  palms  as  a  chessman  is  turned  in  a  groove,  and  then  he  threw  him  half  dead  over  the  wall  of  the  fort,  into  a  heap  of  mud.  There  was  no  opening  there,  and  the  people  inside  the  dun  thought  he  had  leaped  over  from  outside,  as  a  challenge  to  the  others  to  do  the  same. 

There  they  stayed  until  the  end  of  the  day,  and  at  the  fall  of  night  Conall  went  out  to  take  the  watch,  as  he  was  older  than  Cuchulain.  Everything  happened  as  it  did  to  Laegaire  the  first  night.  And  when  the  third  night  came,  Cuchulain  went  into  the  seat  of  the  watch. 


76      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

When  midnight  was  come  he  heard  a  noise,  and  by  the  light  of  the  cold  moon  he  saw  nine  grey  shapes  coming  towards  him  over  the  marsh.  "  Stop,"  said  Cuchulain,  "who  is  there?  If  they  are  friends,  let  them  not  stir;  if  they  are  enemies,  let  them  come  on."  Then  they  raised  a  great  shout  at  him,  and  Cuchulain  rushed  at  them  and  attacked  them,  so  that  the  nine  fell  dead  to  the  ground,  and  he  cut  their  heads  off  and  made  a  heap  of  them,  and  sat  down  again  to  keep  the  watch.  An-  other nine  and  then  another  shouted  at  him,  but  he  made  an  end  of  the  three  nines,  and  made  one  heap  of  their  heads  and  their  arms. 

While  he  was  watching  on  through  the  night,  tired  and  down-hearted,  he  heard  a  sound  rising  from  the  lake,  like  the  sound  of  a  very  heavy  sea.  However  tired  he  was,  his  mind  would  not  let  him  keep  quiet,  without  going  to  see  what  was  the  cause  of  that  great  noise  he  heard.  Then  he  saw  a  great  worm  coming  up  from  the  lake,  and  it  raised  itself  into  the  air  over  him  and  made  for  the  dun,  and  opened  its  mouth,  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  one  of  the  houses  would  fit  into  its  gullet. 

Then  Cuchulain  with  one  leap  reached  its  head  and  put  his  arm  round  its  neck,  and  stretched  his  hand  across  its  gullet,  and  tore  the  monster's  heart  out  and  threw  it  to  the  ground.  Then  the  beast  fell  down,  and  Cuchulain  hacked  it  with  his  sword,  and  made  little  bits  of  it,  and  brought  the  head  along  with  him  to  the  heap  of  skulls. 

He  was  sitting  there,  towards  the  break  of  day,  worn  out  and  discouraged,  and  he  saw  the  great  shadow  shaped  like  a  giant  coming  to  him  westward  from  the  sea.  "  This  is  a  bad  night,"  he  said.  "It  will  be  worse  for  you  yet,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  he  threw  one  of  the  beams  at  Cuchulain,  but  it  passed  by  him,  and  he  did  that  two  or  three  times,  but  it  did  not  reach  either  his  shield  or  his  skin.  Then  he  stretched  out  his  hand  to  grip   Cuchulain   as   he   did   the   others,  but   Cuchulain 


CUCHULAIN'S   LEAP  yj 

leaped  his  salmon  leap  at  the  head  of  the  monster,  with  his  drawn  sword,  and  broug^ht  him  down.  ''  Life  for  life,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  and  with  that  he  vanished  and  was  no  more  seen. 

Then  Cuchulain  wondered  to  himself  how  his  fellows  had  made  their  leap  over  the  fort,  for  the  wall  was  big  and  broad  and  high,  and  twice  he  tried  it  and  failed.  Then  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  went  a  good  way  back  and  made  a  run,  and  with  the  dint  of  the  anger  that  was  on  him,  and  the  courage  of  his  heart  and  of  his  mind,  he  hardly  took  the  dew  off  the  tips  of  the  grass  in  the  run,  and  he  made  one  leap  over  the  wall,  and  lit  in  the  middle,  at  the  door  of  the  house.  Then  he  went  in  through  the  door  and  gave  a  sigh.  And  Blanad,  wife  of  Curoi,  said,  "  That  is  not  the  sigh  of  a  beaten  man,  but  a  conqueror's  sigh  of  triumph."  For  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  the  Isle  of  the  Men  of  Falga  knew  well  all  Cuchulain  had  gone  through  that  night. 

"  The  Champion's  Portion  must  go  now  to  Cuchulain,"  she  said  to  the  others ;  "  for  you  see  by  this  that  you  are  not  equal  to  him."  "  We  do  not  agree  to  that,"  said  they ;  "  for  we  know  it  was  one  of  his  friends  among  the  Sidhe  came  to  put  us  down  and  to  put  us  out  of  the  Championship.  We  will  not  give  up  for  that,"  they  said. 

Then  she  gave  them  a  message  she  had  from  Curoi,  that  the  three  champions  were  to  go  back  to  Emain,  until  he  would  bring  his  judgment  there  himself  So  they  bade  her  farewell,  and  went  back  to  the  Red  Branch. 

It  was  a  good  while  after  this,  as  the  men  of  Ulster  were  in  Emain*  tired  after  the  gathering  and  the  games,  Conchubar  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  with  the  chief  men,  went  from  the  field  of  sports  outside,  and  sat  down  in  the  house  of  the  Red  Branch  ;  but  Cuchulain  was  not 


7S      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

there  that  night,  or  Conall  Cearnach,  but  all  the  rest  of  the  chief  heroes  were  in  it. 

As  they  were  sitting  there  towards  evening,  and  the  day  wearing  to  its  close,  they  saw  a  big  awkward  fellow,  very  ugly,  coming  to  them  into  the  hall.  It  seemed  to  them  as  if  none  of  the  men  of  Ulster  could  reach  to  half  his  height.  He  was  frightful  to  look  at ;  next  his  skin  he  had  an  old  cow's  hide,  and  a  grey  cloak  around  him,  and  over  him  he  had  a  great  spreading  branch  the  size  of  a  winter  shed  under  which  thirty  cattle  could  find  shelter.  Ravenous  yellow  eyes  he  had,  and  in  his  right  hand  an  axe  weighing  fifty  cauldrons  of  melted  metal,  its  sharpness  such  that  it  would  cut  through  hairs,  if  the  wind  would  blow  them  against  its  edge. 

He  went  over  and  leaned  against  the  branched  beam  that  was  beside  the  fire. 

"  Who  are  you  at  all  ?  "  said  Dubthach  of  the  Chafer  Tongue.  "  Is  there  no  other  place  for  you  in  the  hall  that  you  come  up  here  ?  Is  it  to  be  candlestick  to  the  house  you  want,  or  is  it  to  set  the  house  on  fire  you  want  ?  " 

"  Uath,  the  Stranger,  is  my  name,"  said  he  ;  "  and  neither  of  those  things  is  the  thing  I  want.  The  thing  I  want  is  the  thing  I  cannot  find,  and  I  after  going  through  the  world  of  Ireland  and  the  whole  world  look-  ing for  it,  and  that  is  a  man  that  will  keep  his  word  and  will  hold  to  his  agreement  with  me." 

"  What  agreement  is  that  ?  "  said  Fergus.  "  Here  is  this  axe,"  he  said,  "  and  the  man  into  whose  hands  it  is  put  is  to  cut  off  my  head  to-day,  I  to  cut  his  head  off  to-morrow.  And  as  you  men  of  Ulster  have  a  name  beyond  the  men  of  all  other  countries  for  strength  and  skill,  for  courage,  for  greatness,  for  highmindedness,  for  behaviour,  for  truth  and  generosity,  for  worthiness,  let  you  find  one  among  you  that  will  hold  to  bis  word 


UATH,   THE   STRANGER  79 

and  keep  to  his  bargain.  Conchubar  I  put  aside  because  of  his  kingship,  and  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  for  the  same  reason.  But  outside  these  two,  come,  which-  ever of  you  will  venture,  he  to  cut  off  my  head  to-night,  I  to  cut  off  his  head  to-morrow  night." 

"  It  is  not  right  for  dishonour  to  be  put  on  a  whole  province,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  the  want  of  one  man  that  will  keep  his  word."  "  Sure  there  is  no  champion  here  after  these  two  are  left  out,"  said  Dubthach.  "  By  my  word,  there  will  be  one  this  moment,"  said  Laegaire,  and  he  leaped  out  on  the  floor  of  the  hall.  "  Stoop  down,  clown,  that  I  may  cut  off  your  head  to-night,  you  to  cut  off  mine  to-morrow  night."  "  By  the  oath  of  my  people,"  said  Dubthach,  "  it  is  no  good  prospect  you  have  if  the  man  killed  to-night  comes  to  kill  you  to-morrow." 

Then  Uath  put  spells  on  the  edge  of  the  axe  and  laid  his  neck  down  on  a  block,  and  Laegaire  struck  a  blow  across  it  with  the  axe,  till  it  went  into  the  block  underneath,  and  the  head  fell  on  the  floor  and  the  house  was  filled  with  the  blood.  But  presently  Uath  rose  up  and  gathered  his  head  and  his  axe  to  his  breast  and  went  out  from  the  hall,  his  neck  streaming  with  blood,  so  that  there  was  terror  on  all  the  people  in  the  house. 

"  I  swear,"  said  Dubthach,  "  if  this  stranger,  being  killed,  comes  back  to-morrow  night,  he  will  not  leave  a  man  alive  in  Ulster." 

Back  he  came  the  next  night  to  have  his  agreement  kept.  But  Laegaire's  heart  failed  him,  and  he  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  But  Conall  Cearnach  was  in  the  hall,  and  he  said  he  would  make  a  new  agreement  with  him.  So  all  happened  the  same  as  the  night  before,  but  when  Uath  came  the  next  day,  it  was  the  same  with  Conall  as  with  Laegaire,  his  heart  failed  hinrj  when  it  came  to  the  keeping  of  his  bargain. 


8o      CHAMPIONSHIP   OF   ULSTER 

Cuchulain  was  there  that  night  when  Uath  came  in  and  began  to  reproach  and  to  mock  at  them  all.  "  As  for  you,  men  of  Ulster,"  he  said,  "  all  your  courage  and  your  daring  is  gone  from  you  ;  you  covet  a  great  name,  but  you  are  not  able  to  earn  it.  Where  is  that  poor  squinting  fellow  that  is  called  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  till  I  see  if  his  word  is  any  better  than  the  word  of  the  others  ? "  "I  will  keep  my  word  without  any  agree-  ment," said  Cuchulain.  "  That  is  likely,  you  miserable  fly,  it  is  in  great  fear  of  death  you  are." 

On  that,  Cuchulain  made  a  leap  towards  him  and  gave  him  a  blow  with  the  axe,  and  hurled  his  head  to  the  top  rafter  of  the  hall,  so  that  the  whole  house  shook. 

On  the  morrow  the  men  of  Ulster  were  watching  Cuchulain  to  see  if  he  would  break  his  word  to  the  stranger,  as  the  others  had  done.  As  Cuchulain  sat  there  waiting  for  him,  they  saw  that  he  was  very  down  -  hearted,  and  they  made  sure  his  life  was  at  its  end,  and  that  they  might  as  well  begin  keening  him.  And  then  Cuchulain  said  to  Conchubar,  and  there  was  hanging  of  the  head  on  him,  "  Do  not  go  from  this  till  my  agreement  is  fulfilled,  for  death  is  coming  to  me,  but  I  would  sooner  meet  with  death  than  break  my  word," 

They  were  there  till  the  close  of  day,  and  then  they  saw  Uath  coming.  "  Where  is  Cuchulain  ? "  he  said.  "  Here  I  am,"  he  answered.  "It  is  dull  your  speech  is  to-night,"  saicl  the  stranger ;  "  it  is  in  great  fear  of  death  you  are.  But  however  great  your  fear,  you  have  not  failed  me." 

Then  Cuchulain  went  to  him  and  laid  his  head  on  the  block.  "  Stretch  out  your  head  better,"  said  he.  "  You  are  keeping  me  in  torment,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  put  an  end  to  me  quickly.  For  last  night,"  he  said,  "  by   my   oath,  I   made  no  delay  with  you."     Then  he 


CUROrS   DECISION  8i 

stretched  out  his  neck,  and  Uath  raised  his  axe  till  it  reached  the  rafters  of  the  hall,  and  the  creaking  of  the  old  hide  that  was  about  him,  and  the  crashing  of  the  axe  through  the  rafters,  was  like  the  loud  noise  of  a  wood  in  a  stormy  night.  But  when  the  axe  came  down,  it  was  with  its  blunt  side,  and  it  was  the  floor  it  struck,  so  that  Cuchulain  was  not  touched  at  all.  And  all  the  chief  men  of  Ulster  were  standing  around  looking  on,  and  they  saw  on  the  moment  that  it  was  no  strange  clown  was  in  it,  but  Curoi,  son  of  Daire,  that  had  come  to  try  the  heroes  through  his  enchantments. 

"  Rise  up,  Cuchulain,"  he  said.  "  Of  all  the  heroes  of  Ulster,  whatever  may  be  their  daring,  there  is  not  one  to  compare  with  you  in  courage  and  in  bravery  and  in  truth.  The  Championship  of  the  heroes  of  Ireland  is  yours  from  this  out,  and  the  Champion's  Portion  with  it,  and  to  your  wife  the  first  place  among  all  the  women  of  Ulster.  And  whoever  tries  to  put  himself  before  you  after  this,"  he  said,  "  I  swear  by  the  oath  my  people  swear  by,  his  own  life  will  be  in  danger." 

With  that  he  left  them.  And  this  was  the  end  of  the  Women's  War  of  Words,  and  of  the  quarrel  among  the  heroes  for  the  Championship  of  Ulster. 


VI 

THE   HIGH   KING   OF   IRELAND 

'T^HERE  was  a  king  over   Ireland  before  this   time  ^       whose  name  was  Eochaid  Feidlech,  and  it  is  he  was  grandfather  to  Conaire  the  Great. 

He  was  going  one  time  over  the  fair  green  of  Bri  Leith,  and  he  saw  at  the  side  of  a  well  a  woman,  with  a  bright  comb  of  silver  and  gold,  and  she  washing  in  a  silver  basin,  having  four  golden  birds  on  it,  and  little  bright  purple  stones  set  in  the  rim  of  the  basin.  A  beautiful  purple  cloak  she  had,  and  silver  fringes  to  it,  and  a  gold  brooch  ;  and  she  had  on  her  a  dress  of  green  silk  with  a  long  hood  embroidered  in  red  gold,  and  wonderful  clasps  of  gold  and  silver