[BHD-cuchulain  —  part 3 of 5, continuation of part 2]
============================================================

household ;  and  along  with  that  my  father  gave  me  one  of  the  provinces  of  Ireland,  the  province  of  Cruachan  ;  so  that  Maeve  of  Cruachan  is  the  name  that  was  given  to  me. 

176 


176     WARFORBULLOFCUAILGNE 

"  And  as  to  being  asked  in  marriage,"  she  said,  "  messengers  came  to  me  from  your  own  brother,  Finn,  son  of  Ross  Ruadh,  king  of  Leinster,  and  I  gave  him  a  refusal ;  and  after  that  there  came  messengers  from  Cairbre  Niafer,  son  of  Rossa,  king  of  Teamhair ;  and  from  Conchubar,  son  of  Ness,  king  of  Ulster  ;  and  after  that  again  from  Eochu  Beag,  son  of  Luchta,  and  I  refused  them  all.  For  it  is  not  a  common  marriage  portion  would  have  satisfied  me,  the  same  as  is  asked  by  the  other  women  of  Ireland,"  she  said  ;  "  but  it  is  what  I  asked  as  a  marriage  portion,  a  man  without  stinginess,  without  jealousy,  without  fear.  For  it  would  not  be  fitting  for  me  to  be  with  a  man  that  would  be  close-handed,  for  my  own  hand  is  open  in  wage-paying  and  in  free-giving  ;  and  it  would  be  a  reproach  on  my  husband,  I  to  be  a  better  wage-payer  than  himself  And  it  would  not  be  fitting  for  me  to  be  with  a  man  that  would  be  cowardly,  for  I  myself  go  into  struggles  and  fights  and  battles  and  gain  the  victory ;  and  it  would  be  a  reproach  to  my  husband,  his  wife  to  be  braver  than  himself  And  it  would  not  be  fitting  for  me  to  be  with  a  husband  that  would  be  jealous,  for  I  would  never  hold  myself  to  be  bound  to  one  man  only.  Now  I  have  got  such  a  husband  as  I  looked  for  in  yourself,  Ailell,  son  of  Ross  Ruadh,  king  of  Leinster,  for  you  are  not  close-handed  or  jealous  or  cowardly.  And  I  gave  you  good  wedding  gifts,"  she  said,  "  suits  of  clothing  enough  for  twelve  men  ;  a  chariot  that  was  worth  three  times  seven  serving-maids  ;  the  width  of  your  face  in  red  gold,  the  round  of  your  arm  in  a  bracelet  of  white  bronze.  And  the  fine  or  the  tribute  you  can  ask  of  your  enemies  is  no  more  than  the  fine  or  the  tribute  I  have  a  right  to  ask,  for  you  are  nothing  of  yourself,  but  it  is  in  the  pay  of  a  woman  you  are,"  she  said.  "  That  is  not  so,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  I  am  a  king's  son,  and  I  have  two  brothers  that  are  kings,  Finn,  king  of  Leinster,  and  Cairbre,  king  of  Teamhair,  and  I 


QUARREL  OF  MAEVE  AND  AILELL    177 

would  have  been  king  in  their  places  but  that  they  are  older  than  myself.  And  as  to  giving  of  wages  and  dividing  of  gifts,"  he  said,  "  you  are  no  better  than  my-  self;  and  if  this  province  is  under  the  rule  of  a  woman,  it  is  the  only  province  in  Ireland  that  is  so :  and  it  is  not  through  your  right  I  took  the  kingship  of  it,  but  through  the  right  of  my  mother,  Mata  of  Murrisk,  daughter  of  Magach.  And  if  I  took  the  daughter  of  the  chief  king  of  Ireland  for  my  wife,  it  was  because  I  thought  she  was  a  fitting  wife  for  me."  "  You  know  well,"  said  Maeve,  "  the  riches  that  belong  to  me  are  greater  than  the  riches  that  belong  to  you."  "  There  is  no  truth  in  that,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  there  is  no  one  in  Ireland  has  a  better  store  of  jewels  and  riches  and  treasure  than  myself,  and  you  know  well  there  is  not." 

"  Let  our  goods  and  our  riches  be  put  beside  one  another,  and  let  a  value  be  put  on  them,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  you  will  know  which  of  us  owns  most."  "  I  am  content  to  do  that,"  said  Ailell. 

With  that,  orders  were  given  to  their  people  to  bring  out  their  goods  and  to  count  them,  and  to  put  a  value  on  them.  They  did  so,  and  the  first  things  they  brought  out  were  their  drinking  vessels,  their  vats,  their  iron  vessels,  and  all  the  things  belonging  to  their  households,  and  they  were  found  to  be  equal.  Then  their  rings  were  brought  out,  and  their  bracelets  and  chains  and  brooches,  their  clothing  of  crimson  and  blue  and  black  and  green  and  yellow  and  saffron  and  speckled  silks,  and  these  were  found  to  be  equal.  Then  their  great  flocks  of  sheep  were  driven  from  the  green  plains  of  the  open  country  and  were  counted,  and  they  were  found  to  be  equal ;  and  if  there  was  a  ram  among  Maeve's  flocks  that  was  the  equal  of  a  serving-maid  in  value,  Ailell  had  one  that  was  as  good.  And  their  horses  were  brought  in  from  the  meadows,  and  their  herds  of  swine  out  of  the  woods   and  the   valleys,   and    they   were  equal    one  to 

M 


178    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

another.  And  the  last  thing  that  was  done  was  to  bring  in  the  herds  of  cattle  from  the  forest  and  the  wild  places  of  the  province,  and  when  they  were  put  beside  one  another  they  were  found  to  be  equal,  but  for  one  thing  only.  It  happened  a  bull  had  been  calved  in  Maeve's  herd,  and  his  name  was  Fionnbanach,  the  White-horned.  But  he  would  not  stop  in  jMaeve's  herds,  for  he  did  not  think  it  fitting  to  be  under  the  rule  of  a  woman,  and  he  had  gone  into  Ailell's  herds  and  stopped  there  ;  and  now  he  was  the  best  bull  in  the  whole  province  of  Connaught.  And  when  Maeve  saw  him,  and  knew  he  was  better  than  any  bull  of  her  own,  there  was  great  vexation  on  her,  and  it  was  as  bad  to  her  as  if  she  did  not  own  one  head  of  cattle  at  all.  So  she  called  Mac  Roth,  the  herald,  to  her,  and  bade  him  to  find  out  where  there  was  a  bull  as  good  as  the  White-horned  to  be  got  in  any  province  of  the  provinces  of  Ireland. 

"  You  know  that  well  yourself,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  for  there  is  a  bull  that  is  twice  as  good  as  himself  at  the  house  of  Daire,  son  of  Fachtna,  in  the  district  of  Cuailgne,  and  that  is  Donn  Cuailgne,  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne."  "  Rise  up,  then,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  make  no  delay,  but  go  to  Daire  from  me,  and  ask  the  loan  of  that  bull  for  a  year,  and  I  will  return  him  at  the  end  of  the  year,  and  fifty  heifers  along  with  him,  as  fee  for  the  loan.  And  there  is  another  thing  for  you  to  say,  Mac  Roth  ;  if  the  people  of  Daire's  district  and  country  think  bad  of  him  for  sending  away  that  wonderful  jewel  the  Donn  of  Cuailgne,  let  Daire  himself  come  along  with  him,  and  I  will  give  him  the  equal  of  his  own  lands  on  the  smooth  plain  of  Ai,  and  a  chariot  that  is  worth  three  times  seven  serving-maids,  and  my  own  close  friendship  along  with  that." 

So  Mac  Roth  set  out  on  his  journey,  and  nine  men  along  with  him,  and  when  they  came  to  Daire's  house  there  was  a  good  welcome  before  them,  as  there 


DA  IRE'S    FEAST  179 

should    be,  for  Mac    Roth   was  the  chief  herald  of  all  Ireland. 

Daire  asked  him  then  what  was  the  reason  of  his  journey,  and  Mac  Roth  told  him  the  whole  story  of  the  quarrel  between  Maeve  and  Ailell  and  of  the  counting  of  their  herds,  and  of  the  great  rewards  Maeve  offered  him  if  he  would  give  her  the  loan  for  one  year  of  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne.  Daire  was  so  well  pleased  when  he  heard  this,  that  he  started  up  and  said  :  "  By  my  hand  of  valour,  I  will  send  him  to  Maeve  into  Connaught,  with  no  delay,  whether  the  men  of  Ulster  like  it  or  do  not  like  it."  Mac  Roth  was  well  content  with  what  he  said,  and  then  he  and  his  men  were  attended  to,  and  fresh  rushes  were  spread,  and  a  feast  was  put  before  them,  with  every  sort  of  food  and  of  drink,  so  that  after  a  while  they  were  not  so  clear  in  their  wits  as  they  were  before. 

Two  of  them  began  talking  to  one  another  then,  and  one  said  :  "  This  is  a  good  man  in  whose  house  we  are."  "  He  is  good  indeed,"  said  the  other.  "  Is  there  any  man  in  Ulster  better  than  himself?  "  said  the  first.  "  There  is,  surely,"  said  the  other,  "for  Conchubarthe  High  King  is  a  better  man,  and  it  is  no  shame  for  all  the  men  of  Ulster  to  gather  to  him."  "  It  is  a  wonder,"  said  the  first,  "  Daire  to  have  given  up  to  us  what  it  would  have  taken  the  strength  of  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  to  bring  away  by  force."  "  That  I  may  see  the  mouth  that  spoke  those  words  filled  with  blood,"  said  another  of  the  men  ;  "  for  if  Daire  had  refused  to  give  it  willingly,  the  strength  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve,  and  the  knowledge  of  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  would  have  brought  it  from  him  against  his  will." 

Just  as  they  were  talking,  the  chief  steward  of  Daire's  house  came  in,  and  servants  along  with  him  bringing  meat  and  drink ;  and  he  heard  what  the  men  of  Connaught  said  and  great  anger  came  on  him,  and  he 


i8o    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

bade  the  servants  put  down  the  food  for  them,  but  he  never  told  them  to  use  it  or  not  to  use  it,  but  he  went  to  where  Daire  was  and  said  :  "  Was  it  you,  Daire,  promised  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne  to  these  messengers  ?  "  "  It  was  myself  indeed,"  said  Daire.  "  Then  what  they  have  said  is  true?"  "What  is  that?"  said  Daire.  "They  say  that  you  knew  if  you  did  not  give  him  willingly  you  would  have  had  to  give  him  against  your  will  by  the  strength  of  Ailell  and  Maeve  and  by  the  guidance  of  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh."  "If  they  say  that,"  said  Daire,  "  I  swear  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,  that  they  will  not  take  him  away  till  they  take  him  by  force." 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow  the  messengers  rose  up  and  went  into  the  house  where  Daire  was.  "  Show  us  now,"  they  said,  "  the  place  where  the  bull  is."  "  I  will  not  indeed,"  said  Daire ;  "  but  if  it  was  a  habit  with  me,"  he  said,  "  to  do  treachery  to  messengers  or  to  travellers  or  to  men  on  their  road,  not  one  of  you  would  go  back  alive  to  Cruachan."  "  What  reason  have  you  for  this  change  ?  "  said  Mac  Roth.  "  I  have  a  good  reason  for  it,  for  you  were  saying  last  night  that  if  I  did  not  give  the  bull  willingly,  I  would  be  forced  to  give  it  against  my  will  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve  and  by  Fergus."  "  If  that  was  said,  it  was  the  talk  of  common  messengers,  and  they  after  eating  and  drinking,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  and  it  is  not  fitting  for  you  to  take  notice  of  a  thing  like  that." 

"  It  may  be  so  "  said  Daire  ;  "  but  for  all  that,"  he  said  "  I  will  not  give  the  bull  this  time." 

They  went  back  then  to  Cruachan,  and  Maeve  asked  news  of  them,  and  Mac  Roth  told  her  the  whole  story,  how  Daire  gave  them  the  promise  of  the  bull  at  first,  and  refused  it  afterwards.  "  What  was  the  reason  of  that  ?  "  she  asked.  And  when  it  was  told  her  she  said  :  "  This  riddle  is  not  hard  to  guess ;  they  did   not  intend  to  let 


THE   CAMP   AT    CRUACHAN        i8i 

us  get  the  bull  at  all ;  but  now  we  will  take  him  from  them  by  force,"  she  said. 

And  this  was  the  cause  of  the  great  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 

Then  Maeve  sent  messengers  to  the  six  Maines,  her  sons,  to  come  to  Cruachan,  the  brothers  of  Maine  Morgor  that  got  his  death  at  Dun  Gerg.  And  she  sent  mes-  sengers to  the  sons  of  Magach ;  and  they  came,  with  thirty  hundred  armed  men,  and  to  Cormac  Conloingeas,  son  of  King  Conchubar,  and  to  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh  ;  and  they  came,  and  thirty  hundred  armed  men  with  them. 

This  is  the  appearance  that  was  on  the  first  troop.  Black  heads  of  hair  they  had,  and  green  cloaks  about  them,  held  with  silver  brooches,  and  on  their  bodies  shirts  of  gold  thread,  embroidered  with  red  gold,  and  they  had  swords  with  white  sheaths  and  hilts  of  silver. 

As  to  the  second  troop,  they  had  short-cut  hair,  and  grey  cloaks  about  them,  and  on  their  bodies  pure  white  shirts  ;  and  they  had  swords  with  knobbed  hilts  of  gold,  and  sheaths  of  silver.  Every  one  asked :  "  Is  that  Cormac  among  them  ? "  "  It  is  not  indeed,"  said  Maeve. 

As  to  the  last  troop,  they  had  gold-yellow  hair,  falling  loose  like  manes,  and  crimson  cloaks,  well  ornamented,  about  them,  and  gold  brooches  with  jewels  at  their  breasts,  and  long  silk  shirts  coming  down  to  their  ankles.  And  as  they  walked  they  lifted  up  their  feet  and  put  them  down  again  all  together.  "Is  that  Cormac  among  them  ? "  every  one  asked.  "  It  is,  surely,"  said  Maeve. 

So  they  made  their  camp  there,  and  between  the  four  fords  of  Ai,  Athmaga,  Athslisen,  Athberena,  and  Ath-  coltna,  there  were  red  fires  blazing  through  the  night. 


i82    WAR   FOR    BULL   OFCUAILGNE 

And  they  stopped  a  fortnight  there  at  Cruachan,  eating  drinking,  and  resting  themselves,  that  they  might  be  the  better  able  for  the  journey  and  the  marching. 

Then  Maeve  bade  her  chariot-driver  to  yoke  her  horses,  that  she  might  go  and  consult  with  her  Druid  and  ask  a  prophecy  from  him,  to  foretell  for  her  if  the  army  she  was  bringing  out  would  get  the  victory,  and  would  come  back  safely.  And  she  said  to  the  Druid  :  "  There  are  many  that  will  part  here  to-day  from  their  companions  and  their  friends,  from  their  country  and  their  lands,  from  their  father  and  their  mother.  And  if  it  happens  that  the  whole  of  them  do  not  come  back  again  safe  and  sound,  it  is  on  me  the  complaints  and  the  curses  will  fall.  And  besides  that,"  she  said,  "  there  is  no  one  that  goes  out  or  that  stops  behind,  that  is  dearer  to  us  than  we  are  to  ourselves.  So  find  out  for  us  now  whether  we  shall  return,  or  not  return."  And  the  Druid  said  :  "  Whoever  returns  or  does  not  return,  you  yourself  will  return." 

Her  chariot  was  turned  then,  and  she  went  back  again  homeward.  But  presently  she  saw  a  thing  she  wondered  at,  a  woman  sitting  on  the  shaft  of  the  chariot,  facing  her,  and  this  is  how  she  was :  a  sword  of  white  bronze  in  her  hand,  with  seven  rings  of  red  gold  on  it  and  she  seemed  to  be  weaving  a  web  with  it ;  a  speckled  green  cloak  about  her,  fastened  at  the  breast  with  a  brooch  of  red  gold  ;  a  ruddy,  pleasant  face  she  had,  her  eyes  grey,  and  her  mouth  like  red  berries,  and  when  she  spoke  her  voice  was  sweeter  than  the  strings  of  a  curved  harp,  and  her  skin  showed  through  her  clothes  like  the  snow  of  a  single  night.  Long  feet  she  had,  very  white,  and  the  nails  on  them  pink  and  even  ;  her  hair  gold-  yellow,  three  locks  of  it  wound  about  her  head,  and  another  that  fell  down  loose  below  her  knee. 

Maeve  looked  at  her,  and  she  said :  "  What  are  you  doing  here,  young  girl  ?"     "  It  is  looking  into  the  future 


FEDELM'S    FORETELLING         183 

for  you  I  am,"  she  said,  "  to  see  what  will  be  your  chances  and  your  fortunes,  now  you  are  gathering  the  provinces  of  Ireland  to  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne."  "  And  why  would  you  be  doing  this  for  me  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  There  is  good  reason  for  it,"  she  said,  "  for  I  am  a  serving-maid  of  your  own  people."  "  Which  of  my  people  do  you  belong  to  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  I  am  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  of  Rath  Cruachan."  "  It  is  well,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe ;  tell  me  what  way  you  see  our  hosts."  "  I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red."  "  Yet  Conchubar  is  lying  in  his  weakness  at  Emain ;  my  messengers  are  come  back  from  there,  and  we  need  not  be  in  dread  of  anything  from  Ulster,"  said  Maeve.  "  But  look  again,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  and  tell  me  the  truth  of  the  matter."  "  I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red,"  said  the  girl.  "  Yet  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthacht,  is  in  his  weakness  at  Rathairthir ;  my  messengers  are  come  back  from  him  ;  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  anything  from  Ulster.  Look  again,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe ;  how  do  you  see  our  hosts ? "  "I  see  them  all  crimson,  I  see  them  all  red."  "  Celtchair,  son  of  Uthecar,  is  lying  in  his  weakness  within  his  fort ;  my  messengers  are  come  back  from  him.  Tell  me  again,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  how  do  you  see  our  hosts  ? "  "I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red."  "  There  may  be  no  harm  in  what  you  see,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  when  all  the  men  of  Ireland  are  gathered  together  in  one  place,  there  will  surely  be  quarrels  and  fights  among  them,  about  going  first  or  last  over  fords  and  rivers,  or  about  the  first  wounding  of  some  stag  or  boar,  or  such  like.  Tell  me  truly  now,  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  what  way  do  you  see  our  hosts ? "  "I  see  crimson  on  them,  I  see  red.  And  I  see,"  she  said,  "  a  low-sized  man  doing  many  deeds  of  arms ;  there  are  many  wounds  on  his  smooth  skin  ;  there  is  a  light  about  his  head,  there  is  victory  on  his  forehead ;  he  is  young  and  beautiful,  and  modest  towards  women  ;  but  he  is  like  a  dragon  in  the 


i84    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

battle.  His  appearance  and  his  courage  are  like  the  appearance  and  the  courage  of  Cuchulain  of  Muirthemne  ;  and  who  that  Hound  from  Muirthemne  may  be  I  do  not  know ;  but  I  know  this  much  well,  that  all  this  host  will  be  reddened  by  him.  He  is  setting  out  for  the  battle ;  he  will  make  your  dead  lie  thickly,  the  memory  of  the  blood  shed  by  him  will  be  lasting ;  women  will  be  keening  over  the  bodies  brought  low  by  the  Hound  of  the  Forge  that  I  see  before  me." 

This  is  the  foretelling  that  was  made  for  Maeve  by  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe,  before  the  setting  out  of  the  hosts  at  Cruachan  for  Ulster. 

Now,  when  Maeve  told  Fedelm  of  the  Sidhe  that  there  need  be  no  fear  of  the  men  of  Ulster  coming  out  to  attack  the  army,  for  they  were  lying  in  their  weak-  ness, she  meant  that  they  were  under  the  curse  and  the  enchantment  that  was  put  on  them  one  time  by  a  woman  they  had  ill-treated.  And  the  story  of  it  is  this  :— 

There  was  a  man  of  the  name  of  Crunden,  son  of  Agnoman,  that  lived  in  a  lonely  part  of  Ulster,  among  the  mountains,  and  he  had  a  good  way  of  living  ;  but  his  wife  had  died,  and  he  had  the  care  of  all  his  children  on  him.  One  day  he  was  sitting  in  the  house,  and  he  saw  a  woman  come  in  at  the  door,  tall  and  handsome,  and  with  good  clothes  on  her,  and  she  did  not  say  a  word,  but  she  sat  down  by  the  hearth  and  began  to  make  up  the  fire.  And  then  she  went  to  where  the  meal  was,  and  took  it  out  and  mixed  it,  and  baked  a  cake.  And  when  the  evening  was  drawing  on,  she  took  a  vessel  and  went  out  and  milked  the  cows,  but  all  the  time  she  never  spoke  a  word.  Then  she  came  back  into  the  house,  and  took  a  turn  to  the  right,  and  was  the  last  to  stop  up  and  to  cover  over  the  fire. 

She  stayed  on  there,   and  Crunden,  the  man  of  the 


CRUNDEN'S    WIFE  185 

house,  married  her,  and  she  tended  him  and  his  sons,  and  everything  he  had  prospered. 

It  happened,  one  day,  there  was  to  be  a  great  gather-  ing of  the  men  of  Ulster,  for  games  and  races  and  all  sorts  of  amusements,  and  all  that  could  go,  both  of  men  and  women,  used  to  go  to  that  gathering.  "  I  will  go  there  to-day,"  said  Crunden,  "  the  same  as  every  other  man  is  going."  "  Do  not,"  said  his  wife,  "  for  if  you  so  much  as  say  my  name  there  at  the  fair,"  she  said, "  I  will  be  lost  to  you  for  ever."  "  Then  indeed  I  will  not  speak  of  you  at  all,"  said  Crunden.  So  he  set  out  with  the  others  to  the  fair,  and  there  was  every  sort  of  amuse-  ment there,  and  all  the  people  of  the  country  were  at  it. 

At  the  ninth  hour,  the  royal  chariot  was  brought  on  the  ground,  and  the  king's  horses  won  the  day.  Then  the  bards  and  poets,  and  the  Druids,  and  the  servants  of  the  king,  and  the  whole  gathering,  began  to  praise  the  king  and  the  queen  and  their  horses,  and  they  cried  out :  "  There  were  never  seen  such  horses  as  these  ;  there  are  no  better  runners  in  all  Ireland."  "  My  wife  is  a  better  runner  than  those  two  horses,"  said  Crunden.  When  the  king  was  told  of  that  he  said  :  "  Take  hold  of  the  man,  and  keep  him  until  his  wife  can  be  brought  to  try  her  chance  and  to  run  against  the  horses." 

So  they  took  hold  of  him,  and  kept  him,  and  messengers  were  sent  from  the  king  to  the  woman.  She  bade  the  messengers  welcome,  and  asked  what  brought  them.  "We  are  come  by  the  king's  order,"  they  said,  "to  bring  you  to  the  fair,  to  see  if  you  will  run  faster  than  the  king's  horses  ;  for  your  husband  boasted  that  you  would,  and  he  is  kept  prisoner  now  until  you  will  come  and  release  him."  "  It  is  foolish  my  husband  was  to  speak  like  that,"  she  said  ;  "  and  as  for  myself,  I  am  not  fit  to  go,  for  I  am  soon  going  to  give  birth  to  a  child."     "  That  is  a  pity,"  said  the  messengers,  "  for  if  you 


i86    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

do  not  come,  your  husband  will  be  put  to  death."  "  If  that  is  so,  I  must  go,  whatever  happens,"  she  said. 

So  with  that  she  set  out  for  the  gathering,  and  when  she  got  there  all  the  people  were  crowding  about  her  to  see  her.  "  It  is  not  fitting  to  be  looking  at  me,  and  I  the  way  I  am,"  she  said  ;  "  and  what  have  I  been  brought  here  for  ?  "  "  To  run  against  the  two  horses  of  the  king,"  the  people  called  out.  "  Ochone ! "  she  said, "  do  not  ask  me,  for  I  am  close  upon  my  hour."  "  Take  out  your  swords  and  put  the  man  to  death,"  said  the  king.  "  Give  me  your  help,"  she  said  to  the  people,  "  for  every  one  of  you  has  been  born  of  a  mother."  And  then  she  said  to  the  king :  "  Give  me  even  a  delay  until  my  child  is  born."  "  I  will  give  no  delay,"  said  the  king.  "  Then  the  shame  that  is  on  you  will  be  greater  than  the  shame  that  is  on  me,"  she  said.  "  And  because  you  have  showed  no  pity  and  no  respect  to  me,"  she  said,  "  it  is  a  heavier  punish-  ment will  fall  on  you  than  has  fallen  upon  me.  And  bring  out  the  horses  beside  me  now."  Then  they  started,  and  the  woman  outran  the  horses  and  gained  the  race  ;  and  at  the  goal  the  pains  of  childbirth  came  on  her,  and  she  bore  two  children,  a  boy  and  a  girl,  and  she  gave  a  great  cry  in  her  pain. 

And  a  weakness  came  suddenly  on  all  that  heard  the  cry,  so  that  they  had  no  more  strength  than  the  woman  as  she  lay  there.  And  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  From  this  out,  and  till  the  ninth  generation,  the  shame  that  you  have  put  on  me  will  fall  on  you  ;  and  at  whatever  time  you  most  want  your  strength,  at  the  time  your  enemies  are  closing  on  you,  that  is  the  time  the  weakness  of  a  woman  in  childbirth  will  come  upon  all  the  men  of  the  province  of  Ulster." 

And  so  it  happened;  and  of  all  the  men  of  Ulster  that  were  born  after  that  day,  there  was  no  one  escaped  that  curse  and  that  enchantment  but  only  Cuchulain. 


THE    GAILIANA  187 

When  the  men  of  Connaught  set  out  from  Cruachan  for  the  north  they  stopped  towards  evening  at  Cuilsilinne,  and  there  they  made  their  encampment  for  the  night  Ailell  took  his  place  in  the  middle  of  the  camp,  and  on  his  right  was  Fergus,  son  of  Rogh,  and  Cormac  Con-  loingeas  next  to  him  again,  and  their  people  on  the  same  side  ;  and  on  Ailell's  left  there  was  a  place  made  for  Maeve  and  Findabair  her  daughter.  But  Maeve  stopped  behind  until  the  whole  of  the  army  had  come  up,  and  then  she  went  in  her  chariot  to  see  if  all  was  in  order,  and  after  that  she  came  and  took  her  seat  at  Ailell's  right  hand.  "  Which  of  the  troops  do  you  think  the  best  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  None  of  them  are  any  good  at  all,"  said  Maeve,  "  compared  with  the  men  of  Leinster,  the  Gailiana."  "  What  have  they  done  beyond  all  the  others  that  you  praise  them  so  much  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  There  is  reason  for  praising  them,"  said  Maeve ;  "  for  while  the  others  were  choosing  a  place  for  themselves,  the  Gailiana  had  their  huts  and  their  shelters  made,  and  while  the  others  were  making  their  shelters,  they  had  their  share  of  food  and  drink  cooked  and  set  out,  and  while  the  others  were  making  ready  their  food  they  had  theirs  eaten,  and  while  the  others  were  eating,  they  were  laid  down  and  sleeping.  And  as  their  servants  have  been  better  than  the  servants  of  the  men  of  Ireland,"  she  said,  "so  will  their  young  men  and  their  fighting  men  be  better  than  the  young  men  of  Ireland  on  this  march."  "  I  am  well  pleased  to  hear  that,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  it  was  with  me  they  came,  and  they  are  of  my  own  province."  "Then  you  need  not  be  so  well  pleased,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  they  shall  march  no  further  with  you,  for  I  will  not  have  them  boasted  of,  before  me  or  to  me."  "  Let  them  stop  in  this  camp,  then,"  said  Ailell.  "  They  shall  not  do  that  either,"  said  Maeve.  "  What  must  they  do,  then  ?  "  said  Findabair,  "  if  they  are  neither  to  go  on  nor  to  stop  in  the  camp  ?  "     "  They  will  get  death  and 


i88    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

destruction  from  myself,"  said  Maeve.  "  It  is  a  pity  you  to  say  that,"  said  Ailell,  "and  they  only  just  after  joining  us."  "If  you  think  to  harm  them,"  said  Fergus,  "you  will  have  to  fight  with  me  as  well  as  with  them  ;  for  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  he  said,  "  it  is  only  over  my  body  and  the  bodies  of  the  men  of  Ulster  that  are  with  me,  you  can  come  at  their  death."  "  Do  not  speak  that  way,  Fergus,"  said  Maeve  ;  "  for  if  you  were  to  join  with  these  strangers  against  me,  I  would  have  the  six  Maines  and  their  men  on  my  side,  and  the  sons  of  Magach  and  their  men,  and  my  own  troops  along  with  them.  And  I  think  we  would  be  well  able  for  you,"  she  said.  "  It  is  not  right  for  you  to  say  that,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  there  are  no  men  in  Ireland  better  than  the  young  men  of  Ulster  that  came  to  Connaught  with  me,  and  they  have  been  a  good  help  to  you  up  to  this.  But  I  will  tell  you  another  thing  to  do,"  he  said  :  "  let  the  men  of  Leinster  be  divided  through  all  the  other  troops  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  the  way  there  will  not  be  more  than  five  of  them  together  in  any  one  place."  "  I  will  agree  to  that,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  I  know  there  would  be  nothing  but  fighting  and  jealousy  if  they  were  left  together  the  way  they  are  now." 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow,  they  made  ready  to  set  out  again,  but  the  chief  men  among  them  consulted  together  first,  what  way  they  could  best  keep  the  peace  between  so  many  troops  and  tribes  and  families  ;  and  it  is  what  they  settled,  to  put  every  troop  under  its  own  leader,  and  to  let  it,  great  or  small,  take  a  road  of  its  own.  And  besides  that,  they  consulted  who  would  be  the  best  man  to  put  over  the  whole  army,  to  lead  them  and  to  show  them  the  way.  And  they  all  said  Fergus  would  be  the  best,  for  he  had  been  king  of  Ulster  seventeen  years,  until  Conchubar  put  him  out  of  the  kingship,  and  he  had  stopped  on  in  Ulster  after  that  until  the  time  Conchubar  killed  the  sons  of  Usnach  in  spite  of  the  guarantee  he  had  given  them. 


SUALTIM    AND   CUCHULAIN       189 

So  Fergus  was  made  leader  of  the  whole  army ;  but  as  they  went  on,  a  great  love  for  his  own  province  and  his  home  came  on  him,  and  instead  of  going  on  north-  wards he  turned  to  the  south.  And  while  he  was  delay-  ing the  army  like  that,  he  sent  messsengers  into  Ulster  to  give  warning  and  news  of  their  coming.  But  Maeve  was  keeping  a  watch  on  him,  and  when  she  saw  what  had  happened,  she  went  to  him  and  said  :  "  Why  is  it,  Fergus,  that  we  have  turned  again  to  the  south  ?  "  Then  Fergus  knew  it  was  no  use  to  try  and  deceive  her,  and  they  turned  again,  but  they  did  not  go  far,  but  only  to  the  place  they  had  left  in  the  morning,  Cuilsilinne. 

Then  Fergus  called  to  mind  that  they  were  coming  near  the  borders  of  Ulster,  and  that  it  was  likely  it  would  not  be  long  before  they  would  meet  with  Cuchulain  ;  and  he  gave  a  warning  to  the  army  and  bade  them  mind  themselves  well,  lest  the  Hound  of  Muirthemne  should  fall  on  them  and  destroy  them. 

And  then  the  men  of  Connaught  set  out  again  east-  ward, and  when  they  came  to  Monecolthan,  they  saw  before  them  eight-score  deer,  in  the  one  herd,  and  the  whole  army  surrounded  them,  and  all  the  deer  were  killed  ;  but  if  they  were,  it  was  the  Gailiana,  scattered  as  they  were,  that  killed  all  the  deer  but  five,  and  those  five  were  all  that  were  killed  by  the  rest  of  the  men  of  Ireland. 

It  was  on  that  same  day  Cuchulain  and  his  father,  Sualtim,  came  to  the  pillar-stone  at  Ardcullin,  for  they  had  got  the  warning  Fergus  had  sent,  and  there  they  let  their  horses  graze,  and  Sualtim's  horses  cropped  the  grass  to  the  north  of  the  pillar-stone  to  the  earth,  but  Cuchulain's  horses,  at  the  south  side,  cropped  it  to  the  bare  flags. 

"  It  is  in  my  mind,  Sualtim,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  that  the  army  of  Connaught  is  not  far  away  from  us  now.  Go  now,  then,"  he  said,  "and  bring  a  warning  to  the 


I90    WAR    FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

men  of  Ulster,  and  tell  them  not  to  stop  in  the  open  plains,  but  to  go  into  the  woods  and  the  valleys  of  the  province,  that  the  men  of  Ireland  may  not  come  upon  them."  "  And  you  yourself,  little  son,  what  will  you  do?"  said  Sualtim.  "I  must  go,"  said  Cuchulain,  "southward  to  Teamhair,  for  I  promised  to  go  there  to-day,  to  see  a  young  girl  of  the  household  of  Fedelm  of  the  Fair  Shape,  Laegaire's  wife."  "  It  is  a  pity  for  you  to  go  for  a  thing  like  that,"  said  Sualtim,  "  and  you  leaving  Ulster  under  the  feet  of  enemies  and  strangers."  "  I  must  go,  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  if  I  break  my  word  to  a  woman,  it  will  be  said  from  this  out  that  a  woman's  word  is  better  than  a  man's." 

So  Sualtim  set  out  then,  to  give  a  warning  to  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  Cuchulain  went  into  the  oak  woods  and  cut  down  an  oak  sapling,  and  twisted  it  into  a  ring,  and  cut  a  message  on  it  in  Ogham.  And  then  he  forced  the  ring  over  the  top  of  the  pillar-stone,  and  down  to  the  thick  part  of  it.  And  then  he  went  on  to  keep  his  appointment  at  Teamhair. 

As  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  they  went  on  till  they  came  to  ArdcuUin,  and  the  whole  country  of  Ulster  lay  there  before  them.  And  then  they  saw  the  pillar-stone  and  the  oak  ring  that  was  on  it ;  and  Ailell  took  it  off,  and  gave  it  to  Fergus,  and  bade  him  read  the  Ogham.  And  what  he  read  on  it  was  Cuchulain's  name,  and  the  warn-  ing on  it  that  the  men  of  Ulster  should  not  pass  the  pillar-stone  that  night,  for  if  they  did,  he  would  do  a  great  revenge  on  them  at  the  sunrise  of  the  morrow. 

"  It  would  be  a  pity,"  said  Maeve,  "  that  the  first  blood  to  be  shed  after  going  into  the  province  should  be  the  blood  of  our  own  people :  it  would  be  best  for  us  to  draw  blood  first  on  the  people  of  Ulster."  "  I  agree  to  that,"  said  Ailell,  "  for  I  am  loth  to  go  against  this  ring  or  the  man  that  twisted  it  ;  but  let  us  go  into  the  wood  and  make  our  camp  there  for  the  night."     So  they  went 


THE    BORDER    PASSED  191 

into  the  wood,  and  cut  a  way  for  the  chariots  with  their  swords  as  they  went,  and  it  is  from  that  the  place  is  called  Sleact  na  Gearbat,  the  Cut  Way  of  the  Chariots,  until  this  time.  And  a  great  snow  fell  that  night,  so  that  it  made  one  plain  of  the  five  provinces  of  Ireland,  and  they  could  make  no  shelter  or  prepare  food,  and  none  of  the  men  in  the  camp  knew  through  the  whole  night  was  it  friend  or  enemy  was  near  him,  until  the  clear  light  of  the  sun  fell  on  the  snow  in  the  morning.  And  then  they  left  that  place,  and  went  on  into  Ulster. 

As  to  Cuchulain,  he  did  not  rise  very  early  that  morn-  ing, and  when  he  did,  there  was  food  made  ready  for  him,  and  a  bath  of  pure  water.  Then  he  bade  Laeg  to  make  his  chariot  ready,  and  they  set  out ;  and  after  a  while  they  came  to  the  track  of  the  army  of  Ireland  where  it  had  gone  over  the  border  into  Ulster.  "  Well,  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  I  have  not  much  luck  out  of  my  appointment  that  I  kept  last  night ;  for  it  is  expected  of  one  that  is  watching  the  borders  that  the  least  he  should  do  is  to  raise  a  cry  or  give  a  warning  of  the  enemy  that  is  coming,  and  I  have  missed  doing  this,  so  that  the  men  of  Ireland  have  slipped  by  without  news  or  notice  into  Ulster."  "  I  told  you,  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg,  "that  if  you  kept  to  your  meeting  last  night,  some  vexation  like  this  would  fall  on  you."  "Well,  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  let  you  follow  their  track  now,  and  count  them,  and  see  what  number  of  the  men  of  Ireland  are  come  over  the  border."  Laeg  did  this,  and  he  came  back  and  told  their  number,  as  he  had  counted  them.  "There  is  a  mistake  in  your  counting,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  will  count  them  myself  this  time."  Then  he  told  their  number.  "  It  is  with  yourself  the  mistake  is,  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg.  "  It  is  not,"  he  said,  "  but  there  are  eighteen  divisions  have  passed  the  border,  but  the  eighteenth  is  broken  up  and  distributed  among  the  others,   so  that  no  sure  reckoning  can  be  made  of  it." 


192    WAR   FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

This,  now,  was  one  of  the  three  best  estimates  ever  made  in  Ireland,  and  the  other  two  were  made  by  Lugh  of  the  Long  Hand,  and  by  Angus  at  Brugh  na  Boinne. 

"  But  now,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  turn  the  chariot  towards  the  army,  and  hurry  on  the  horses ;  for  unless  I  can  make  an  end  of  some  of  them  to-day,"  he  said,  "  I  will  not  live  through  the  night  myself." 

So  they  went  on  to  the  place  that  is  called  now  Athgowla,  northward  from  Knowth. 

There  they  met  with  the  two  young  men,  the  sons  of  Neara,  that  were  sent  out  in  front  of  Maeve's  army,  to  see  was  there  any  hindrance  before  it,  and  Cuchulain  struck  off  their  heads  and  the  heads  of  their  chariot-  drivers. 

And  he  cut  down  a  tree  with  his  sword,  and  it  having  four  branches,  and  he  lopped  them  short,  and  cleared  the  tree  ;  and  he  stood  up  in  his  chariot,  and  with  one  cast  he  drove  the  tree  into  the  ground  that  it  stood  deep  and  firm,  and  he  set  the  four  heads  he  had  struck  off  on  the  four  lopped  branches  of  it.  And  then  he  turned  back  their  horses  in  their  chariots  towards  the  army. 

Now  it  is  the  way  Maeve  used  to  be  going,  she  in  a  chariot  by  herself,  and  two  chariots  on  each  side  of  her,  and  behind  her  and  before  her,  the  way  no  sod  from  the  feet  of  the  horses  of  the  army,  or  foam  from  their  mouths,  would  touch  her  clothing.  And  when  she  saw  the  two  chariots  coming  back,  and  the  bodies  in  them  without  heads,  she  stopped  to  see  what  had  happened.  "  What  are  these  ?  "  she  said.  "  They  are  the  chariots  and  the  bodies  of  the  two  sons  of  Neara  that  went  on  before  us,"  said  her  chariot-driver. 

Then  she  held  a  council  with  her  chief  men,  and  it  is  what  they  agreed,  that  it  must  be  some  part  of  the  army  of  Ulster  was  there  before  them  at  the  ford  they  were  drawing  near,  and  that  it  was  best  to  send  out 


FERGUS    AND   THE    POLE  193 

Cormac  Conloingeas  and  his  men  to  see  who  was  in  it.  for  the  men  of  Ulster  would  not  be  willing  to  harm  the  son  of  their  High  King. 

So  Cormac  and  his  troop  went  on  to  the  ford,  but  when  he  got  there  all  he  saw  was  a  lopped  tree  and  four  heads  on  it,  and  the  blood  dripping  down  from  them,  and  the  track  of  one  chariot  only,  going  eastward  out  of  the  ford.     Then  the  rest  of  the  army  came  with  the  other  chief  men.     "  There  is  wonder  on  me,"  said  Ailell ;  "  our  four  men  to  have  been  made  an  end  of  so  easily  as  this."  "  You  may  wonder  as  well,"  said  Fergus,  "  at  the  way  this  pole  was  driven  into  the  ground  by  one  man,  and  it  will  be  hard  for  you  to  find  a  man  of  your  army  will  drag  it  out  again."     "  Do  it  yourself,  Fergus,"  said  Maeve,  "  for   you  are   of  my  army."     So   Fergus  called  for  a  chariot,  and  stood  up  in  it,  and  gave  such  a  strong  pull  at  the  pole,  that  the  chariot  broke  under  him.     "  Give  me  another  chariot,"  he  said.     And   when   he  had  broken  seventeen  of  the  war-chariots  of  Connaught  one  after  another,  and    had    not    so  much    as  loosened  the  pole,  Maeve  said  :  "  Leave  off  now,  Fergus,  from  breaking  my  people's  chariots  ;  and  if  you  yourself  had  not  been  with  us  on  this  march,"  she  said,  "  we  would  have  been  up  with  the  men  of  Ulster  before  now,  and  we  would  have  taken  men  and  cattle.     And  I  know  well  why  you  did  this  ;  it  was  to  give  the  men  of  Ulster  time  to  get  over  their  weakness  and  their  pains,  and  to  come  out  against  us  to  defend  their  bull  and  their  cattle."     "  Give  me  my  own  chariot,  then,"  said  Fergus.     So  they  gave  him  his  own  chariot,  and  he  got  up  in  it  and  gave  a  great  pull  at  the  pole ;  and  neither  the  frame  nor  the  wheels  of  his  chariot  started  or  strained  like  the  others,  and  he  pulled  up  the  pole  and  gave   it  into  Ailell's  hand,  and  Ailell  looked  at  it  and  said :  "  There  is  dread  on  me,  of  the  man  that  set  that  pole  there  ;    do  you  think,  Fergus,"  he  said,  "was    it  Conchubar  the   High   King  that  did 

N 


194    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

it  ? "  ^'  It  was  not,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  if  Conchubar  had  come  here,  his  army  would  have  come  along  with  him,  and  all  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  he  would  not  have  been  so  near  to  you  without  offering  you  battle,  and  by  this  time  whichever  got  the  better  would  be  boasting  of  it."  "  Do  you  think  was  it  Cuscraid,  Conchubar's  son  ? "  said  Ailell  ;  "  or  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthacht,  king  of  Fernmaighe ;  or  Celthair,  son  of  Uthecar?"  "I  do  not,"  said  Fergus,  "but  it  is  what  I  think,  that  it  was  my  own  foster-son  and  Conchubar's  that  was  here,  Cuchulain,  son  of  Sualtim."  "  We  heard  you  often  talking  at  Cruachan  about  that  young  man,  and  what  is  his  age  at  this  time?"  "  His  age  is  of  no  great  matter,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  he  did  great  deeds,  when  he  was  but  a  soft  child."  "  He  is  young  enough  yet,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  I  think  it  will  not  be  hard  to  find  some  one  of  our  own  men  that  will  get  the  better  of  this  wild  Hound,  for  he  has  but  the  one  body  to  wound  or  to  put  to  flight."  "  You  will  get  no  one,"  said  Fergus,  "  among  your  fighting  men  and  your  young  men  and  your  champions  that  will  be  able  to  put  down  Cuchulain  " 

They  stopped  there  then  and  made  their  camp,  and  rested  that  night,  with  food  and  with  music. 

And  it  was  in  that  night  Fergus  gave  Maeve  and  Ailell  the  whole  story  of  the  boy  deeds  of  Cuchulain,  and  how  he  used  to  have  a  stone  for  a  pillow,  and  no  one  dared  wake  him,  lest  he  might  chance  to  give  them  a  blow  of  the  stone  in  his  anger.  And  he  told  of  one  night  when  he  was  asleep,  and  Conchubar  was  attacked  and  was  beaten  by  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthacht.  And  Cuchulain  was  awakened  by  the  cries  of  the  beaten  men  that  were  running  away,  and  he  went  out  in  the  darkness  of  the  night  to  look  for  Conchubar;  and  where  the  battle  had  been,  he  saw  a  man  with  the  half  of  a   man's   body  on  his  back,  and  he  called  to 


DEATH    OF   FRAECH  195 

Cuchulain  to  help  him,  and  threw  the  half-body  to  him,  and  Cuchulain  threw  it  back  again,  and  they  fought,  and  he  struck  off  the  man's  head.  And  then  he  found  Conchubar  lying  in  a  grave,  and  he  dug  him  out  of  that,  and  as  they  went  home,  they  met  Cuscraid  that  was  wounded,  and  Cuchulain  brought  him  home  to  Emain  on  his  back.  And  another  time  he  went  into  a  wood  and  saw  a  terrible-looking  man  having  a  wild  boar  in  one  hand,  and  his  weapon  in  the  other  hand,  and  he  killed  him,  and  brought  home  the  boar.  And  another  time  when  the  men  of  Ulster  were  in  their  weakness,  three  times  nine  sea-robbers  came  to  Emain,  and  the  women  ran  shrieking  to  the  palace  when  they  saw  them,  and  when  the  boys  that  were  at  play  on  the  lawn  knew  what  they  were  running  from,  they  ran  along  with  them.  But  Cuchulain  went  out  and  killed  nine  of  the  sea-  robbers  and  wounded  the  rest  of  them,  so  that  he  drove  them  all  back.  And  he  told  them  many  other  stories  of  his  doings  beside  these. 

The  next  day,  the  army  marched  on  eastward  beyond  the  mountain.  But  there  was  a  narrow  place  they  had  to  pass  through,  and  Cuchulain  cut  down  a  great  oak  tree,  and  laid  it  across  the  gap,  and  wrote  an  Ogham  on  it ;  and  when  the  men  of  Ireland  came  up  to  it,  it  hindered  them,  and  they  could  not  move  it,  and  they  made  their  camp  there  that  night.  And  early  in  the  morning  they  sent  the  young  man  Fraech,  son  of  Idath,  to  get  the  hindrance  cleared  away.  But  Fraech  went  on  beyond  it,  till  he  came  to  a  river,  and  there  he  found  Cuchulain  bathing.  And  they  attacked  one  another  in  the  water,  and  Fraech  was  beaten,  and  Cuchulain  went  away  and  left  his  body  on  the  bank. 

And  when  the  men  of  Ireland  found  his  body  they  began  to  keen  him.  And  then  they  saw  a  great  band  of  women  of  the   Sidhe,  with  green  dresses  on  them, 


196    WAR   FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

coming  for  his  body,  and  they  gave  out  a  great  cry  over  him  and  brought  him  away  to  a  hill  of  the  Sidhe.  And  Findabair  cried  after  him,  and  went  to  see  the  green  bank  where  he  was  lying. 

And  they  knew  that  Cuchulain  was  not  far  from  them,  for  presently  Maeve's  little  dog,  Baiscne,  got  his  death  by  a  stone  from  a  sling.  There  was  anger  on  Maeve  then,  and  she  urged  her  men  to  follow  after  Cuchulain,  so  that  they  broke  the  poles  of  their  chariots  in  their  hurry. 

The  next  day  Cuchulain  was  going  through  the  wood,  and  he  heard  the  sound   of  blows  on  the  trees. 

"  It  is  too  bold  the  men  of  Ulster  are,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  to  be  cutting  down  trees  like  this,  with  the  men  of  Ireland  coming  on  them  ;  and  stop  here,"  he  said,  "  till  I  find  out  who  is  it  that  is  in  the  wood." 

He  went  on  till  he  met  with  a  young  man  of  Connaught,  that  was  chariot-driver  to  Orlam,  son  of  Maeve  and  Ailell.  "  What  is  it  you  are  doing  there,  young  man  ?  "  he  asked.  "  I  am  cutting  holly  poles,"  said  the  young  man,  "  for  we  have  broken  our  chariots  hunting  that  notable  deer,  Cuchulain.  And  now,  good  friend,"  he  said,  "  lend  me  a  hand  with  these  poles,  lest  that  same  notable  Cuchulain  should  come  upon  me  here."  "  Your  choice,  boy  ;  shall  I  cut  the  holly  poles,  or  shall  I  trim  them  for  you  ?  "  "  Let  you  do  the  trimming,"  said  he.  So  Cuchulain  took  them  and  trimmed  them  straight  and  smooth,  that  a  fly  could  not  have  kept  his  footing  on  them.  The  chariot-driver  looked  at  the  poles,  and  he  said  :  "  I  am  thinking  this  is  not  the  work  you  have  a  right  to  be  put  to.  And  who  are  you  at  all  ?  "  he  said.  "  I  am  that  notable  Cuchulain  you  were  speak-  ing of  just  now."  "That  is  bad  news  for  me,"  said  the  driver,  "  for  surely  I  am  a  dead  man."  "  There  need  be  no  fear  on  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  "for  I  do  not  fight  against  drivers  or   messengers   or  unarmed   men.     But 


THE    HARPERS    OF   CAINBILE     197 

where  is  your  master  ? "  he  said.  "  He  is  out  before  you  on  the  plain."  "  Go  to  him,  then,  and  give  him  this  warning,  that  I  am  here,  and  that  if  we  meet,  he  will  surely  get  his  death  from  me."  With  that  the  young  man  went  to  look  for  his  master,  but  quick  as  he  went,  Cuchulain  was  quicker,  and  as  soon  as  he  came  up  with  Orlam  he  struck  off  his  head,  and  held  it  up  and  shook  it  before  the  men  of  Ireland. 

After  that,  the  three  sons  of  Garach  came  out  and  made  an  attack  on  him,  but  he  overcame  them,  and  struck  off  their  heads,  and  he  killed  their  chariot-  drivers  as  well,  that  they  had  armed  against  him.  And  Lethan  and  his  chariot-driver  came  against  him,  and  he  killed  them  in  the  same  way. 

At  that  time  the  harpers  of  Cainbile  came  to  Maeve's  camp,  and  played  on  their  magic  harps  ;  but  the  men  of  Ireland  thought  it  might  be  as  spies  they  came,  and  they  drove  them  out  of  the  camp,  and  followed  after  them  till  they  came  to  the  great  stone  of  Lecmore.  But  when  they  thought  to  overtake  them  there,  the  harpers  took  on  themselves  the  shape  of  wild  deer,  and  went  away.  And  it  was  on  the  same  day  that  Cuchulain,  with  two  casts  of  a  sling  stone,  killed  the  squirrel  and  the  pet  bird  that  were  sitting  on  Maeve's  two  shoulders. 

Then  the  men  of  Ireland  came  into  Magh  Breagh  and  Muirthemne,  and  carried  off  and  destroyed  all  before  them.  And  Fergus  warned  them  that  Cuchulain  was  not  far  off,  and  that  he  would  do  a  great  vengeance  on  them,  since  they  had  spoiled  Muirthemne.  And  it  was  at  that  time  Lugaid,  son  of  Nois,  that  had  gone  into  Connaught  with  Fergus,  went  secretly  to  Cuchulain  and  told  him  of  all  that  was  going  on  in  the  camp,  and  of  the  dread  of  him  that  was  on  all  the  men  of  Ireland,  so  that  they  did  not  dare  to  stir  out  alone,  and  that  he  himself  was  true  to  him  yet. 

And   now   that   the   army   was   coming   so   near    to 


198    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

Cuailgne,  the  War-goddess,  the  Battle  Crow,  the  Morrigu,  came  and  sat  on  a  pillar-stone  at  Teamhair,  and  gave  a  warning  to  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne,  and  it  is  what  she  said  :  "  Have  a  care,  and  keep  a  good  watch,  my  poor  bull,  or  the  men  of  Ireland  will  come  on  you  and  will  drive  you  away  to  their  camp."  And  when  the  bull  heard  the  warning,  he  brought  fifty  of  his  heifers  with  him,  and  went  away  to  a  valley  of  Slieve  Cuilinn. 

And  the  men  of  Ireland  came  on,  bringing  the  herds  of  cattle  they  took  on  the  way,  where  there  was  no  one  to  defend  them.  And  they  stopped  for  the  night  at  Conaille  Muirthemne,  and  there  Maeve  bade  one  of  her  women  go  down  to  the  stream  for  water.  And  the  woman  was  wearing  Maeve's  golden  covering  on  her  head,  and  Cuchulain  saw  her,  and  he  thought  it  was  Maeve  herself  that  was  in  it,  and  he  made  a  cast  of  a  stone  that  killed  her,  and  the  gold  covering  was  broken  in  pieces. 

And  they  were  delayed  there  for  a  while,  for  the  river  was  in  flood,  and  when  they  tried  to  cross  it,  the  chariots  that  went  in  were  swept  away  to  the  sea  ;  and  one  of  Maeve's  best  men,  Uala,  that  she  sent  to  try  the  depth  of  it,  was  swept  away  along  with  them.  And  while  they  were  stopping  there,  Cuchulain  killed  Raen  and  Rae,  that  were  come  to  tell  the  story  of  the  war,  and  a  hundred  men  along  with  them. 

Then  Maeve  said  :  "  Some  man  of  you  must  go  out  and  stand  against  Cuchulain  to  save  the  army."  "  It  is  not  I  that  will  go,"  said  one  of  them.  "  It  is  not  I,"  said  all  the  others,  "  for  Cuchulain  is  no  easy  man  to  stand  against."  Then  when  none  of  them  would  go  out,  Maeve  made  them  cut  a  way  through  the  mountain  before  them,  that  it  might  be  left  as  a  lasting  disgrace  to  Ulster.  So  they  did  this,  and  it  is  called  Berna  Ulaid,  the  Gap  of  Ulster,  to  this  day. 

Now,  when  they  were  setting  out  to  cross  the  moun- 


FERLOGA  199 

tain,  Maeve  gave  orders  that  the  army  was  to  be  divided  in  two  parts,  each  with  its  own  share  of  cattle,  and  of  all  other  things,  and  she  said  that  she  herself  and  Fergus  would  go  with  the  one  part,  by  the  Gap  of  Ulster,  and  that  Ailell  should  go  with  the  other  part,  by  the  road  of  Midluachair. 

So  Ailell  set  out,  and  his  chariot-driver,  Ferloga,  with  him,  and  that  was  the  same  Ferloga  that  made  a  bargain  with  Conchubar,  the  High  King,  one  time ;  and  this  is  the  way  it  happened.  It  was  at  the  time  Mac  Datho  of  Leinster  had  stirred  up  a  fight  between  the  men  of  Ulster  and  the  men  of  Connaught,  about  the  dividing  of  a  pig  at  a  feast  he  made,  the  same  way  Bricriu  had  stirred  up  a  fight  about  the  Championship,  and  Conchubar  was  following  after  the  men  of  Connaught  over  the  plain  ofFearbile;  and  all  of  a  sudden  Ferloga,  that  had  been  left  behind  by  Ailell,  and  that  was  hiding  himself,  made  a  leap  to  the  back  of  Conchubar's  chariot,  and  took  a  hold  of  his  neck  between  his  two  hands.  "  What  will  you  give  me  to  let  you  loose,  king  ?  "  he  said.  "  What  is  it  you  are  asking  ?  "  said  Conchubar.  "  Indeed  it  is  no  great  gift  I  am  asking,"  said  Ferloga,  "but  only  you  to  bring  me  along  with  you  to  Emain  Macha,  and  the  young  women  and  the  young  girls  of  Ulster  to  sing  a  song  around  me  every  evening,  and  every  one  of  them  to  say,  '  Ferloga  is  my  favourite.' "  Conchubar  agreed  to  that,  and  Ferloga  went  with  him  to  Emain  ;  but  at  the  end  of  a  year  they  sent  him  back,  and  presents  with  him,  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve. 

At  that  time,  a  suspicion  came  on  Ailell,  that  there  was  some  understanding  between  Maeve  and  Fergus,  and  he  bade  Ferloga  to  keep  a  watch  on  them.  After  a  while,  Ferloga  saw  that  Maeve  and  Fergus  had  stopped  in  a  wood  behind  the  rest  of  the  army,  and  he  followed  after  them  quietly,  the  way  they  would  not  hear  him,  and  there  he  found  Fergus's  sword  lying  on  the  ground. 


200    WAR    FOR  BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

So  he  took  the  sword  out  of  the  sheath,  and  he  cut  a  wooden  sword  and  shaped  it,  and  put  it  into  the  sheath  in  its  place,  and  he  brought  Fergus's  sword  back  to  Ailell,  and  told  him  how  he  had  found  it,  and  Ailell  bade  him  hide  it  in  his  chariot.  When  Fergus  saw  that  his  sword  was  gone  and  a  wooden  sword  was  put  in  its  place,  there  was  great  confusion  on  him  ;  but  Ailell  said  nothing  of  it  when  they  met,  but  asked  him  to  come  and  play  a  game  of  chess  with  him.  And  at  the  game  they  quarrelled,  and  Ailell  said  sharp  words  of  blame  to  Fergus  and  to  Maeve,  and  they  answered  him  back,  and  Fergus  bade  him  give  him  up  his  sword.  But  Ailell  said  he  would  never  give  it  to  him  until  the  day  of  the  great  battle  would  come,  between  the  men  of  Ireland  and  the  men  of  Ulster. 

Then  Cuchulain  came  there  and  stood  on  a  height  and  shook  his  spears  and  his  sword  before  them,  so  that  great  dread  came  on  them. 

After  that,  Maeve  sent  Fiacha,  son  of  Flraba,  to  talk  with  Cuchulain,  and  to  try  could  he  win  him  over.  "  What  will  you  offer  him  ?  "  said  Fiacha.  "  I  will  give  him  full  payment  for  all  that  has  been  spoiled  of  his  goods,  and  a  good  place  for  himself  in  Cruachan  Ai,  and  my  own  protection  and  Ailell's,  if  he  will  give  up  Conchubar's  service  and  come  into  ours.  And  indeed  that  would  be  better  for  him,"  she  said,  "  than  to  stop  under  a  little  king  like  Conchubar." 

So  Fiacha  went  to  speak  with  Cuchulain,  and  he  gave  him  a  good  welcome.  And  Fiacha  told  him  the  message  he  had  brought  from  Maeve,  and  the  offer  she  had  made  if  he  would  quit  Conchubar's  service.  "  I  will  not  do  that,"  said  Cuchulain;  "I  will  not  betray  my  mother's  brother  for  the  sake  of  any  strange  king.  But  I  will  consent  to  go  myself  to-morrow,"  he  said,  "  to  speak  with  Maeve  and  Ailell  and  with  Fergus."  So  Fiacha  bade  him  farewell,  and  went  back  to  the  army. 


MAC    ROTH    THE    HERALD         201 

On  the  morning  of  the  morrow  Cuchulain  went  to  Glen  Ochain,  and  Maeve  and  Fergus  came  to  meet  him  ;  and  Maeve  looked  at  him  and  she  said  :  "  Is  this  the  same  Cuchulain  you  put  such  a  great  name  on,  Fergus  ?  I  see  that  he  has  not  yet  grown  out  of  his  boyhood."  Then  she  spoke  with  Cuchulain  and  made  her  offer  again,  and  he  refused  it,  and  they  left  the  place  with  great  anger  on  them  one  against  the  other.  And  that  night,  and  the  two  nights  after  it,  the  men  of  Ireland  were  afraid  either  to  eat  or  to  sleep  or  to  make  music  ;  for  Cuchulain  killed  so  many  of  their  men  before  the  clear  light  of  every  morning,  that  it  was  as  if  the  whole  army  was  melting  away.  "  Some  one  must  go  and  make  him  another  offer,"  said  Maeve,  and  this  time  she  sent  Mac  Roth,  the  herald.  "  Where  will  I  find  him  ? "  said  Mac  Roth.  "  It  is  likely,"  said  Fergus,  "he  will  be  between  Ochain  and  the  sea,  letting  the  sun  shine  and  the  wind  blow  upon  him  after  so  many  nights  spent  without  sleep." 

It  was  there  he  found  him  sure  enough,  and  Laeg  keeping  a  watch  a  good  way  off  "  There  is  an  armed  man  coming  towards  us,  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg.  "  What  sort  of  a  man  is  he  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  A  brown-haired,  broad-faced,  handsome  young  man  ;  a  fine  brown  cloak  on  him  ;  a  bright  bronze  spear-like  brooch  fastening  his  cloak  ;  a  well-fitting  shirt  next  his  skin  ;  two  strong  shoes  between  his  feet  and  the  ground.  There  is  a  white  hazel  rod  in  one  hand,  and  a  sword  with  a  sea-horse  tooth  for  a  hilt  in  the  other."  "  Well,  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  let  him  come,  for  these  are  the  tokens  of  a  herald." 

Mac  Roth  came  up  to  him  then  and  asked  :  "  Who  are  you  serving  under,  young  man  ?  "  "  We  are  serving  under  Conchubar,  High  King  of  Ulster."  "  Can  you  tell  me  where  can  I  find  Cuchulain,  that  has  killed  so  many  of  the  men  of  Ireland  ?  "  "  Whatever  you  would  say  to  him,  you  may  say  it  to  me,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  Mac  Roth  told  him  all  the  new  offers  he  had  brought  from 


202    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

Maeve,  and  Cuchulain  said :  "  I  am  Cuchulain  that  you  are  looking  for,  and  I  refuse  all  your  offers."  So  Mac  Roth  went  back  to  the  camp.  "  Did  you  find  Cuchulain  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  I  found,"  he  said,  "  an  angry  boy  between  Ochain  and  the  sea,  and  I  do  not  know  if  it  was  Cuchulain."  "  Did  he  take  your  offer  ?  "  said  Maeve.  "  He  did  not,"  said  Mac  Roth.  "  It  is  Cuchulain  he  was  talking  to,"  said  Fergus.  "  You  must  go  to  him  again,"  said  Maeve,  "  and  make  new  offers."  So  Mac  Roth  went  out  again  to  make  some  terms  with  Cuchulain,  but  he  refused  all  his  offers.  "  And  another  thing,"  he  said,  "  I  would  never  consent  to  give  in  to  a  woman,  or  to  be  under  a  woman's  rule."  "Is  there  any  bargain  you  would  make?"  said  Mac  Roth.  "If  there  is,"  said  Cuchulain,  "you  must  find  it  out  for  yourselves,  and  there  is  one  in  the  camp  can  tell  you  of  it,"  he  said  ;  "  and  if  he  himself  comes  to  me,  I  will  speak  with  him,  but  if  any  other  man  comes  to  me  again  with  offers,  that  will  be  the  last  day  of  his  life." 

So  Mac  Roth  went  back  again  and  told  all  this  to  Maeve.  "  And  I  will  not  go  near  him  again,  myself,"  he  said,  "  for  all  that  any  king  in  Ireland  could  give  me."  Then  Maeve  said  to  Fergus :  "  Have  you  any  knowledge  of  the  terms  Cuchulain  would  take?"  "  I  have  not,"  said  Fergus.  But  after  she  had  questioned  him  a  while,  he  said :  "  It  is  what  he  wants,  that  one  man  of  the  men  of  Ireland  should  meet  him  and  fight  alone  with  him  every  day.  And  while  that  fight  is  going  on,  he  will  put  no  hindrance  on  the  rest  of  the  army,  but  it  may  march  on.  But  so  soon  as  he  has  killed  the  man  set  against  him,  the  army  must  stop,  and  make  its  camp  until  the  morning  of  the  morrow."  "  I  will  agree  to  that,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  it  is  better  to  lose  one  man  every  day  than  a  hundred  every  night.  And  who  will  go  and  make  this  agreement  with  him  ?  "  "  Fergus    must    go,"   they    all    said.     "  I   will   not   go," 


FERGUS'S   VISIT  203 

said  Fergus.  "  Why  so  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  I  will  not  go,"  he  said,  "  unless  you  bind  yourselves  on  your  oath  to  keep  to  your  agreement  with  him."  "  We  will  do  that,"  they  said  ;  and  so  Fergus  bound  them  on  their  oath,  and  his  horses  were  yoked  to  his  chariot. 

Then  a  young  lad,  Etarcomal  by  name,  foster-son  of  Maeve  and  of  Ailell,  made  ready  his  own  chariot.  "  What  side  are  you  going,  Etarcomal  ? "  said  Fergus.  "jl  am  going  with  you,"  he  said,  "  the  way  I  will  get  a  sight  of  Cuchulain."  "  If  you  take  my  advice,  you  will  not  make  that  journey,"  said  Fergus.  "  Why  so  ? "  "  Because  if  your  pride  and  his  pride  meet  together,  some  misfortune  will  surely  happen."  "  I  give  my  word  not  to  anger  him  in  any  way,"  said  Etarcomal. 

They  went  on  then  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  between  Ochain  and  the  sea,  and  himself  and  Laeg  were  play-  ing a  game  with  their  casting  spears.  "  There  is  an  armed  man  coming  to  us,"  said  Laeg.  "  What  sort  of  man  is  he  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  He  is  large  and  proud,  and  he  standing  in  a  high  chariot,  and  the  waving  yellow  hair  about  his  head  gives  him  the  appearance  of  the  top  of  a  tall  tree  that  stands  on  a  green  lawn,"  said  Laeg.  "  He  has  a  crimson  cloak  about  him  with  a  deep  border  of  gold  thread,  and  an  inlaid  gold  brooch  in  the  cloak  ;  a  broad  green  spear  in  his  hand ;  a  shield  with  a  boss  of  red  gold  over  him ;  a  long  sword  in  a  toothed  sheath  across  his  knees."  "It  is  Fergus  that  is  in  it,"  said  Cuchulain.  Then  Fergus  came  where  he  was  and  got  out  of  his  chariot,  and  Cuchulain  gave  him  a  great  welcome.  "  Do  you  welcome  me  indeed  ?  "  said  Fergus.  "  I  do  surely,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  but  if  it  is  to  look  for  a  feast  from  me  you  are  come,  the  white  birds  are  on  the  side  of  the  cliffs,  and  the  fish  are  in  the  stream,  and  the  wild  deer  on  the  hiils."  "  It  is  not  to  look  for  a  feast  I  am  come,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  I  know  well  it  is  not  easy  for  you  to  get  your  own  share  of  food. 


204    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

But  I  am  come  for  the  men  of  Ireland,  to  agree  to  your  conditions.  And  from  this  out  they  will  send  one  of  their  best  men  to  fight  with  you  alone  every  day."  "  I  agree  to  keep  to  my  part  of  the  bargain,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  let  us  not  stop  talking  here  any  more,"  he  said,  "  or  the  men  of  Ireland  will  be  thinking  you  are  doing  some  treachery  on  them." 

So  Fergus  went  back  to  the  camp,  but  Etarcomal  stopped  for  a  while  looking  at  Cuchulain.  "  What  are  you  looking  at  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  looking  at  your-  self," he  said.  "  Then  take  your  eyes  off  me,  and  go  after  Fergus ;  and  maybe  you  think  yourself  a  better  fighting  man  than  the  one  you  are  looking  at,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  You  look  to  me  as  good  a  fighter  as  I  ever  saw  for  one  of  your  age,"  said  Etarcomal,  "but  you  would  not  be  thought  much  of  among  trained  fighters  and  grown  men."  "  It  is  well  for  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  under  Fergus's  protection  you  came,  or  I  swear,  by  the  gods  my  people  swear  by,  you  would  not  go  back  safe  and  sound  to  the  camp."  "  You  have  no  right  to  say  that,"  said  Etarcomal ;  "  and  what  you  want  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  I  will  give  it  to  you,"  he  said,  "  for  you  ask  for  one  champion  at  a  time  to  fight  with,  and  I  myself  will  be  the  first  to  come  to  you  to-morrow."  "  Come,  then,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  however  early  you  may  come  in  the  morning,  you  will  find  me  here  before  you." 

So  Etarcomal  set  out,  and  he  began  to  tell  his  chariot-  driver  all  he  had  said,  and  how  he  had  promised  to  go  out  and  fight  with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow.  "  Did  you  make  that  promise?"  said  his  driver.  "I  did,"  said  Etarcomal,  "  and  I  have  given  my  word  I  will  go  ;  and  I  do  not  know,"  he  said,  "  would  it  be  better  for  me  to  wait  till  to-morrow,  or  to  go  back  and  fight  with  him  to-day."  "  You  will  not  get  the  better  of  him  to-morrow,"  said  his  driver,  "  and  it  would  be  just  as  well  for  you  to  be  beaten  to-night."     "  Turn  the  chariot  and  let  us  go  back,"  said 


ETARCOMAL'S   FOLLY  205 

Etarcomal,  "  for  I  swear  by  the  oath  of  my  people,  I  will  not  go  back  to  the  camp  without  bringing  Cuchulain's  head  in  my  hand."  So  they  turned  back  again  towards  the  sea. 

Then  Laeg  said  :  "  That  chariot  that  was  here  a  while  ago  has  turned  back  again  to  us,  Cuchulain."  "  It  is  Etarcomal  coming  back  to  challenge  me,  and  it  is  not  I  that  will  fall  in  this  fight,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  But  bring  me  my  arms,"  he  said,  "  for  it  would  not  be  right  for  me  not  to  be  ready  to  meet  him."  So  he  went  to  meet  him,  and  took  his  sword  out  of  the  sheath,  and  said  :  "  What  are  you  come  back  for?"  "  I  am  come  to  fight  with  you."  "  I  am  loth  to  fight  with  you,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  was  under  the  protection  of  Fergus  you  came  here." 

And  with  that  he  gave  a  blow  of  his  sword  that  cut  the  sod  clean  away  from  under  the  soles  of  Etarcomal's  feet,  so  that  he  fell  on  his  back.  "  Go  back  now,"  he  said,  "  for  you  have  had  a  warning."  "  I  will  not  go  back  until  I  have  fought  with  you."  Then  Cuchulain  gave  another  stroke  with  the  edge  of  his  sword  that  cut  the  hair  close  off  his  head,  but  drew  no  blood.  "  You  may  go  back  now,  at  least,"  he  said.  "  I  will  not  go,"  said  Etarcomal,  "  until  I  have  made  an  end  of  you,  or  you  have  made  an  end  of  me."  "Well,"  said  Cuchulain,  "if  you  are  set  upon  that,  it  is  I  must  make  an  end  of  you."  With  that  he  made  a  cross  blow  at  him  that  cut  him  through  and  through,  so  that  he  fell  dead. 

Fergus,  now,  had  seen  nothing  of  all  this,  for  it  was  his  custom,  when  he  was  travelling,  never  to  look  back,  but  always  to  be  looking  before  him  ;  and  presently,  Etarcomal's  chariot-driver  came  up  with  him,  and  he  said  :  "  Where  have  you  left  your  master  ?  "  "  Cuchulain  is  after  attacking  and  making  an  end  of  him  on  the  plain,"  said  the  man.  "  It  was  not  right  of  him  to  do  that,"  said  Fergus,  "to  any  one  that  came  under  my  protection.      Turn    my   chariot    about   now"   he   said, 


2o6    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

"  until  I  go  back  and  talk  with  him."  And  when  he  came  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  he  said  :  "  It  was  not  right  of  you,  my  own  foster-son,  to  kill  one  that  came  under  my  protection."  "  Ask  his  chariot-driver,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  on  which  of  us  the  blame  should  be  laid."  Then  the  chariot-driver  told  the  whole  story,  and  when  Fergus  heard  it,  he  said  :  "  There  is  no  blame  on  you,  Cuchulain."  Then  he  bound  the  body  of  Etarcomal  to  his  chariot,  so  that  it  was  dragged  after  it  along  the  road  and  through  the  camp  to  the  door  of  Ailell  and  Maeve.  "  There  is  the  young  man  you  sent  out,"  he  said,  "  and  this  is  the  treatment  Cuchulain  will  give  to  every  other  man  that  goes  out  against  him."  And  Maeve  came  out  of  the  door  and  spoke  high,  angry,  loud  words  :  "  I  had  put  great  hopes  in  that  young  man,"  she  said,  "  and  I  did  not  think  it  was  under  bad  protection  he  was  going,  when  he  went  under  the  pro-  tection of  Fergus."  And  Fergus  said  :  "  What  business  had  he  going  out  at  all,  to  meddle  with  Cuchulain  ?  And  if  I  went  there  myself,"  he  said,  "  it  is  well  pleased  I  was  to  get  back  again  safely." 

The  next  day,  the  men  of  Ireland  consulted  together  as  to  who  should  go  against  Cuchulain,  and  they  agreed  that  it  was  best  to  send  Natchrantal,  that  was  a  great  fighting  man. 

So  he  set  out,  but  he  would  bring  no  arms  with  him  but  three  times  nine  holly  rods,  and  they  having  hardened  points. 

Cuchulain  was  at  that  time  following  after  a  flock  of  wild  birds,  to  bring  some  of  them  down  for  the  evening's  food,  and  he  took  no  notice  of  Natchrantal,  but  went  on  following  after  the  birds.  But  Natchrantal  thought  it  was  afraid  of  him  he  was,  and  he  went  back  to  the  door  of  Maeve's  tent  and  gave  a  loud  shout,  and  he  said  :  "  That  great  Cuchulain  there  is  so  much  talk  about,  is  running  away  now  after  the  challenge  I  gave  him."     *'  I  would 


cue  HULA  I  N'S   ANGER  207 

hardly  believe  that,"  said  Maeve,  "for  he  has  stood  against  many  good  fighting  men  before  now,  and  why  would  he  not  stand  against  you  ?  "  Fergus  heard  what  was  said,  and  it  vexed  him,  any  man  to  say  Cuchulain  had  run  before  him ;  and  he  sent  Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba,  to  reproach  him,  for  letting  such  a  thing  be  said,  and  Cuchulain  bade  him  welcome.  "  I  am  come  from  Fergus,"  said  Fiacha,  "  and  it  is  what  he  says,  that  it  would  have  been  more  fitting  for  you  to  spill  the  blood  of  the  man  that  was  sent  against  you,  than  to  run  from  him."  "  Who  did  I  run  from  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  Tell  me  who  makes  that  boast."  "  It  is  Natchrantal,"  said  Fiacha.  "  What  would  Fergus  have  me  do  ? "  said  Cuchulain  ;  ''  would  he  have  me  kill  an  unarmed  man  ?  For  he  brought  nothing  with  him  but  wooden  rods,  and  it  is  not  my  custom  to  wound  chariot-drivers  or  messengers  or  unarmed  men.  But  let  him  come  out  armed  to  meet  me,"  he  said,  "  on  the  morning  of  to-  morrow." 

So  Fiacha  went  back  to  the  camp,  and  the  day  seemed  long  to  Natchrantal  till  he  could  meet  Cuchulain.  But  when  he  went  out  in  the  morning  and  came  to  the  plain  he  said  to  Cormac  Conloingeas :  "  Where  is  Cuchulain  ?  "  "  He  is  there  before  you,"  said  he.  "  That  is  not  the  appearance  that  was  on  him  yesterday,"  said  Natchrantal ;  for  Cuchulain's  anger  had  come  on  him  so  that  the  appearance  he  had  was  changed,  and  he  was  leaning  against  a  pillar-stone,  and  in  the  strength  of  his  anger,  as  he  was  throwing  his  cloak  about  him,  he  broke  off  the  pillar-stone,  and  he  never  noticed  that  it  was  wrapped  between  the  cloak  and  himself ;  and  Natchrantal  threw  his  sword  at  him,  and  it  broke  to  pieces  against  the  pillar-stone,  and  then  Cuchulain  gave  him  a  blow  over  the  top  of  his  shield  that  struck  off  his  head. 

While  this  fight  was  going  on,  Maeve,  having  a  third   part  of  the  army  with   her,   set   out   Northward 


2o8    WAR    FOR   BULL    OF   CUAILGXE 

to  Dun-Sobairce,  to  look  for  the  Brown  Bull.  And  Cuchulain  followed  after  her  for  a  while  ;  but  then  he  turned  back  to  defend  his  own  countr}\  And  he  saw  before  him  Buac,  son  of  Bainblai,  that  was  the  man  Maeve  trusted  better  than  any  other,  and  twent)--four  men  along  with  him,  and  they  dri\-ing  the  Bro\\'n  Bull  before  them  and  fifteen  of  his  heifers,  that  they  had  brought  out  of  Glen-na-masc  in  Slieve  Cuilinn.  "  Where  are  you  bringing  these  cattle  from  ? "  said  Cuchulain.  "  Out  of  that  mountain  beyond."  "  What  is  your  name  ?  "  he  said.  *  If  I  tell  it,  it  is  not  either  through  love  of  \-ou  or  through  fear  of  you,"  he  said.  "  I  am  Buac,  son  of  Bainblai,  from  Ailell's  countr}-  and  Maeve's."  "Take  this  from  me,  then,"  said  Cuchulain,  and  with  that  he  threw  his  spear  at  him  so  that  it  went  through  his  body,  and  he  fell  dead.  But  while  he  was  doing  this,  the  rest  of  the  men  drove  away  the  Bull  with  great  haste  to  the  camp  of  the  men  of  Ireland  ;  and  this  was  the  greatest  affront  that  was  put  on  Cuchulain  through  the  whole  of  the  war  for  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne. 

Then  the  men  of  Ireland  began  saying  to  one  another  that  Cuchulain  would  not  have  the  mastery  over  them  but  for  the  bronze  spear  he  had,  and  that  there  must  be  enchantment  on  it,  for  none  of  them  could  stand  against  it.  And  they  said  to  Maeve  that  she  should  send  Rae,  the  satirist,  to  ask  it  of  him,  for  he  could  not  refuse  a  satirist ;  so  Rae  went  and  asked  it  of  him.  "  Give  me  your  spear,"  he  said.  "  I  will  not  give  you  that  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain,  '•  but  I  will  give  you  other  things."  "  I  will  not  take  any  other  thing,"  said  Rae,  "  and  I  will  put  a  bad  name  on  you,  if  you  refuse  me  the  spear."  "  Take  it,  then,"  said  Cuchulain,  and  with  that  he  threw  it  with  all  his  force  at  his  head.  "That  is  a  weighty  present,"  said  the  satirist,  and  he  dropped  dead. 

Then  Cur,  son  of  Daltach,  was  sent  out,  for  the  men  of  Ireland    thought    he    would   be   able   ro  rid   them   of 


A    BLOOD-BOND  209 

Cuchulain.  But  it  was  hard  to  persuade  Cur,  because  he  thought  it  was  not  worth  his  while  to  go  and  fight  with  a  young  beardless  boy.  And  when  he  went  out  in  the  morning,  Cuchulain  was  practising  all  his  feats  that  he  had  learned,  and  Cur  was  for  a  while  trying  to  get  near  enough  to  come  at  him  with  his  weapons,  but  he  could  not ;  and  Cuchulain  was  so  taken  up  with  doing  his  feats  that  he  never  noticed  him  at  all.  Then  Laeg  saw  him  and  said  :  "  Have  a  care,  Cuchulain  ;  there  is  an  armed  man  making  ready  to  attack  you."  Cuchulain  was  doing  his  apple  feat  at  that  time,  keeping  nine  apples,  and  his  shield,  and  his  sword  in  the  air,  that  none  of  them  fell  to  the  ground.  And  when  he  saw  Cur,  he  threw  the  apple  that  was  in  his  hand  straight  at  his  forehead,  and  it  went  through,  and  brought  out  a  share  of  his  brains  the  size  of  itself,  at  the  other  side. 

And  after  that,  other  fighting  men  were  sent  out  every  day  through  a  week,  and  he  killed  them  all.  And  one  day  he  said  :  "  Go,  Laeg,  to  the  camp,  to  my  friend  Lugaid,  and  say  you  are  come  from  me,  and  ask  him  which  of  the  men  of  Ireland  is  to  be  sent  against  me  to-morrow."  So  Laeg  went,  and  when  he  came  back  he  said :  "  It  is  your  own  comrade  and  fellow-pupil  with  Scathach,  Ferbaeth,  your  blood-friend,  is  coming  against  you  ;  for  he  has  only  lately  joined  the  army,  and  he  has  brought  four-fifths  of  his  men  with  him,  and  Maeve  has  promised  him  her  daughter  Findabair,  and  he  has  drunk  from  her  cup,  and  been  fed  by  her  hand."  "  I  am  sorry  to  hear  that,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  I  think  worse  of  a  comrade  of  my  own  coming  against  me,  than  of  any  other  man."  And  when  Ferbaeth  came  out  to  fight  against  him  in  the  morning,  Cuchulain  did  his  best  to  make  him  give  up  the  fight,  for  the  sake  of  the  old  friendship  between  them,  but  Ferbaeth  would  not  listen  to  him.  Cuchulain  turned  from  him  then  in  anger,  and  to  loosen  the  blood-bond  between  them,  he  struck  the 

O 


2IO    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

sole  of  his  own  foot  with  a  spear,  that  it  drew  blood,  and  then  he  threw  his  spear  at  Ferbaeth,  but  he  did  not  look  to  see  did  it  hit  him  or  not.  But  the  spear  went  through  his  head  and  out  of  his  mouth,  and  this  is  the  way  Ferbaeth  came  to  his  death. 

Then  Ailell  made  up  a  plan  by  which  he  thought  to  make  Cuchulain  give  up  the  stand  he  was  making  against  the  army,  and  his  plan  was  to  offer  Findabair  to  him  if  he  would  give  his  word  to  leave  off  attacking  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  he  sent  Lugaid  to  make  the  offer  to  him.  Cuchulain  was  not  very  well  pleased  with  the  message,  and  he  thought  there  might  be  some  treachery  in  it,  but  he  agreed  that  he  would  meet  Ailell  and  Findabair,  and  speak  with  them.  But  when  the  time  came,  Ailell  made  his  fool  put  on  his  clothes,  and  wear  his  gold  circle  on  his  head,  and  go  with  Findabair ;  and  he  bade  him  stop  as  far  back  as  he  could,  the  way  Cuchulain  would  not  know  it  was  not  the  king  that  was  in  it ;  and  then  Findabair  was  to  bind  him  over  to  their  side,  not  to  fight  any  more  against  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  when  that  was  done,  she  herself  and  the  fool  were  to  hurry  back  to  the  camp  together.  But  when  Cuchulain  saw  them,  he  knew  the  fool,  and  he  sent  a  stone  out  of  his  sling  and  killed  him.  And  because  Findabair  had  taken  a  share  in  the  treachery,  he  cut  off  her  two  plaits  of  hair  and  took  them  away.  And  after  a  while  Ailell  and  Maeve  came  to  see  what  had  happened  them,  and  there  they  found  Findabair  beside  the  dead  body  of  the  fool.  And  they  brought  her  home  and  said  nothing  of  it,  but  all  the  same  the  story  was  talked  of  in  the  camp. 

Then  Cuchulain  sent  Laeg  into  the  camp  again  to  ask  news  of  Lugaid.  And  it  is  what  Lugaid  told  him  that  the  next  to  be  sent  against  him  was  his  own  brother  Larine,  that  Maeve  had  persuaded  with  wine,  and  with  the  promise  of  Findabair,  to  go  against  him.  "  And  it  is  what  they  think,"   said  Lugaid,   "that   if  Cuchulain 


THE    MORRIGU  211 

should  kill  my  brother,  I  myself  would  have  to  go  and  get  satisfaction  for  his  death  ;  and  tell  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  not  to  make  an  end  of  Larine,  but  only  to  give  him  some  punishment  he  will  not  forget."  So  when  Larine  came  out,  at  the  breaking  of  the  day,  Cuchulain  came  to  meet  him  without  any  weapons  ;  but  he  took  him  in  his  two  hands  and  shook  him,  and  left  him  there  with  the  life  still  in  him.  But  he  was  never  the  better  of  the  shaking  he  got  to  the  end  of  his  life. 

As  Cuchulain  lay  in  his  sleep  one  night  a  great  cry  from  the  North  came  to  him,  so  that  he  started  up  and  fell  from  his  bed  to  the  ground  like  a  sack.  He  went  out  of  his  tent,  and  there  he  saw  Laeg  yoking  the  horses  to  the  chariot.  "  Why  are  you  doing  that  ? "  he  said.  "  Because  of  a  great  cry  I  heard  from  the  plain  to  the  north-west,"  said  Laeg.  "Let  us  go  there  then,"  said  Cuchulain.  So  they  went  on  till  they  met  with  a  chariot,  and  a  red  horse  yoked  to  it,  and  a  woman  sitting  in  it,  with  red  eyebrows,  and  a  red  dress  on  her,  and  a  long  red  cloak  that  fell  on  to  the  ground  between  the  two  wheels  of  the  chariot,  and  on  her  back  she  had  a  grey  spear.  "  What  is  your  name,  and  what  is  it  you  are  wanting  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  the  daughter  of  King  Buan,"  she  said,  "  and  what  I  am  come  for  is  to  find  you  and  to  offer  you  my  love,  for  I  have  heard  of  all  the  great  deeds  you  have  done."  "  It  is  a  bad  time  you  have  chosen  for  coming,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  I  am  wasted  and  worn  out  with  the  hardship  of  the  war,  and  I  have  no  mind  to  be  speaking  with  women."  "  You  will  have  my  help  in  everything  you  do,"  she  said,  "and  it  is  protecting  you  I  was  up  to  this,  and  I  will  protect  you  from  this  out."  "  It  is  not  trusting  to  a  woman's  pro-  tection I  am  in  this  work  I  have  in  my  hands,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Then  if  you  will  not  take  my  help."  she  said,  "  I  will  turn  it  against  you ;  and  at  the  time  when  you  will  be  fighting  with  some  man  as  good  as  yourself,  I  will 


212    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

come  against  you  in  all  shapes,  by  water  and  by  land,  till  you  are  beaten."  There  was  anger  on  Cuchulain  then,  and  he  took  his  sword,  and  made  a  leap  at  the  chariot.  But  on  the  moment,  the  chariot  and  the  horse  and  the  woman  had  disappeared,  and  all  he  saw  was  a  black  crow,  and  it  sitting  on  a  branch ;  and  by  that  he  knew  it  was  the  Morrigu  had  been  talking  with  him. 

After  that,  Loch,  son  of  Mofebis,  was  sent  for  to  Maeve,  and  she  asked  him  would  he  go  out  to  the  next  day's  fight.  "  I  will  not  go,"  he  said,  "  for  it  would  not  be  fitting  for  me  to  go  out  against  a  young  boy,  whose  beard  is  not  grown  ;  but  I  have  one  to  meet  him,"  he  said,  "  and  that  is  my  brother  Long,  son  of  Emonis,  and  you  can  make  an  agreement  with  him."  So  then  Long  was  sent  for,  and  Maeve  promised  him  a  great  reward,  suits  of  armour  for  twelve  men,  and  a  chariot,  and  Findabair  for  a  wife,  and  the  right  of  coming  to  every  feast  at  Cruachan.  Then  Long  went  out  to  the  fight,  but  Cuchulain  killed  him. 

Then  Maeve  said  to  her  women :  "  Go  now  to  Cuchulain,  and  tell  him  to  put  some  likeness  of  a  beard  on  himself,  and  say  to  him  there  is  no  good  warrior  in  the  camp  thinks  it  fitting  to  go  out  and  fight  him,  he  being  young  and  beardless." 

When  Cuchulain  heard  that,  he  took  blackberries  and  smeared  the  juice  on  his  face,  the  way  he  would  have  the  appearance  of  a  beard,  and  then  he  came  out  on  the  hill  and  showed  himself  to  the  men  of  Ireland.  When  Loch,  son  of  Mofebis,  saw  him,  he  said  :  "  Is  that  a  beard  on  Cuchulain  ? "  "  That  is  certainly  what  I  see,"  said  Maeve.  "  Then  I  will  go  out  and  meet  him,"  said  Loch.  So  they  met  beside  the  ford,  where  Long  had  got  his  death.  "  Come  to  the  ford  that  is  higher  up,"  said  Loch,  for  he  would  not  fight  at  the  ford  where  his  brother  died.  So  they  fought  at  the  upper  ford,  and  while   they  were   fighting,   the   Morrigu   came   against 


CUCHULAIN'S   LONELINESS     213 

Cuchulain  with  the  appearance  of  a  white,  red-eared  heifer,  and  fifty  other  heifers  along  with  her,  and  a  chain  of  white  bronze  between  every  two  of  them,  and  they  made  a  rush  into  the  ford.  But  Cuchulain  made  a  cast  at  her,  and  wounded  one  of  her  eyes.  Then  she  came  down  the  stream  in  the  shape  of  a  black  eel,  and  wound  herself  about  Cuchulain's  legs  in  the  water ;  and  while  he  was  getting  himself  free  of  her,  and  bruising  her  against  a  green  stone  of  the  ford,  Loch  wounded  his  body.  Then  she  took  the  appearance  of  a  grey  wolf,  and  took  hold  of  his  right  arm,  and  while  he  was  getting  free  of  her.  Loch  wounded  him  again.  Then  great  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  took  the  spear  Aoife  had  given  him,  the  Gae  Bulg,  and  gave  him  a  deadly  wound.  "  I  ask  one  thing  for  the  sake  of  your  great  name,  Cuchulain,"  he  called  out.  "  What  thing  is  that  ?  "  "  It  is  not  to  spare  my  life  I  am  asking  you,"  said  Loch,  "  but  let  me  rise  up,  the  way  I  may  fall  on  my  face,  and  not  back-  wards towards  the  men  of  Ireland,  so  that  none  of  them  can  say  it  was  in  running  away  or  in  going  backward  I  fell."  "  I  will  surely  give  that  leave,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  the  thing  you  ask  is  a  right  gift  for  a  fighting  man."  And  after  that  he  went  back  to  his  own  camping-place. 

Now,  on  that  day  above  any  other,  a  very  downhearted  feeling  came  on  Cuchulain,  he  to  be  fighting  alone  against  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland.  And  he  bade  Laeg  to  go  to  Conchubar  and  to  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  to  say  to  them  that  he,  the  son  of  Dechtire,  was  tired  with  fighting  every  day,  and  with  the  wounds  he  had  got,  and  not  one  of  his  people  or  his  friends  coming  to  help  him. 

After  that  Maeve  sent  out  six  all  together  against  him,  three  men  and  three  women  that  understood  en-  chantments ;  but  he  destroyed  them  all.  And  now  that  Maeve  had  broken  her  agreement  with  him,  not  to  send  more  than  one  against  him  at  a  time,  he  did  not  spare 


214    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

her  men  any  longer,  but  from  where  he  was  he  used  his  sling  so  well  that  in  the  whole  army  there  was  neither  dog,  horse,  or  man,  that  dared  turn  his  face  towards  Cuchulain. 

It  was  one  day  at  that  time  the  Morrigu  came  to  try  and  get  healing  of  her  wounds  from  him,  for  it  was  only  by  his  own  hand  the  wounds  he  gave  could  be  healed.  She  took  the  appearance  of  an  old  woman  on  her,  and  she  milking  a  cow  with  three  teats.  Cuchulain  was  passing  by,  and  there  was  thirst  on  him,  and  he  asked  a  drink,  and  she  gave  him  the  milk  of  one  teat.  "  May  this  be  to  the  good  of  the  giver,"  he  said,  and  with  that  her  eye  that  was  wounded  was  healed.  Then  she  gave  him  milk  from  another  teat,  and  he  said  the  same  words  ;  then  she  gave  him  the  milk  from  the  third  teat.  "  The  full  blessing  of  the  gods,  and  of  the  people  of  the  plough,  on  you,"  he  said.  And  with  that,  all  the  wounds  of  the  Great  Queen  were  healed. 

Then  the  men  of  the  four  great  provinces  of  Ireland  made  their  camp,  and  put  up  walls  at  the  place  called  the  Great  Breach,  on  the  plain  of  Muirthemne  ;  but  they  sent  the  cattle  they  had  with  them  southward.  And  Cuchulain  took  his  place  on  a  hill  ;  and  in  the  evening  Laeg  made  a  fire  for  him  there,  and  the  flame  flashed  on  the  bright  shining  weapons  of  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  when  Cuchulain  saw  so  many  of  them,  and  they  so  near  him,  great  anger  came  on  him,  and  he  took  his  spears  and  his  shield  and  his  sword  and  shook  them,  and  he  gave  out  his  loud  hero  cry,  and  it  was  such  a  great  cry  he  gave  that  the  Bocanachs  and  Bananachs  and  the  witches  of  the  valley  answered  it  from  all  parts. 

And  when  the  men  in  the  camp  heard  these  great  cries,  they  thought  it  was  an  attack  that  was  being  made  upon  them,  and  they  ran  against  one  another,  and  fought  one  another  in  their  fright,  so  that  a  hundred  of  them  were  killed  in  that  night. 


LUGH  OF  THE  LONG  HAND   215 

Then  Laeg  saw  a  man  coming  through  the  camp  from  the  north-east.  "  There  is  a  man  coming  towards  us,  Httle  Hound,"  he  said.  "  What  is  the  appearance  on  him  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  "  He  is  very  tall  and  handsome  and  shining,  and  he  has  a  green  cloak  about  him,  fastened  with  a  silver  brooch  ;  a  shirt  of  silk  that  is  embroidered  with  red  gold,  falling  to  his  knees ;  a  black  shield  in  his  hand,  with  a  border  of  white  bronze,  and  a  spear  with  five  prongs.  And  it  is  a  strange  thing,"  he  said,  "  that  no  one  in  the  whole  camp  seems  to  see  him  or  to  take  any  heed  of  him."  "  That  is  so,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  and  the  men  of  Ireland  take  no  heed  of  him  because  they  cannot  see  him  ;  and  I  know  well  it  is  one  of  my  friends  among  the  Sidhe  that  is  coming  to  give  me  help  and  relief;  for  they  know  it  is  hard  for  me  to  be  standing  alone  against  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland." 

Then  the  man  of  the  Sidhe,  that  was  Lugh  of  the  Long  Hand,  came  and  spoke  with  Cuchulain,  and  it  is  what  he  said,  that  he  knew  he  was  tired  out  and  in  want  of  sleep.  "  And  sleep  now,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  by  the  grave  in  the  Lerga,  and  I  myself  will  keep  watch  over  you  till  the  end  of  three  days  and  three  nights.  So  Cuchulain  fell  asleep  there  and  then  by  the  grave  that  is  in  the  Lerga,  and  no  wonder  in  that,  for  he  had  been  fighting  since  before  the  feast  of  Samhain  without  sleep,  but  all  the  while  killing  and  attacking  and  destroying  the  men  of  Ireland — unless  he  might  sleep  a  little  while  beside  his  spear  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  his  head  on  his  hand,  and  his  hand  on  his  spear,  and  his  spear  on  his  knee.  And  while  he  was  lying  in  his  heavy  sleep,  the  man  of  the  Sidhe  put  Druid  herbs  on  his  wounds,  so  that  they  were  all  healed.  So  he  slept  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  rose  up  and  passed  his  hand  over  his  face,  and  he  blushed  red  from  head  to  foot  with  the  strengthening  of  his  courage  that  he  felt  in  him,  and  he  would  have  been  ready  to  go  there  and  then 


2i6    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

into  any  great  gathering  or  feasting  hall  in  all  Ireland.  "  How  long  have  I  been  in  my  sleep  ? "  he  asked  the  man.  "  Three  days  and  three  nights."  "  Then  you  have  done  me  a  bad  turn  indeed,"  he  said,  "for  the  men  of  Ireland  have  been  left  in  quiet  all  that  time."  "  They  were  not  indeed,"  said  the  man.  "  Who  was  it  stood  up  to  them  then  ? "  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  was  the  boy  troop  came  from  the  North,  from  Emain  Macha,"  he  said ;  "  three  times  fifty  sons  of  the  chief  men  of  Ulster,  and  they  attacked  the  army  three  times,  and  they  killed  three  times  their  own  number,  but  they  themselves  were  all  killed  in  the  end.  And  Follaman,  son  of  Conchubar,  was  leading  them,  and  he  had  made  a  boast  that  he  would  never  go  home  again  unless  he  could  bring  Ailell's  head  along  with  him,  and  the  gold  crown  that  was  on  it.  But  two  foster-sons  of  Ailell,  the  two  sons  of  Betchach,  son  of  Baen,  fell  on  him  and  wounded  him,  so  that  he  got  his  death."  "  My  grief,  and  oh !  my  grief  that  I  was  not  there,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  for  if  I  had  been  in  it,  the  boy  troop  would  never  have  been  destroyed,  and  Conchubar's  son  would  not  have  come  to  his  death."  "  Do  not  be  fretting,  little  Hound,  "  said  the  strange  man  ;  "  there  is  no  reproach  on  your  name  by  it."  "  Stop  here  with  me  to-night,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  the  two  of  us  together  will  avenge  the  boy  troop."  "  I  will  not  indeed,"  said  he  ;  "  but  let  you  yourself  play  the  game  out  now  with  the  men  of  Ireland,  for  it  is  not  they  that  have  power  over  your  life  at  this  time." 

With  that  he  went  away,  and  Cuchulain  said  to  Laeg,  "  Yoke  the  scythed  chariot  for  me  now,  if  you  have  the  things  belonging  to  it."  Then  Laeg  rose  up  and  got  ready  the  chariot,  and  he  put  on  his  light  dress  of  deer-  skins, that  was  spotted  and  striped  and  close-fitting,  so  that  his  arms  were  left  free.  And  over  that  he  put  his  raven-black  cloak,  and  his  shining  helmet  on  his  head  ;  and  on  his  forehead  he  put  the  narrow  band  of  gold  that 


DUBTHACH'S  JEALOUSY  217 

chariot-drivers  were  used  to  wear.  And  then  he  threw  over  the  horses  the  cloths  that  covered  them  all  over,  and  that  were  studded  with  little  blades,  and  spikes,  and  points,  so  that  every  time  the  chariot  moved,  it  brought  some  sharp  point  against  those  that  were  near  it,  the  way  every  point  and  every  head  of  the  chariot  would  cut  its  sure  path ;  and  he  gathered  the  reins  in  his  hand,  and  the  goad,  and  the  long  whip. 

And  then  Cuchulain  put  on  his  armour,  and  took  his  spears,  and  his  sword,  and  his  shield  that  had  a  rim  so  sharp  it  would  cut  a  hair  against  the  stream,  and  his  cloak  that  was  made  of  the  precious  fleeces  of  the  land  of  the  Sidhe,  that  had  been  brought  to  him  by  Manannan  from  the  King  of  Sorcha.  He  went  out  then  against  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  attacked  them,  and  his  anger  came  on  him,  so  that  it  was  not  his  own  appearance  he  had  on  him,  but  the  appearance  of  a  god.  And  after  that  he  turned  back  and  left  them,  and  there  was  no  wound  on  himself,  or  on  the  horses,  or  on  Laeg  that  day.  And  he  made  a  round  of  the  whole  army,  mowing  men  down  on  every  side,  in  revenge  for  the  boy  troop  of  Emain. 

But  the  next  day  he  was  standing  on  the  hill,  young,  and  comely,  and  shining,  and  the  cloud  of  his  anger  had  gone  from  him.  Then  the  women  and  the  young  girls  in  the  camp,  and  the  poets  and  the  singers,  came  out  to  look  at  him  ;  but  Maeve  hid  her  face  behind  a  shelter  of  shields,  thinking  he  might  make  a  cast  at  her  with  his  sling.  And  there  was  wonder  on  these  women  to  see  him  so  quiet  and  so  gentle  to-day,  and  he  such  a  terror  to  the  whole  army  yesterday;  and  they  bade  the  men  lift  them  up  on  their  shields  to  the  height  of  their  shoulders,  the  way  they  could  have  a  good  sight  of  him. 

But  Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  saw  his  own  wife  climbing  up  with  the  other  women  to  look  at  Cuchulain,  and  great  anger  and  jealousy  came  on  him  ;  and  he  said  to  the  chief  men  of  the  army  that  it  would  be  best  for 


2i8    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

them  to  surround  Cuchulain  secretly  on  all  sides,  and  then  to  let  on  to  be  fighting  among  themselves,  so  as  to  lead  him  down  where  he  could  not  escape  them.  But  when  Fergus  was  told  this,  he  gave  a  great  kick  of  his  foot  to  Dubthach,  that  sent  him  from  where  he  was.  And  he  spoke  angr>^  words  against  Dubthach,  and  he  told  him  he  would  be  well  paid  for  the  harm  he  had  planned,  whenever  the  men  of  Ulster  would  get  up  from  their  weakness,  and  come  out  to  help  Cuchulain. 

And  that  night  the  army  of  Ireland  made  their  camp  at  the  great  stone  in  the  country  of  Ross  ;  and  then  Maeve  asked  which  of  them  would  go  out  and  fight  with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow.  But  every  one  of  the  men  of  Ireland  said  :  "  It  is  not  I  that  will  go."  "  It  is  not  one  of  my  family  that  should  be  sent  to  his  death."  Then  Maeve  asked  Fergus  to  go  out  and  fight  him.  "  It  is  not  right  for  you,"  said  Fergus,  "  to  ask  me  to  go  against  a  young  boy,  and  he  my  own  pupil  and  my  foster-son."  But  Maeve  pressed  him  so  hard  that  he  could  not  but  take  the  work  in  hand  ;  and  early  in  the  morning  he  went  out  to  the  ford  of  fighting  where  Cuchulain  was.  When  Cuchulain  saw  him  coming  he  said  :  "  Truly,  my  master,  it  is  not  safe  for  you  to  come  and  fight,  and  you  without  a  sword,"  for  Ailell  had  not  given  him  back  his  own  sword  yet.  "  It  is  no  matter,"  he  said,  "for  if  I  had  a  sword  in  my  sheath,  it  is  not  on  you  I  would  use  it.  And  now,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  for  the  sake  of  all  I  did  for  you,  and  all  Conchubar  and  the  whole  of  Ulster  did  for  you  in  your  bringing-up,  let  you  give  way  before  me  to-day,  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  Ireland."  "Indeed  I  am  loth  to  give  way  before  any  man  in  this  war,"  said  Cuchulain.  "You  need  not  mind  that,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  I  will  do  the  same  for  you  when  the  great  last  battle  of  this  war  is  fought ;  it  is  then  I  will  turn  and  run  before  you,  when  you  are  covered  with  wounds  and  with  blood.     And  if  I  run  then,"  he  said,  "  all  the  men  of 


THE   OUTLAWS  219 

Ireland  will  run  along  with  me."  So  Cuchulain  agreed  to  do  that,  because  it  would  be  for  the  profit  of  Ulster.  And  he  bade  Laeg  make  ready  his  chariot ;  and  presently,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten  by  Fergus,  he  gave  way  to  him  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  Ireland.  When  they  saw  it,  they  called  out :  "  He  is  running  before  you,  Fergus."  And  Maeve  called  out :  "  Follow  him,  Fergus —  make  haste,  the  way  he  will  not  escape  you."  "  I  will  not  indeed,"  said  Fergus,  "  I  will  follow  him  no  farther  ;  and  if  you  think  I  did  not  make  him  run  far  enough,"  he  said,  "  I  did  more  than  all  the  rest  of  the  men  that  went  against  him  up  to  this  ;  and  I  will  make  no  other  attack  on  him,"  he  said,  "  until  all  the  men  of  Ireland  have  fought  with  him,  one  by  one." 

So  that  was  the  end  of  the  fight  between  Fergus  and  Cuchulain. 

There  was  a  man  of  Connaught  at  that  time  whose  name  was  Ferchu,  and  he  had  been  at  war  with  Ailell  and  Maeve  from  the  time  they  got  the  kingdom,  and  he  used  to  be  robbing  the  country  and  destroying  it,  so  that  he  was  made  an  outlaw.  And  some  of  his  men  heard  that  the  whole  army  of  Connaught  was  being  vexed  and  hindered  by  one  man ;  and  when  they  told  it  to  Ferchu,  he  said  :  "  It  would  be  a  good  chance  for  us  to  go  and  attack  that  man,  and  to  bring  his  head  with  us  to  Ailell  and  Maeve,  for  if  we  do  that,"  he  said,  "  they  will  forgive  us  all  the  harm  we  have  done  their  country." 

So  he  himself  and  his  twelve  men  went  forward  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  and  they  attacked  him  all  together.  But  Cuchulain  was  not  long  in  making  an  end  of  them,  and  he  struck  off  their  heads,  and  put  them  on  twelve  stones  ;  and  he  put  Ferchu's  head  on  a  stone  by  itself. 

Then  the  men  of  Ireland  consulted  together  again  who  they  would  send  out  to  fight  on  the  next  day  ;  and 


220    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

it  is  what  they  all  said,  that  it  was  Calatin  and  his  twenty-seven  sons  and  his  sister's  son,  Glas,  son  of  Delga,  should  go  out.  Now  it  is  the  way  they  were,  every  man  of  them  had  poison  in  himself  and  in  his  weapons ;  and  there  was  not  one  of  them  ever  made  a  cast  of  a  spear  or  a  stone  that  missed,  and  there  was  no  one  that  would  be  wounded  by  them  but  he  would  die,  either  on  the  spot  or  within  the  week.  So  great  rewards  were  promised  them,  if  they  would  go  out  against  Cuchulain.  And  Fergus  was  there  at  the  time  the  business  was  knotted.  "  And  surely,"  every  one  said,  "  they  are  only  one  man,  for  they  are  all  members  of  Calatin's  body."  After  that,  Fergus  went  into  his  tent,  to  his  people,  and  he  gave  a  deep  groan  of  trouble,  and  he  said  :  "  My  grief  for  the  thing  that  is  to  be  done  to-  morrow." "  What  thing  is  that  ? "  said  they  all.  ''  Cuchulain  to  be  killed,"  he  said.  "  Who  would  kill  him  ?  "  said  they.  "  Calatin  and  his  sons,"  he  said,  "  and  if  there  is  any  one  of  you  would  go  and  watch  the  fight  and  bring  me  word  what  happens,  I  would  give  him  a  good  reward,  and  my  blessing."  "  I  will  go,"  said  Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba. 

So  in  the  morning  Calatin,  with  his  sons  and  his  sister's  son,  rose  up  and  went  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  and  Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba,  went  along  with  them.  And  as  soon  as  they  came  near  him,  they  threw  their  twenty-  nine  spears  at  him  all  together,  in  one  cast,  and  not  one  of  them  drew  blood,  for  he  caught  them  all  on  his  shield.  Then  Cuchulain  drew  his  sword  from  the  sheath  to  hack  off  the  spears  and  to  lighten  his  shield  ;  but  while  he  was  doing  that,  they  all  ran  at  him  as  one  man  and  put  their  twenty-nine  right  hands  on  his  head,  and  forced  his  face  down  to  the  gravel  and  the  sand  of  the  ford.  And  he  gave  out  his  great  hero  cry,  and  the  cry  of  a  man  in  unequal  fight,  and  there  was  not  a  man  in  the  camp,  and  he  not  dead  or  asleep,  but  heard  it. 


FIACHA,   A    DEBT  221 

Then  Fiacha,  son  of  Firaba,  came  up,  and  when  he  saw  what  had  happened,  the  love  of  his  own  countryman  came  over  him,  and  he  pulled  out  his  sword  and  hit  the  nine-and-twenty  hands  off  Calatin  and  his  sons,  with  one  blow.  Cuchulain  raised  up  his  head  then,  and  gave  a  deep  sigh  of  relief,  and  he  saw  who  it  was  had  come  to  his  help.  "  That  was  done  quiet  and  easy,  my  good  comrade,"  he  said.  "  You  may  think  it  is  quiet  and  easy  I  was,"  said  Fiacha,  "  but  if  what  I  did  is  heard  of  in  the  camp,  the  reward  that  will  fall  on  me  will  not  be  quiet  and  easy.  For  if  the  men  of  the  children  of  Rudraige  should  hear  of  the  stroke  I  made  for  you,  it  is  with  sword  and  spear  my  reward  will  be  paid."  "  I  give  you  my  word,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  that  now  I  have  lifted  my  head  and  got  my  breath  again,  unless  you  tell  tales  on  yourself,  none  of  these  men  will  tell  tales  on  you." 

With  that  he  made  an  attack  on  Calatin  and  his  sons,  and  he  began  to  hack  and  to  cut  at  them  till  there  was  nothing  left  of  them  but  limbs  and  little  pieces  eastward  and  westward  over  the  whole  face  of  the  ford.  Only  one  man  of  them,  Glas,  son  of  Delga,  got  away  and  ran,  but  Cuchulain  rushed  after  him  and  gave  him  a  great  blow.  But  he  got  as  far  as  Ailell  and  Maeve's  tent,  and  all  he  could  say  was,  "  Fiacha !  Fiacha ! "  before  he  fell  dead. 

Fergus  and  Maeve  said  :  "  What  debts  are  those  he  called  out  about  ?  " — for  Fiacha  is  the  word  for  a  debt  in  Irish.  "  I  do  not  know  indeed,"  said  Fergus,  "  unless  it  might  be  that  some  one  in  the  camp  owed  him  a  debt,  and  that  it  was  on  his  mind."  "  That  must  have  been  so,"  said  Ailell.  "  By  my  word,"  said  Fergus,  "  however  it  was,  all  his  debts  are  paid  now." 

And  at  the  ford  where  Calatin  and  his  sons  got  their  death,  there  is  a  stone  with  the  marks  of  their  sword-  hilts,  and  the  butt-ends  of  their  spears  on  it  to  this  day. 

Then  it  was  settled  by  the  men  of  Ireland  that  it  was 


222    WAR   FOR    BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

Ferdiad,  son  of  Daire,  the  great  champion  of  the  men  of  Domnand,  should  go  out  and  meet  Cuchulain  the  next  day.  For  they  had  the  same  way  of  fighting,  and  it  was  with  the  same  teachers  they  had  learned  the  knowledge  of  arms,  with  Scathach  and  with  Uathach  and  with  Aoife ;  and  neither  of  them  had  an  advantage  over  the  other,  except  that  Cuchulain  had  the  feat  of  the  Gae  Bulg.  But  Ferdiad  had  good  armour  to  pro-  tect him  against  any  man  he  would  fight  with. 

So  they  sent  messengers  to  bring  Ferdiad,  but  he  refused  and  would  not  come,  for  he  knew  it  was  what  they  wanted  of  him,  to  fight  against  his  friend,  his  companion  and  his  fellow  pupil,  Cuchulain. 

Then  Maeve  sent  the  Druids  and  the  satirists  to  him,  that  they  might  make  three  hurtful  satires  and  three  hill-  top satires  on  him,  if  he  would  not  come  with  them,  that  would  raise  three  blisters  on  his  face.  Shame  and  Blemish  and  Reproach,  so  that  if  he  did  not  die  on  the  moment,  he  would  be  dead  before  the  end  of  nine  days. 

Then  Ferdiad  came  with  them  for  the  sake  of  his  good  name,  for  he  thought  it  better  to  fall  by  spears  than  by  satires.  And  when  he  came  he  was  received  with  honour  and  attendance,  and  he  was  served  with  pleasant  drinks,  so  that  he  grew  merry,  and  his  mind  was  confused.  And  great  rewards  were  offered  him  if  he  would  go  out  against  Cuchulain ;  clothes  of  all  colours  for  his  men,  and  speckled  satins,  and  silver  and  gold,  and  the  equal  of  his  own  lands  of  the  level  plains  of  Magh  Ai,  without  rent  or  disturbance,  secure  to  his  son  and  to  his  grandson  and  to  their  children  to  the  end  of  life  and  time. 

And  it  is  what  Maeve  said  :  "  It  is  a  great  reward  I  am  giving  you,  Ferdiad,  and  why  would  you  not  accept  it  ? "  And  Ferdiad  was  making  excuses.  "  I  will  not  take  your  reward  without  good  pledges,"  he  said,  "  for  it  is  a  heavy   fight  is   before   me ;  he   that   has   the   name  of 


MAEVE   AND    FERDIAD  223 

Cuchulain  is  surely  a  good  Hound."  "  I  will  give  you  a  champion's  pledge,"  said  Maeve ;  "  you  will  not  be  bound  to  come  to  our  gatherings,  you  will  get  horses  and  bridles ;  I  will  call  you  my  friend  above  all  other  men."  "  I  will  not  go  to  this  fight,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  without  some  other  securities,  for  this  is  a  fight  will  be  heard  of  till  the  end  of  life  and  time."  "  Take  all  you  want,"  said  Maeve.  "  There  is  no  delay  except  with  yourself  Bind  us  till  you  are  satisfied  by  the  right  hand  of  kings  and  of  princes ;  there  is  nothing  I  will  refuse  you."  "  I  must  have  six  securities  and  no  less,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  before  I  will  go  out  and  be  destroyed  by  Cuchulain,  and  all  the  whole  army  looking  on."  "  I  will  give  you  whatever  securities  you  want,"  said  Maeve,  "  however  hard  it  may  be  to  come  at  them  ;  Domnall  in  his  chariot ;  Niaman  of  the  Slaughter,  both  of  them  protectors  of  bards ;  bind  Morann  if  you  want  sure  payment ;  bind  Carpre  Min  of  Manand,  he  that  has  a  string  of  knowledge  in  his  harp ;  bind  our  own  two  sons."  "  O  Maeve,  it  is  a  bitter  woman  you  are,"  said  Ferdiad.  "  And  it  is  not  a  gentle  wife  to  a  husband  you  are,  but  it  is  a  fit  queen  you  are  for  Cruachan  of  the  Swords,  with  your  high  talk  and  your  fierce  strength.  But  in  spite  of  all  the  words  you  are  stirring  me  up  with,"  he  said,  "if  you  would  offer  me  the  land  and  the  sea,  I  would  not  take  them,  without  the  sun  and  the  moon  along  with  them."  "You  need  not  wait  longer  than  to-day  and  to-morrow,"  said  Maeve,  "  before  you  will  get  your  fill  of  all  sorts  of  the  jewels  of  the  earth.  And  here  is  my  brooch  with  its  hooked  pin,"  she  said  ;  "  and  more  than  all  that,  Ferdiad,  so  soon  as  you  have  killed  this  Hound  of  feats,  I  will  give  you  Findabair  of  the  champions,  queen  of  the  west  of  Elga."  ^ 

Ferdiad  gave  in  to  her  then,  and  he  bound  her  on  the  sureties   of  the   aforesaid   six  for  the  fulfilment  of  her 


224    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

promises   of  the  reward  ;  and  she  bound  him  to  fight  with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow. 

Then  Fergus  got  his  horses  harnessed  and  his  chariot  yoked,  and  he  went  out  to  where  Cuchulain  was,  to  tell  him  of  all  that  had  happened.  "  My  welcome  before  you,  my  master  Fergus,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  am  glad  of  that  welcome,  my  pupil,"  said  Fergus.  "  But  what  I  am  come  for  is  to  tell  you  who  it  is  that  is  coming  to  fight  at  the  early  hour  of  the  morning  of  to-morrow."  "  I  will  listen  to  that,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Your  own  friend  and  companion,  and  fellow-pupil,  the  man  that  learned  the  use  of  arms  with  you,  Ferdiad,  son  of  Daire,  the  hero  of  the  men  of  Domnand."  "  I  give  my  word,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  not  my  wish,  my  friend  to  come  out  against  me."  "  And  now,"  said  Fergus,  "  you  must  be  careful  and  ready  more  than  any  other  time,  for  there  was  not  the  like  of  Ferdiad  among  any  of  the  men  who  have  fought  you  up  to  this."  "  I  am  here,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  hindering  and  delaying  the  four  great  provinces  of  Ireland,  from  the  beginning  of  the  winter  to  the  beginning  of  spring,  and  I  have  not  drawn  back  one  foot  before  any  man  in  that  time,  and  I  think  it  likely  I  will  not  draw  back  before  him."  "  Neither  has  Ferdiad  any  fear  on  him  before  you,  now  his  anger  is  stirred  up,"  said  Fergus,  "  and  besides  that,  he  has  good  armour  to  protect  him."  "  Be  quiet  now,  Fergus,  and  do  not  let  me  hear  any  more  of  that  story,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  I  was  always  well  able  to  stand  against  him  in  any  place,  or  on  any  ground."  "It  is  not  easy  to  get  the  better  of  him,"  said  Fergus,  "  for  he  is  fierce  in  fighting,  and  he  has  the  strength  of  a  hundred."  "  There  will  be  a  sharp  fight  when  myself  and  Ferdiad  come  to  the  ford,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  it  will  not  be  without  being  told  in  stories."  "  O  Cuchulain  of  the  red  sword,"  said  Fergus,  "  it  would  be  better  to  me  than  a  great  reward,  you   to   carry  proud  Ferdiad's  purple  cloak  eastward." 


FERDIAD    AND    HIS    DRIVER      225 

"  I  give  my  word  and  my  oath,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  it  is  I  myself  will  get  the  victory  over  Ferdiad."  Then  Fergus  went  back  to  the  encampment. 

At  the  same  time  Ferdiad  went  to  his  tent  and  to  his  people,  and  told  them  how  he  was  bound  by  Maeve  to  fight  with  Cuchulain  on  the  morrow,  and  he  told  how  he  had  bound  Maeve  by  six  sureties  for  the  fulfilment  of  her  promises,  if  Cuchulain  should  fall  by  him. 

It  is  not  happy  in  their  minds  the  people  of  Ferdiad's  tent  were  that  night,  but  gloomy  and  heavy-hearted  ;  for  they  were  sure  that  wherever  Cuchulain  and  Ferdiad  would  meet,  it  was  there  one  of  them  would  get  his  death,  and  they  were  sure  that  one  would  be  their  own  master ;  for  no  one  at  all  had  been  able  to  stand  against  Cuchulain  since  the  beginning  of  the  war. 

Ferdiad  slept  through  the  early  part  of  the  night  very  heavily,  and  when  the  latter  end  of  the  night  came,  his  sleep  went  from  him,  and  his  drunkenness  had  passed  away,  and  the  thought  of  the  fight  was  pressing  on  him.  And  he  bade  his  driver  to  harness  the  horses,  and  to  yoke  his  chariot.  But  the  driver  tried  to  turn  him  from  it.  "  It  would  be  better  for  you  to  stop  here  than  to  go,"  he  said,  "  for  my  liking  of  it  is  not  more  than  my  disliking." 

"  Be  silent,  boy,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  for  I  will  not  be  turned  from  this  journey  by  any  young  lad ;  but  I  will  go  to  the  ford,  a  ford  the  ravens  will  be  croaking  over ;  I  will  fight  with  Cuchulain  till  I  wound  his  strong  body,  till  I  crush  the  courage  out  of  him  the  way  that  he  will  die." 

"  It  would  be  better  for  you  to  stop  here,"  said  the  driver,  "  for  it  is  not  gentle  your  threats  are  ;  your  parting  will  be  sorrowful ;  there  is  one  to  whom  it  will  be  a  sickness  ;  grief  will  come  of  that  meeting  with  Cuchulain  ;  it  is  long  it  will  be  remembered  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  him  who  goes  that  journey."  "  It  is  not  right  what  you  are  saying,"  said   Ferdiad  ;  "  it  is  not  for  a   brave  man  to 

P 


226    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

refuse — it  is  not  in  our  race.  I  will  delay  no  longer,  courage  is  better  than  fear ;  let  us  set  out  now  to  the  ford." 

Then  Ferdiad's  horses  were  harnessed,  and  his  chariot  was  yoked,  and  he  went  forward  to  the  ford,  and  the  day  with  its  full  light  came  upon  him  there.  "  Now,  boy,"  he  said,  "  spread  out  the  skins  and  the  cushions  of  my  chariot  under  me  here,  until  I  get  some  sleep  and  rest,  for  I  got  no  sleep  at  the  end  of  the  night,  with  the  care  of  the  fight  upon  me." 

So  his  servant  unharnessed  the  horses,  and  settled  the  skins  and  cushions  of  the  chariot  under  him,  and  the  hea\y  rest  of  sleep  came  upon  him. 

But  as  to  Cuchulain,  he  did  not  rise  up  at  all  till  the  day  had  come  with  its  full  light,  the  way  the  men  of  Ireland  would  not  say  it  was  fear  that  was  on  him  that  made  him  rise.  And  when  the  day  came  :  "  It  would  be  as  well,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  to  yoke  the  chariot,  for  it  is  an  early-rising  man  that  is  coming  to  meet  us  to-day." 

"  The  horses  are  harnessed,  and  the  chariot  is  yoked,"  said  Laeg ;  "  let  you  get  into  it,  and  there  will  be  no  hindrance  to  your  courage." 

With  that  the  ready-handed,  battle-winning  son  of  Sualtim  leaped  into  the  chariot,  and  there  shouted  around  him  the  Bocanachs  and  Bananachs,  and  witches  of  the  valley.  For  the  Sidhe  were  used  to  set  up  their  shouts  around  him,  the  way  the  fear  and  the  wonder  would  be  great  before  him  in  every  fight  he  would  go  into. 

And  it  was  not  long  until  Ferdiad's  driver  heard  the  noise  coming  near,  the  straining  of  the  harness,  the  creaking  of  the  chariot,  the  ringing  of  the  armour  and  of  the  shield,  the  trampling  of  the  horses,  the  joyful  coming  of  Cuchulain  to  the  ford. 

The  driver  came  and  laid  his  hand  on  his  master.  "  Good  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  rise  up  ;  here  they  are  coming. 


THE   COMING   OF   CUCHULAIN     227 

"  For  I  hear,"  he  said,  "  the  creaking  of  a  chariot ;  it  has  come  over  Breg  Ross,  over  Braine ;  it  has  come  over  the  highway  by  the  foot  of  Baile-in-Bile ;  he  is  a  mighty  Hound  that  urges  it ;  he  is  a  good  driver  that  yokes  it  ;  he  is  a  free  hawk  that  hurries  his  horses  towards  the  south.  It  is  not  he  that  will  be  slow  in  the  fight.  It  is  a  pity  for  him  that  is  on  the  height  waiting  for  the  Hound  of  valour.  It  is  a  year  ago  I  foretold  there  would  come  a  Hound,  the  Hound  of  Emain,  a  Hound  with  all  colours  about  him — the  Hound  of  Ulster,  the  Hound  of  Battle ;  I  hear  him — I  have  heard  him  coming." 

"  Good  servant,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  why  is  it  you  have  been  praising  that  man  ever  since  you  came  out  from  the  house  ?  It  is  likely  you  are  not  without  wages  for  your  great  praise  of  him.  Yet  it  has  been  foretold  to  me  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve,  it  is  he  that  will  fall  by  me.  And  it  is  a  time  to  help  me,"  he  said  ;  "  and  let  you  be  silent,  and  give  up  praising  him,  that  your  foretelling  may  not  come  true.  It  is  not  for  you  to  give  up  on  the  brink  of  the  fight ;  surely  I  will  soon  have  the  reward." 

And  the  driver  said  :  "  He  is  coming,  not  slowly,  but  quick  as  the  wind,  or  as  water  from  a  high  cliff,  or  like  swift  thunder."  "  Surely  you  have  taken  wages  for  these  great  praises  you  put  upon  him,"  said  Ferdiad  ;  "  it  is  not  against  him  you  are,  but  praising  him,  and  putting  a  great  name  on  him." 

It  was  not  long  then  until  Ferdiad  saw  Cuchulain  coming  towards  him  in  his  chariot,  and  it  is  how  his  two  horses  were  going,  like  a  hawk  sweeping  from  a  cliff  on  a  day  of  hard  wind,  or  like  a  sweeping  gust  of  the  spring  wind  on  a  March  day  over  a  smooth  plain,  or  like  the  swift-  ness of  a  wild  stag  when  he  is  first  started  by  the  hounds  in  his  first  field  ;  as  if  they  were  on  fiery  flagstones,  so  that  the  earth  was  shaking  and  trembling  with  the  quickness  of  their  going. 

So  Cuchulain  reached  the  ford,  and  Ferdiad  came  to 


228    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

the  south  side,  and  Cuchulain  drew  up  on  the  north  side,  and  Ferdiad  bade  Cuchulain  welcome.  "  I  am  happy  at  your  coming,  Cuchulain,"  he  said.  "  I  would  have  been  glad  of  that  welcome  up  to  this  time,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  but  to-day  I  do  not  take  it  as  the  welcome  of  a  friend.  And  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  it  would  be  fitter  for  me  to  welcome  you  than  for  you  to  welcome  me,  for  it  is  you  have  come  to  me  in  the  country  and  province  where  I  am,  and  it  is  not  right  for  you  to  come  to  fight  with  me,  but  it  is  I  should  go  to  fight  with  you,  for  it  is  out  before  you  are  the  women  and  the  children,  the  young  men  and  the  horses,  the  flocks,  the  herds,  and  the  cattle  of  the  province  of  Ulster." 

"Good  Cuchulain,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  what  has  brought  you  to  fight  with  me  at  all  ?  For  when  we  were  with  Scathach  and  with  Uathach  and  with  Aoife,  you  were  my  serving-boy,  to  tie  up  my  spears  and  to  make  ready  my  bed."  "  That  is  true  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  but  it  was  as  less  in  age  than  you  I  was  used  to  do  so ;  but  that  is  not  the  story  that  will  be  told  of  us  after  this  day,  for  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  whole  world  I  would  not  fight  to-day." 

And  it  is  then  each  of  them  spoke  sharp,  unfriendly  words  against  the  other ;  and  it  is  what  Ferdiad  said  :  "  What  has  brought  you,  O  Hound,  to  fight  with  a  strong  fighter?  It  is  red  your  blood  will  be,  flowing  over  the  harness  of  your  horses  ;  it  is  a  pity  for  your  journey  ;  it  is  long  it  will  be  spoken  of;  you  will  be  in  much  want  of  healing  if  you  ever  get  back  to  your  own  house,"  he  said. 

"  I  have  fought  with  heroes,  with  chiefs  of  armies,  with  troops,  with  hundreds  before  now,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  what  I  have  to  do  to-day  is  to  make  an  end  of  you,  to  bring  you  down  in  our  first  path  of  battle." 

"  You  have  met  now  with  a  man  that  will  put  re-  proach on  you,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  for  it  is  I  myself  will  do  that.     It  is  well  the  loss  of  the  men  of  Ulster  will  be 


BEFORE   THE    FIGHT  229 

remembered,"  he  said,  "  their  champion  to  be  put  down,  and  they  looking  on." 

"  What  way  shall  we  meet  one  another  ? "  said  Cuchulain.  "  Is  it  in  our  chariots  we  had  best  fight,  or  is  it  with  my  sword  and  spear  I  am  to  overthrow  you,  if  the  time  has  come  ?  "  And  Ferdiad  said  :  "  Before  the  setting  of  the  sun  to-night,  you  will  be  fighting  as  if  with  a  mountain,  and  it  is  not  white  that  battle  will  be.  The  men  of  Ulster  will  be  shouting  for  you,"  he  said,  "  till  you  grow  overbold  ;  but  it  is  sorrowful  they  will  be,  when  your  ghost  passes  over  them  and  through  them."  "  You  are  fallen  into  the  gap  of  danger,  Ferdiad,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  the  end  of  your  life  has  come,  not  by  treachery,  but  by  sharp  weapons.  You  may  think  much  of  yourself  till  we  meet  one  another,  but  you  will  never  fight  in  a  battle  again,  from  this  day  to  the  end  of  time."  "  Leave  off  now  from  your  boastings,"  said  Ferdiad ;  "  it  is  you  are  the  greatest  boaster  in  the  world.  I  know  well  you  are  no  fighter  at  all,  you  heart  of  a  bird  in  a  cage ;  you  are  but  a  giggling  fellow,  without  courage,  without  strength."  But  Cuchulain  said :  "  When  we  were  together  with  Scathach,  we  used  to  be  practising  together,  we  used  to  go  to  every  battle  together,  because  of  our  bravery  that  was  equal.  You  were  my  heart  companion,  you  were  my  people,  you  were  my  family — I  never  found  one  was  dearer ;  it  is  sorrowful  your  death  would  be  to  me." 

"  Where  is  the  use  of  all  this  talk  ?  "  said  Ferdiad  ;  "  your  great  name  will  be  lost,  your  head  will  be  on  a  stake  before  the  crowing  of  the  cock.  Madness  and  grief  are  taking  hold  of  you,  Cuchulain,"  he  said,  "  and  it  is  bad  treatment  you  will  get  from  me,  because  it  is  on  your-  self the  fault  is." 

"  Good  Ferdiad,"  Cuchulain  said  then,  "  it  was  not  right  for  you  to  come  out  against  me,  through  the  stirring  up  and  the  meddling  of  Ailell  and  of  Maeve  ;  and  none  of  those  who  came  before  you  got  victory  or  success,  but 


230    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

they  all  fell  by  me,  and  you  will  fall  along  with  them.  And,  O  Ferdiad,  strong  fighter,"  he  said,  "do  not  come  against  me ;  the  meeting  will  bring  sorrow  to  many,  and  what  is  worse  than  sorrow  to  you.  Have  you  not  been  bought  with  many  presents  ?  A  purple  belt,  a  suit  of  armour  ?  But,  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  the  woman  for  whom  you  are  come  to  this  fight,  Findabair,  daughter  of  Maeve,  however  comely  she  may  be,  will  never  be  given  to  you  ;  for  she  has  been  offered  to  many  before  you,"  he  said,  "  and  many  like  you  have  been  wounded  for  her  sake. 

"  Do  not  break  your  oath  not  to  fight  with  me  ;  do  not  break  friendship.  Do  not  break  the  word  you  gave  me,  do  not  come  against  me. 

"  The  woman  has  been  promised  to  fifty  others  ;  it  was  a  heavy  gift  for  them  ;  it  is  by  me  they  were  sent  to  their  grave ;  it  is  by  me  they  got  the  end  that  was  fitting  for  them. 

"  Though  Ferbaeth  was  boastful,  he  who  had  a  house-  ful of  brave  men,  it  is  short  the  time  was  till  I  quieted  his  rage  ;  I  killed  him  by  the  one  cast. 

"  The  striking  down  of  Srub  Daire's  courage  was  bitter  to  him ;  it  is  he  held  the  secrets  of  a  hundred  women  ;  he  had  a  great  name  at  one  time  ;  it  is  not  silver  thread  but  gold  thread  was  in  his  clothes. 

"  If  it  were  to  me  the  woman  was  promised  on  whom  the  kings  of  the  fair  province  smile,  I  would  not  bring  the  red  blood  on  your  body  for  it,  south  or  north,  east  or  west. 

"  And  good  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  this  is  why  it  is  not  right  for  you  to  come  to  this  fight.  When  we  were  with  Scathach,  it  is  together  we  used  to  go  to  every  battle,  to  every  wild  place,  through  every  darkness  and  every  hardship.  We  were  heart  companions  ;  we  were  com-  rades in  gatherings ;  we  shared  the  one  bed  where  we  used  to  sleep   sound    sleep.     We   used   to   practise  to- 


THE    FIGHT   WITH    FERDIAD      231 

gether,  in  many  far  countries ;  we  used  to  go  to  hard  fights ;  we  used  to  go  through  every  forest  together." 

"  O  Cuchulain  of  the  wonderful  feats,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  although  we  learned  knowledge  together,  and  although  I  know  the  bonds  friendship  put  upon  us,  it  is  I  that  will  give  you  your  first  wounds  ;  do  not  be  remembering  our  companionship,  for  it  will  not  protect  you.  And  it  is  too  long  we  are  delaying  like  this,"  he  said  ;  "  and  what  arms  shall  we  use  to-day,  Cuchulain  ?  " 

"  It  is  you  have  the  choice  of  arms  to-day,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  you  were  the  first  to  reach  the  ford."  "Do  you  remember  at  all,"  said  Ferdiad,  "the  casting  spears  we  used  to  practise  with  Scathach  and  with  Uacthach  and  with  Aoife  ?  "  "I  remember  them  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  If  you  remember,  let  us  begin  with  them,"  said  Ferdiad. 

So  they  began  with  their  casting  weapons,  and  they  took  their  protecting  shields,  and  their  round-handled  spears,  and  their  little  quill  spears,  and  their  ivory-  hilted  knives,  and  their  ivory-hafted  spears,  eight  of  each  of  them  they  had.  And  these  were  flying  from  them  and  to  them  like  bees  on  the  wing  on  a  fine  summer  day ;  there  was  no  cast  that  did  not  hit,  and  each  one  went  on  shooting  at  the  other  with  those  weapons  from  the  twilight  of  the  early  morning  to  the  full  midday,  until  all  their  weapons  were  blunted  against  the  faces  and  the  bosses  of  the  shields.  And  as  good  as  the  throwing  was,  the  defence  was  so  good  that  neither  of  them  drew  blood  from  the  other  through  that  time. 

"  Let  us  leave  these  weapons  now,  Cuchulain,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  for  it  is  not  by  the  like  of  them  our  fight  will  be  settled."  "  Let  us  leave  them  indeed  if  the  time  is  come,"  said  Cuchulain. 

They  stopped  then,  and  threw  their  darts  into  the  hands  of  their  chariot-drivers.  "  What  weapons  shall  we  use  now,  Cuchulain  ?  "  said  Ferdiad.     "  The  choice  of 


232    WARFORBULLOFCUAILGNE 

weapons  is  yours  till  night,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Let  us,  then,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  take  to  our  straight  spears,  with  the  flaxen  strings  in  them."  "  Let  us  now  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain.  And  then  they  took  two  stout  shields,  and  they  took  to  their  spears. 

Each  of  them  went  on  throwing  at  the  other  with  the  spears  from  the  middle  of  mid-day  until  the  fall  of  evening.  And  good  as  the  defence  was,  yet  the  throwing  was  so  good  that  each  of  them  wounded  the  other  in  that  time. 

"  Let  us  leave  this  now,"  said  Ferdiad.  "  Let  us  leave  it  indeed  if  the  time  has  come,"  said  Cuchulain. 

So  they  left  off,  and  they  threw  their  spears  away  from  them  into  the  hands  of  their  chariot-drivers.  Each  of  them  came  to  the  other  then,  and  each  put  his  hands  round  the  neck  of  the  other,  and  gave  him  three  kisses.  Their  horses  were  in  the  one  enclosure  that  night,  and  their  chariot-drivers  at  the  one  fire ;  and  their  chariot-  drivers  spread  beds  of  green  rushes  for  them,  with  wounded  men's  pillows  on  them.  The  men  that  had  knowledge  of  healing  came  then,  and  put  herbs  of  heal-  ing to  their  wounds.  And  of  every  herb  and  plant  that  was  put  to  Cuchulain's  wounds,  he  would  send  an  equal  share  from  him  westward  over  the  ford  to  Ferdiad,  the  way  the  men  of  Ireland  might  not  say  if  Ferdiad  should  fall  by  him,  that  it  was  by  better  means  of  cure  he  was  able  to  overcome  him. 

And  of  every  kind  of  food  and  of  drink  that  was  sent  by  the  men  of  Ireland  to  Ferdiad,  he  would  send  a  fair  share  over  the  ford  northward  to  Cuchulain  ;  because  the  providers  of  Ferdiad  were  more  than  the  providers  of  Cuchulain.  All  the  men  of  Ireland  were  providers  to  Ferdiad  for  beating  off  Cuchulain  from  them,  but  only  the  Bregians  were  providers  to  Cuchulain.  They  used  to  come  and  to  be  talking  with  him  at  the  dusk  of  every  night. 


THESECONDDAY  233 

They  rested  there  that  night,  and  they  rose  up  early  on  the  morrow,  and  came  forward  to  the  ford  of  battle. 

"  What  weapons  shall  we  use  to-day,  Ferdiad  ? "  said  Cuchulain.  "  It  is  you  have  the  choice  of  weapons  until  night,"  said  Ferdiad,  "because  I  had  my  choice  of  them  the  last  day."  "  Let  us  then,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  take  to  our  great  broad  spears  to-day  ;  for  we  shall  be  nearer  to  the  end  of  our  battle  by  the  thrusting  to-day  than  we  were  by  the  throwing  yesterday." 

Each  of  them  continued  to  cut,  and  to  wound,  and  to  redden  the  other,  from  the  twilight  of  the  early  morning  till  the  fall  of  the  evening.  If  it  were  the  custom  for  birds  in  their  flight  to  pass  through  the  bodies  of  men,  they  could  have  passed  through  their  bodies  on  that  day,  and  they  could  have  carried  pieces  of  flesh  and  blood  through  their  stabs  and  cuts,  into  the  clouds  and  the  sky  all  around.  And  when  the  fall  of  evening  came,  their  horses  were  tired,  and  their  chariot-drivers  were  down-hearted,  and  they  were  tired  themselves  as  well. 

"  Let  us  stop  from  this  now,  Ferdiad,"  said  Cuchulain,  "for  our  horses  are  tired,  and  our  chariot-drivers  are  down-hearted  ;  and  when  they  are  tired,  why  would  not  we  be  tired  as  well  ?  And  we  are  not  bound  to  go  on  for  ever,"  he  said,  "  as  is  the  custom  with  the  Fomor.  Let  us  put  the  quarrel  away  for  a  while,  now  the  noise  of  the  fighting  is  over."  "  Let  us  leave  off  indeed  if  the  time  is  come,"  said  Ferdiad. 

They  threw  their  spears  from  them  then  into  the  hands  of  their  chariot-drivers,  and  each  of  them  came  towards  the  other.  Each  of  them  put  his  hand  round  the  neck  of  the  other  and  gave  him  three  kisses.  Their  horses  were  in  the  one  enclosure  that  night,  and  their  chariot-drivers  at  the  one  fire. 

Their  chariot-drivers  made  beds  of  green  rushes  for  them,  with  wounded  men's  pillows  on  them,  and  the  men  that  had  knowledge  of  healing  came  to  examine  them 


234    WAR    FOR    BULL    OF   CUAILGNE 

that  night,  but  they  could  do  nothing  more  for  them,  because  of  the  deepness  of  their  many  wounds,  but  to  use  charms  and  spells  on  them,  to  staunch  their  blood.  Every  charm  and  every  spell  that  was  used  on  the  wounds  of  Cuchulain,  he  sent  a  full  share  of  them  over  the  ford  westward  to  Ferdiad.  And  of  every  sort  of  food  and  of  drink  that  was  sent  to  Ferdiad,  he  sent  a  share  of  them  over  the  ford  northward  to  Cuchulain. 

They  rested  there  that  night,  and  they  rose  up  early  on  the  morrow,  and  they  came  forward  to  the  ford  of  battle.  Cuchulain  saw  a  sort  of  a  dark  look  on  Ferdiad  that  day.  "  It  is  bad  you  are  looking  to-day,  Ferdiad,"  he  said ;  "  there  is  a  darkness  on  your  face,  and  a  heavi-  ness on  your  eyes,  and  your  own  appearance  is  gone  from  you."  "  It  is  not  from  fear  or  dread  of  you  I  am  like  this  to-day,"  said  Ferdiad ;  "  for  there  is  not  a  champion  in  Ireland  to-day  I  could  not  put  down."  And  Cuchulain  was  fretted  to  see  him  that  way,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  O  Ferdiad,  if  it  is  you  yourself,  I  am  sure  you  are  a  miserable  man,  to  have  come  at  the  bidding  of  a  woman  to  fight  against  your  own  com-  panion." But  Ferdiad  said :  "  O  Cuchulain,  giver  of  wounds,  true  hero,  every  man  must  come  in  the  end  to  the  sod  where  his  last  grave  shall  be." 

"  As  to  Findabair,  daughter  of  Maeve,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  whatever  her  beauty  may  be,  it  is  not  for  love  of  you  she  was  given  to  you,  but  only  for  the  sake  of  your  great  strength."  "  O  Hound  of  the  gentle  sway,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  it  is  long  ago  my  strength  was  tried  ;  but  I  never  heard  of  any  man  braver  in  fight  than  yourself;  I  never  met  so  brave  a  man  until  to-day."  "  It  is  your  own  fault  what  has  happened,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  you  to  have  come  at  the  bidding  of  a  woman  to  try  your  sword  against  your  fellow."  "If  I  had  gone  back,"  said  Ferdiad,  "without  doing   battle  with  you,  it  is   little   my    name   and    my 


THE   THIRD   DAY  235 

word  would  be  thought  of  by  Ailell  and  by  Maeve  of  Cruachan."  "  No  one  has  ever  put  food  to  his  lips,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  and  no  one  has  ever  been  born  in  honour  of  a  king  or  queen,  for  whose  sake  I  would  have  harmed  you."  "  O  Cuchulain,  winner  of  battles,"  said  Ferdiad  ;  "  it  was  not  you  but  Maeve  that  betrayed  me  ;  let  you  take  the  victory  and  the  fame,  for  it  is  not  on  you  the  blame  is." 

And  Cuchulain  said :  "  My  faithful  heart  is  like  a  clot  of  blood ;  my  life  is  nearly  gone  from  me ;  I  have  no  strength  for  high  deeds,  fighting  with  you,  Ferdiad."  "  Much  as  you  are  complaining  over  me  now,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  what  arms  shall  we  use  to-day  ?  "  "  It  is  you  have  the  choice  to-day,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  because  it  was  I  had  it  yesterday."  "  Let  us  then,"  said  Ferdiad,  "  take  to  our  swords  to-day,  for  we  will  be  nearer  the  end  of  our  battle  by  the  hewing  to-day,  than  we  were  by  the  thrusting  yesterday."  "  Let  us  do  so  indeed,"  said  Cuchulain. 

And  then  they  put  two  long  wide  shields  on  them,  and  they  took  to  their  swords,  and  each  of  them  continued  to  hack  at  the  other,  from  the  dawn  of  the  early  morning  till  the  time  of  the  fall  of  evening.  "  Let  us  leave  off  from  this  now,"  said  Cuchulain.  So  they  left  off. 

They  threw  their  swords  from  them  into  the  hands  of  their  chariot-drivers,  and  it  was  the  parting,  mournful,  sorrowful,  downhearted,  of  two  men  that  night. 

Their  horses  were  not  in  the  one  enclosure  that  night,  their  chariot-drivers  were  not  at  the  one  fire.  They  rested  that  night  there. 

And  Ferdiad  rose  up  early  next  morning,  and  went  forward  by  himself  to  the  ford.  For  he  knew  that  day  would  decide  the  fight,  and  he  knew  one  of  them  would  fall  on  that  day  there,  or  they  would  both  fall. 

And  then  he  put  on  his  battle  suit,  before  the  coming 


236    WAR    FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

of  Cuchulain  to  him.  He  put  on  his  shirt  of  striped  silk,  with  its  border  of  speckled  gold,  next  his  white  skin.  He  put  on  his  coat  of  brown  leather,  well  sewed,  over  the  outside.  He  put  on  his  apron  of  purified  iron,  through  dread  of  the  Gae  Bulg  that  day.  He  put  his  crested  helmet  of  battle  on  his  head,  on  which  were  forty  gems,  carbuncles,  in  each  division,  and  it  was  studded  with  crystal  and  with  shining  rubies  of  the  eastern  world.  He  took  his  strong  spear  into  his  right  hand,  and  his  curved  sword  upon  his  left  side,  with  its  golden  hilt,  and  its  knobs  of  red  gold,  and  his  great,  large,  bossed  shield  on  his  back. 

And  then  he  began  to  show  off  many  changing,  wonder-  ful feats,  that  he  had  never  learned  with  any  other  person,  neither  with  nurse  or  with  tutor,  or  with  Scathach  or  with  Uacthach,  or  with  Aoife,  but  that  were  made  up  that  day  by  himself  against  Cuchulain. 

Then  Cuchulain  came  to  the  ford,  and  when  he  saw  all  Ferdiad  was  doing :  "  I  see,  my  friend  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  all  those  feats  will  be  tried  on  me  one  after  another ;  and  because  of  that,"  he  said,  "  if  it  is  I  that  begin  to  give  in  to-day,  it  is  for  you  to  reproach  me,  and  to  speak  hard  words  to  me,  the  way  that  the  strength  of  my  anger  may  grow  the  more  on  me.  But  if  I  am  getting  the  better  of  him,  then  you  are  to  praise  me,  and  make  much  of  me,  that  my  courage  may  be  the  greater."  "  I  will  do  that  indeed,  my  master  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg. 

And  then  Cuchulain  put  on  his  battle  suit,  and  he  said  :  "  What  arms  shall  we  take  to-day,  Ferdiad  ? "  "  The  choice  is  yours  to-day,"  said  F'erdiad.  "  Let  us  try  the  ford  feat  then,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  Let  us  in-  deed," said  Ferdiad.  But  though  Ferdiad  agreed  to  it,  it  is  sorry  he  was  to  say  those  words,  for  he  knew  Cuchulain  was  used  to  put  an  end  to  every  fighter  that  was  against  him  in  the  feat  of  the  ford. 

It  was  great  work,  now,  that  was  done  on  that  day  at 


LAEG'S   TAUNTS  237 

the  ford  ;  the  two  champions  of  western  Europe,  the  two  gift-giving  and  wage-giving  hands  of  the  north-  west of  the  world ;  the  two  pillars  and  the  two  keys  of  the  courage  of  the  Gael ;  to  be  brought  from  far  off,  to  fight  one  against  the  other,  through  the  stirring  up  and  the  meddling  of  Aileli  and  Maeve.  Each  of  them  began  to  throw  his  weapons  at  the  other,  from  the  dawn  of  early  morning  to  the  middle  of  mid-day.  And  when  mid-day  came,  the  anger  of  the  men  grew  hotter,  and  each  of  them  drew  nearer  to  the  other.  And  then  it  was  that  Cuchulain  leaped  on  to  the  boss  of  Ferdiad's  shield,  to  strike  at  his  head  over  the  rim  of  the  shield.  But  Ferdiad  gave  the  shield  a  blow  of  the  left  elbow,  and  threw  Cuchulain  from  him  like  a  bird  on  the  brink  of  the  ford.  Cuchulain  leaped  up  again  to  the  boss  of  the  shield,  but  Ferdiad  gave  it  a  stroke  of  his  left  knee,  and  threw  Cuchulain  from  him  like  a  little  child. 

Laeg  saw  that  done.  "  My  grief  indeed,"  he  said,  "  the  fighter  that  is  against  you,  Cuchulain,  casts  you  away  as  a  light  woman  would  cast  her  child.  He  throws  you  as  foam  is  thrown  by  the  river  ;  he  grinds  you  as  a  mill  would  grind  fresh  malt ;  he  cuts  through  you  as  the  axe  cuts  through  the  oak  ;  he  binds  you  as  the  woodbine  binds  the  tree ;  he  darts  on  you  as  the  hawk  darts  on  little  birds  ;  and  from  this  out,  you  have  no  call  nor  claim  to  courage  or  a  brave  name  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,  you  little  fairy  fighter,"  said  Laeg. 

It  is  then  Cuchulain  leaped  up  with  the  quickness  of  the  wind,  and  with  the  readiness  of  the  swallow,  and  with  the  fierceness  of  the  lion,  towards  the  troubled  clouds  of  the  air  the  third  time,  until  he  lit  on  the  boss  of  Ferdiad's  shield,  to  strike  at  his  head  from  above.  And  Ferdiad  gave  his  shield  a  shake  and  cast  Cuchulain  from  him,  the  same  as  if  he  had  never  been  cast  off  before  at  all. 

And  it  is  then  Cuchulain's  anger  came  on  him,  and 


238    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

the  flames  of  the  hero  light  began  to  shine  about  his  head,  hke  a  red-thorn  bush  in  a  gap,  or  like  the  sparks  of  a  fire,  and  he  lost  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  what  was  on  him  was  the  appearance  of  a  god. 

So  close  was  the  fight  they  made  now,  that  their  heads  met  above  and  their  feet  below,  and  their  hands  in  the  middle,  over  the  rims  and  bosses  of  their  shields.  So  close  was  the  fight,  that  they  broke  and  loosened  their  shields  from  the  rim  to  the  middle.  So  close  was  the  fight,  that  they  turned  and  bent  and  shattered  their  spears  from  the  points  to  the  hilts.  So  close  was  the  fight,  that  the  Bocanachs  and  Bananachs  and  the  witches  of  the  valley  screamed  from  the  rims  of  their  shields  and  from  the  hilts  of  their  swords,  and  from  the  handles  of  their  spears.  So  close  was  the  fight,  that  they  drove  the  river  out  of  its  bed  and  out  of  its  course,  so  that  it  might  have  been  a  place  for  a  king  or  a  queen  to  rest  in,  so  that  there  was  not  a  drop  of  water  in  it,  unless  it  dropped  into  it  by  the  trampling  and  the  hewing  the  two  champions  made  in  the  middle  of  the  ford. 

So  great  was  the  fight,  that  the  horses  of  the  men  of  Ireland  broke  away  in  fright  and  shyness,  with  fury  and  madness,  breaking  their  chains  and  their  yokes,  their  ropes  and  their  traces ;  and  the  women  and  the  young  lads  and  the  children  and  the  followers  of  the  men  of  Ireland  broke  out  of  the  camp  to  the  south-west. 

They  were  using  the  edge  of  their  swords  through  that  time ;  and  it  was  then  Ferdiad  found  a  time  when  Cuchulain  was  off  his  guard,  and  he  gave  him  a  stroke  of  the  sword,  and  hid  it  in  his  body,  and  the  ford  was  red-  dened with  Cuchulain's  blood,  and  Ferdiad  kept  on  making  great  strokes  at  him.  And  Cuchulain  could  not  bear  with  this,  and  he  called  to  Laeg  for  the  Gae  Bulg,  and  it  was  sent  down  the  stream  to  him,  and  he  caught  it  with  his  foot.  And  when  Ferdiad  heard  the  name  of  the  Gae  Bulg,  he  made  a  stroke  of  his  shield  down  to 


FERDIAD'S   DEATH  239 

protect  his  body.  But  Cuchulain  made  a  straight  cast  of  the  spear,  the  Gae  Bulg,  off  the  middle  of  his  hand,  over  the  rim  of  the  shield,  and  it  passed  through  his  armour  and  went  out  through  his  body,  so  that  its  sharp  end  could  be  seen. 

Ferdiad  gave  a  stroke  of  his  shield  up  to  protect  the  upper  part  of  his  body,  though  it  was  "  the  relief  after  danger,"  as  the  saying  is.  "  That  is  enough,"  said  Ferdiad  ;  "  I  die  by  that.  And  I  may  say,  indeed,  you  have  left  me  sick  after  you,  and  it  was  not  right  that  I  should  fall  by  your  hand.  O  Hound  of  the  beautiful  feats,  it  was  not  right,  you  to  kill  me ;  the  fault  of  my  death  is  yours,  it  is  on  you  my  blood  is.  A  foolish  man  does  not  escape  when  he  goes  into  the  gap  of  danger ;  my  grief!  I  am  going  away,  my  end  is  come.  My  ribs  will  not  hold  my  heart,  my  heart  is  all  turned  to  blood.  I  have  not  done  well  in  the  battle ;  you  have  killed  me,  Cuchulain." 

Cuchulain  ran  towards  him  after  that,  and  put  his  two  arms  about  him,  and  lifted  him  across  the  ford  northwards,  so  that  his  body  should  be  by  the  ford  on  the  north,  and  not  on  the  west  of  the  ford  with  the  men  of  Ireland. 

He  laid  him  down  then,  and  a  cloud  and  a  weakness  came  on  him  as  he  stood  over  Ferdiad.  Laeg  saw  that,  and  he  saw  that  all  the  men  of  Ireland  were  rising  up  to  come  towards  him.  "  Good  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg,  "  rise  up  now,  for  the  men  of  Ireland  are  coming  towards  us,  and  it  is  not  one  man  they  will  put  to  fight  against  us,  now  that  Ferdiad  has  fallen  by  you."  "  What  use  is  it  to  me  to  rise  up  now,  and  he  after  falling  by  me  ?  "  said  Cuchulain.  But  Laeg  said  :  "  Rise  up,  O  chained  Hound  of  Emain  ;  it  is  glad  and  shouting  you  have  a  right  to  be  now,  since  Ferdiad  of  the  hosts  has  fallen  by  you."  "  What  are  joy  and  shouting  to  me  now  ?  "  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  it    is   to    madness    and   to   grief    I    am    driven    after 


240    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

the  thing  I  have  done,  and  the  body  I  wounded  so  hard."  "  It  is  not  right  for  }-ou  to  be  lamenting  him,"  said  Laeg.  ''  It  is  making  rejoicings  over  him  you  should  be.  It  was  at  you  he  aimed  his  spears."  But  Cuchulain  said  :  "  Even  if  he  had  cut  one  arm  and  one  leg  from  me,  it  is  my  grief  Ferdiad  not  to  be  riding  his  horses  through  the  long  days  of  his  lifetime."  And  Laeg  said  :  "  It  is  better  pleased  the  women  of  the  Red  Branch  will  be,  he  to  have  died  and  you  to  be  living.  They  know  it  is  not  few  but  many  you  have  sent  away  for  ever ;  for  from  the  day  you  came  out  of  Cuailgne  to  meet  Maeve  of  the  great  name,  it  is  a  grief  to  her  all  you  have  killed  of  her  people  and  of  her  fighting  men.  You  have  not  taken  quiet  sleep  since  the  spoiling  of  your  country  began  ;  though  there  were  few  along  with  you,  many  were  the  mornings  you  rose  up  early." 

Then  Cuchulain  began  to  keen  and  to  lament  for  Ferdiad  there,  and  it  is  what  he  said  :  "  Well,  Ferdiad,  it  is  a  pity  for  you  it  was  not  one  of  the  men  that  knew  my  courage  you  asked  an  advice  of  before  }'ou  came  to  meet  me  in  the  fight  that  was  too  hard  for  you.  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  Laeg,  son  of  Riangabra,  you  asked  how  we  stood  one  to  another.  It  is  a  pity  you  did  not  ask  a  true  advice  of  Fergus.  It  is  a  pity  it  was  not  pleasant  comely  Conall  you  asked  which  of  us  would  put  down  the  other. 

"  And  these  men  know  well,"  he  said,  "  there  will  never  be  born  one  among  the  men  of  Connaught  who  will  do  deeds  equal  to  yours,  to  the  end  of  life  and  time.  And  they  know  that  if  they  looked  among  the  places,  the  gatherings,  the  swearings,  the  false  promises  of  the  fair-haired  women  of  Connaught,  or  in  the  playing  with  targets  and  shields,  the  playing  with  shields  and  swords,  the  playing  backgammon  and  chess,  the  playing  with  horses  and  chariots,  there  will  not  be  found  the  hand  of  a  man  that  will  wound  like  Ferdiad's  hand,  or  a  man  to 


CUCHULAIN'S    LAMENTS  241 

bring  the  red-mouthed  birds  croaking  over  the  speckled  battle,  nor  one  that  will  fight  for  Cruachan,  that  will  be  your  equal  to  the  end  of  life  and  time,  O  red-cheeked  son  of  Daman."  And  then  he  rose  up  and  stood  over  Ferdiad.  "  Well,  Ferdiad,"  he  said,  "  it  is  great  wrong  and  treachery  was  played  on  you  by  the  men  of  Ireland,  to  bring  you  out  to  fight  with  me.  For  it  has  not  been  easy  to  stand  against  me  in  the  war  for  the  Bull  of  Cuailgne."     And  he  made  this  complaint : — 

"  O  Ferdiad,  you  were  betrayed  to  your  death  ;  your  last  end  was  sorrowful ;  you  to  die,  I  to  be  living ;  our  parting  for  ever  is  a  grief  for  ever. 

"  When  we  were  far  away,  with  Scathach  the  victorious,  we  gave  our  word  that  to  the  end  of  time  we  would  never  go  against  one  another. 

"  Dear  to  me  was  your  beautiful  ruddiness ;  dear  to  me  your  comely  form  ;  dear  to  me  your  clear  grey  eye ;  dear  to  me  your  wisdom  and  your  talk. 

"  There  has  not  come  to  the  battle,  there  has  not  been  made  angry  in  the  fight,  there  has  not  held  up  shield  on  the  field  of  spears,  the  like  of  you,  O  red  son  of  Daman. 

"  Findabair,  the  daughter  of  Maeve,  with  all  her  great  beauty,  it  was  putting  a  gad  on  the  sand,  or  on  the  sun,  for  you  to  think  to  get  her,  Ferdiad." 

Then  Cuchulain  was  still  looking  down  on  Ferdiad,  "  Well,  my  friend  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  strip  Ferdiad  now,  and  take  his  armour  and  his  clothes  off  him,  until  I  see  the  brooch  for  the  sake  of  which  he  undertook  the 

fight." 

Laeg  stripped  Ferdiad  then,  and  when  Cuchulain  saw  the  brooch,  he  began  to  lament  and  complain  over  him  again,  and  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"  My  grief,  O  gold  brooch !  O  Ferdiad  of  the  poets,  O  strong  striker  of  many  blows,  it  is  brave  your  arm  was. 

Q 


242    WAR   FOR    BULL    OF   CUAILGNE 

"  Your  yellow  hair,  curled,  well-loved ;  your  soft,  leaf-  like belt  about  you  until  death. 

"  Dear  was  our  fellowship,  dear  the  brightness  of  your  eyes ;  your  shield  with  its  rim  of  gold ;  your  chessboard  that  was  worth  riches. 

"It  was  not  right,  you  to  fall  by  my  hand  ;  it  was  not  a  friendly  ending.  My  grief,  O  gold  brooch,  my  grief! 

"  Well,  my  friend  Laeg,"  he  said  then,  "  come  now  and  take  the  Gae  Bulg  out  of  him,  for  I  cannot  afford  to  be  without  my  spear."  So  Laeg  took  the  Gae  Bulg  out  of  him,  and  when  Cuchulain  saw  his  reddened  spear  lying  beside  Ferdiad,  he  said  :  "  O  Ferdiad,  it  is  a  sorrowful  story  to  me,  that  I  should  see  you  so  red  and  so  pale,  I  with  my  spear  reddened,  and  you  in  a  bed  of  blood. 

"  When  we  were  over  in  the  east  with  Scathach,  there  would  not  have  been  angry  words  between  us,  or  destroy-  ing weapons. 

"  Scathach  spoke  fiery  words  to  us,  '  Go  all  of  you  to  the  battle  that  will  be  fought  by  Germain  the  terrible.' 

"  I  said  to  Ferdiad  and  to  Lugaid,  the  always  generous,  and  to  the  son  of  Baetan  the  fair,  '  Let  us  all  go  against  Germain.' 

"  We  all  of  us  came  to  the  battle-ground  on  the  shore  of  the  lake  of  Lind  Formait ;  we  brought  four  hundred  out  with  us  from  the  islands  of  the  Athisech. 

"  As  I  and  brave  Ferdiad  were  together  in  the  door  of  Germain's  dun,  I  killed  Rind,  the  son  of  Niul,  I  killed  Ruad,  son  of  Finnial. 

"  Ferdiad  killed  upon  the  shore  Blath,  son  of  Calba  of  the  red  swords.  Lugaid  killed  Mugarne  of  the  Torrian  Sea,  a  surly,  fierce  man. 

"  We  spoiled  the  dun  of  Germain  the  crafty ;  we  brought  him  with  us  alive  over  the  wide  sea  of  speckled  waters ;  we  brought  him  to  Scathach  of  the  broad  shield. 


CUCHULAIN'S    LAMENTS  243 

"  She,  our  teacher,  whose  name  was  well  known,  bound  us  to  friendship  together,  the  way  our  anger  would  not  turn  against  one  another  among  the  fair  tribes  of  Elga. 

"  Sorrowful  the  morning  when  the  strength  was  taken  from  the  son  of  Daman.  My  grief!  I  loved  the  friend  to  whom  I  have  given  a  drink  of  red  blood. 

"  It  is  a  sorrowful  thing  has  happened  to  us  the  pupils  of  Scathach — I  myself  red  and  wounded  ;  you  yourself  not  driving  your  chariot. 

"  It  is  a  sorrowful  thing  has  happened  to  us  the  pupils  of  Scathach — I  myself  hard  with  blood  ;  you  yourself  entirely  dead. 

"  It  is  a  sorrowful  thing  has  happened  to  us  the  pupils  of  Scathach — yourself  to  have  died,  myself  to  be  alive  and  strong  ;  it  is  angry  we  were  in  the  battle." 

"  Good  Cuchulain,"  said  Laeg,  "  let  us  leave  this  ford  now  ;  it  is  too  long  we  are  here."  "  Let  us  leave  it  now  indeed,  my  friend  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  But  every  other  fight  I  ever  made  was  as  a  game  and  a  sport  beside  the  fight  with  Ferdiad."  And  it  is  what  he  said  : 

"  Each  fight  was  a  game,  each  one  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad  came  to  the  ford  ;  we  got  the  same  teaching,  we  got  the  same  rewards  ;  our  teacher  was  kind  to  us  both  alike,  setting  us  both  above  all  the  others. 

"  Each  was  as  a  game,  each  was  as  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad  came  to  the  ford ;  we  had  the  same  ways,  we  used  to  do  the  same  deeds ;  it  was  at  the  one  time  Scathach  gave  a  shield  to  me,  and  a  shield  to  Ferdiad. 

"  Each  was  a  game,  each  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad  came  to  the  ford  ;  dear  to  me  was  the  pillar  of  gold  that  I  broke  down  on  the  ford  ;  he  who,  when  he  attacked  the  tribes,  was  braver  than  any  other. 

"  Each  was  a  game,  each  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad 


244    WAR   FOR   BULL   OF   CUAILGNE 

came  to  the  ford,  like  a  proud  swelling  wave,  threaten-  ing to  destroy  all  before  him. 

"  Each  was  a  game,  each  was  a  sport,  until  Ferdiad  came  to  the  ford  ;  this  thing  will  hang  over  me  for  ever.  Yesterday  he  was  larger  than  a  mountain  ;  to-day  there  is  nothing  of  him  but  a  shadow." 


XII 

THE    AWAKENING    OF    ULSTER 

TTHEN  some  of  the  men  of  Ulster  came  to  comfort  Cuchulain,  and  among  them  were  Senoll  Uathach  and  the  two  sons  of  Gege,  Muredach  and  Cotreb.  They  brought  him  away  to  the  five  streams  of  Conaille  Muirthemne,  to  wash  his  hurts  in  them.  And  the  Sidhe  threw  all  sorts  of  herbs  and  plants  into  the  streams  for  his  healing,  so  that  they  were  all  strewed  over  with  green  leaves. 

Then  when  Ailell  and  Maeve  heard  there  were  men  beginning  to  come  from  Ulster,  they  sent  Mac  Roth,  the  herald,  to  watch  at  Slieve  Fuad,  and  to  warn  them  if  he  could  see  any  one  coming.  And  after  a  while  he  came  back,  and  Ailell  asked  news  of  him.  "  I  saw,"  he  said,  "  one  chariot  only,  to  the  north  of  Slieve  Fuad,  and  it  coming  straight  on,  and  the  man  that  was  in  it  naked,  and  without  armour  or  weapons,  but  only  an  iron  spit  in  his  hand,  and  he  goading  on  the  horses  as  if  he  would  never  get  to  the  army  alive."  "  Who  do  you  think  was  that  man,  Fergus  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  I  think,"  said  Fergus,  "  it  was  Cethern,  son  of  Fintan,  from  the  North,  and  he  will  soon  be  upon  us."  With  that,  Cethern  came  bursting  into  the  camp,  and  he  attacked  every-  one he  met  with  his  spit,  and  he  himself  got  many  wounds  back  again,  so  that  he  had  to  hold  up  the  board  of  the  chariot  to  his  body  to  keep  his  bowels  from  falling 

245 


246     THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

out ;  and  at  last  he  made  his  escape,  and  came  to  the  place  where  Cuchulain  was  lying.  Then  Cuchulain  said  to  Laeg :  "  Rise  up  now,  and  go  into  the  camp,  and  bring  some  of  Ailell's  physicians  to  cure  Cethern  ;  for  I  give  my  word,  if  they  do  not  come  before  this  time  to-morrow,  I  will  bring  death  and  destruction  on  them."'  So  Laeg  went,  and  he  brought  back  the  physicians  with  him,  and  it  was  only  the  dread  of  Cuchulain  that  made  them  come.  Then  Cethern  showed  the  first  one  of  them  his  wounds,  and  it  is  what  he  said,  that  he  could  not  be  cured.  Then  Cethern  gave  him  a  blow  that  sent  him  out  of  the  house.  And  the  same  thing  happened  with  all  the  rest,  fifteen  there  were  of  them  altogether.  Then  he  asked  Cuchulain  would  he  get  him  another  physician,  for  those  of  the  men  of  Ireland  had  done  him  no  good.  "  Rise  up,  Laeg,"  said  Cuchulain ;  "  go  to  Slieve  Fuad,  to  Fingan,  the  Druid  physician  of  Conchubar,  and  bid  him  to  come  here  and  to  heal  Cethern."  Now,  Fingan  was  the  greatest  physician  in  all  Ireland,  and  it  was  said  of  him  that  he  could  tell  what  a  person's  sickness  was  by  looking  at  the  smoke  of  the  house  he  was  in  ;  and  he  knew  by  looking  at  a  wound  what  sort  the  person  was  that  gave  it  Then  he  came,  and  Cethern  showed  him  his  wounds.  "  Look  at  this  wound  for  me,  good  Fingan,"  he  said.  ".There  came  at  me  two  young  men,  with  clear  noble  looks,  with  strange  foreign  clothes  on  them,  and  each  of  them  threw  a  spear  into  me,  and  I  threw  my  spear  into  each  of  them.  "  I  know  those  two  very  well,"  said  Cuchulain;  "they  are  two  choice  men  of  Norway,  and  they  were  sent  against  you  by  Ailell  and  ]\Iaeve."  "  Look  at  this  wound  for  me,  Fingan,"  said  Cethern.  Fingan  looked  at  it  "  That  is  the  work  of  two  brothers,"  he  said.  ''  That  is  true  indeed,"  said  Cethern.  "  Two  young  men  came  at  me,  and  they  were  like  one  another  ;  but  one  had  curling 


MAEVE'S   APPEARANCE  247 

brown  hair,  and  the  other  had  curHng  yellow  hair.  Two  green  cloaks  about  them,  with  brooches  of  bright  silver ;  two  soft  shirts  of  yellow  silk  ;  bright  swords  in  their  belts  they  had,  and  shields  with  bright  silver  fastenings,  and  spears  with  veins  of  silver  on  their  handles."  "  I  know  those  two  very  well,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  they  are  Maine  Athremail  and  Maine  Mathremail,  two  sons  of  Ailell  and  Maeve." 

"  Look  at  this  wound  for  me,  good  Fingan,"  said  Cethern.  Fingan  looked  at  the  wound,  and  he  said  :  "  It  was  a  father  and  a  son  made  that  together."  "  That  is  true,"  said  Cethern  ;  "  there  came  at  me  two  large  men  with  flaming  eyes,  and  they  having  gold  bands  on  their  heads,  and  the  dress  of  kings,  and  gold  swords  at  their  sides."  "  I  know  those  two  very  well,"  said  Cuchulain  ;  "  it  was  Ailell  and  his  son  Maine  Andoe  that  gave  you  that  wound."  "  Look  at  this  wound,  good  Fingan,"  said  Cethern.  Fingan  looked  at  the  wound.  "  That  is  the  work  of  a  proud  woman,"  he  said.  "  That  is  true,"  said  Cethern  ;  "  there  came  at  me  a  beautiful,  pale,  long-faced  woman,  with  long,  flowing  yellow  hair  on  her,  a  crimson  cloak  with  a  brooch  of  gold  over  her  breast,  and  a  straight  spear  shining  red  in  her  hand.  It  was  she  gave  me  that  wound,  and  she  got  a  little  wound  from  me."  *'  I  know  that  woman  well,"  said  Cuchulain.  "  She  is  Maeve,  daughter  of  the  High  King  of  Ireland,  and  Queen  of  Connaught.  She  would  have  thought  it  a  great  victory  and  a  great  triumph,  you  to  have  fallen  by  her  hand."  "  Good  Fingan,"  said  Cethern  then,  "  tell  me  now,  what  do  you  think  of  the  way  I  am,  and  what  can  you  do  for  me  ?  "  "  It  is  what  I  think,"  said  Fingan,  "you  will  hardly  see  the  calves  that  are  following  your  cows  at  this  time  grow  to  be  yearlings  ;  or  if  you  do  itself,"  he  said,  "  it  will  not  be  much  use  your  life  will  be  to  you."  "  That  is  what  all  the  others  said  to  me,"  said  Cethern,  "  and  it  is  not  much  profit  or  credit  they  got 


248     THE   AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

by  it,  and  it  is  not  much  you  yourself  will  get "  ;  and  with  that  he  made  a  kick  at  him,  to  drive  him  out  of  the  house.  But  in  spite  of  that  treatment,  Fingan  gave  him  his  choice  of  two  things  :  the  first  to  be  a  long  time  on  his  bed,  so  that  he  would  see  the  men  of  Ulster  coming  in  the  end  to  avenge  him  ;  or  to  be  made  well  enough  at  the  end  of  three  days  to  go  out  himself  and  spend  what  he  had  of  strength  on  his  enemies. 

"  I  will  choose  that,"  he  said,  "  for  I  would  not  like  to  leave  my  enemies  after  me ;  and  who  is  there  better  than  myself  to  get  satisfaction  from  them  ? "  So  then  Fingan  bade  Cuchulain  to  make  a  healing  bath  that  would  ease  Cethern.  So  Cuchulain  went  down  to  the  camp,  and  he  brought  away  with  him  all  that  he  met  of  the  cattle  of  the  men  of  Ireland.  Then  their  flesh  was  cut  up  with  their  bones  and  their  skins  to  make  a  Druid  bath,  and  Cethern  was  put  in  it  for  the  length  of  three  days  and  three  nights.  And  at  the  end  of  that  time  he  rose  up  and  got  into  his  chariot,  to  do  vengeance  on  the  men  of  Ireland.  And  his  wife  londa,  daughter  of  Eochaid,  came  to  him  from  the  North,  and  brought  him  his  sword  that  he  had  forgotten  in  his  hurry  at  his  first  setting  out. 

But  it  happened  that  one  of  the  physicians  he  had  driven  out  with  a  blow  had  fallen  down  outside  the  tent,  and  lay  there,  not  able  to  stir  from  that.  But  when  Cethern  was  making  ready  to  set  out,  he  rose  up  and  made  his  way  back  to  the  camp,  and  he  said  to  the  men  of  Ireland  :  "  Cethern  is  after  being  cured  by  Fingan,  the  Druid,  and  he  is  coming  at  you  now,  and  do  you  lay  some  trap  for  him."  So  it  is  what  they  did  :  they  took  Ailell's  cloak  and  his  shirt,  and  they  put  them  about  the  pillar-stone,  at  the  boundary  of  Ross,  and  his  crown  on  top  of  it,  and  left  them  there.  Cethern  came  rushing  on  them,  and  when  he  saw  the  pillar-stone,  he  thought  it  was  Ailell  was  standing  there,  and  he  made  at  it,  and 


FI  ND  ABA  I  R'S   SECRET  249 

gave  a  great  blow  of  his  sword,  that  it  broke  in  pieces  against  the  stone. 

Then  he  saw  what  it  was,  and  he  said  :  "  This  is  some  trick  they  have  played  on  me.  And  by  the  oath  of  my  people,"  he  said,  "  I  will  not  stop  my  hand  from  killing,  until  such  time  as  I  have  killed  some  man  having  a  dress  like  this." 

When  Maine  Andoe  heard  that,  he  put  on  his  father's  armour,  and  came  out  to  meet  him.  And  Cethern  saw  him,  and  made  for  him,  and  threw  his  shield  at  him,  so  that  he  was  cut  through  and  through  the  body  by  the  rim  of  the  shield. 

And  when  the  men  of  Ireland  saw  that,  they  pressed  on  Cethern  from  all  sides  and  made  an  end  of  him.  And  his  wife  londa,  daughter  of  Eochaid,  came  and  cried  over  him  there. 

And  then  Fintan,  Cethern's  father,  came  with  three  times  fifty  men  to  get  satisfaction  for  his  son,  and  he  made  three  attacks  on  the  army,  and  killed  a  great  many  of  Ailell's  men  ;  but  Fintan  lost  a  good  many  of  his  own  men,  and  his  son  Crimthan  was  made  prisoner.  And  the  men  of  Ireland  were  afraid  their  army  would  be  too  much  weakened  by  little  fights  of  this  sort  before  the  great  last  battle  that  was  foretold  would  come,  and  they  made  an  agreement  with  Fintan  to  give  him  back  his  son,  and  to  fall  back  themselves  a  day's  march  ;  and  he  gave  his  word  not  to  vex  them  again  until  the  time  of  the  last  battle.  And  they  found,  where  the  fight  had  been,  one  of  Fintan's  men  and  one  of  Ailell's  men  lying  dead  together,  and  they  with  their  teeth  fixed  into  one  another.  And  it  is  from  this  the  fight  was  given  the  name  of  Fintan's  Tooth-fight. 

Then  Rochad,  son  of  Fatheman,  came  to  help  Cuchulain,  and  three  times  fifty  men  with  him.  Now  Findabair  loved  him,  and  when  she  heard  he  was  coming,  she  told  her  secret,  and  she  said  to  her  mother  :  "  That  is 


250     THE    AWAKENING  OF  ULSTER 

my  love  and  my  choice  out  of  all  the  men  of  Ireland."  And  when  Maeve  heard  that,  sht  made  a  plan  to  draw  him  ofi^  and  she  said  to  Findabair  :  *^  Go  now  and  meet  him  secretly,  and  bid  him  to  go  back  with  his  men  unto  the  day  of  the  great  battle,  and  I  give  you  my  leave  to  be  his  wife."  So  Findabair  went  and  gave  him  the  message,  and  g^ve  herself  to  him,  and -he  went  back  to  the  North-  But  this  was  heard  of  in  the  camp,  and  the  ti^elve  kings  of  Munster  that  were  in  Maeve's  army  began  speaking  with  one  another ;  and  it  is  what  they  all  said,  that  Maeve  had  secretly  promised  Findabair  as  a  ^^i{e  to  each  one  of  them  as  a  reward,  if  he  would  join  in  the  war.  "  And  the  best  thing  we  can  do  now,"  they  said,  "^is  to  go  and  avenge  ourselves  on  Maeve's  men,  and  on  Rochad,  for  the  treacherj^  that  was  done  on  us.*' 

So  they  went  out  and  made  an  attack  on  them,  and  Ailcll  and  Maeve's  men  and  Rochad  made  ready  to  defend  themselves ;  but  Fergus  went  out  and  tried  to  make  them  leave  off,  and  to  make  peace  betw^een  them,  and  before  he  could  do  that  seven  hundred  men  had  got  their  death. 

And  it  was  told  to  Findabair  how  these  seven  hundred  men  had  got  their  death  on  account  of  her,  and  how  Maeve  had  promised  her  in  marriage  to  every  one  of  the  twelve  kings  of  Munster.  And  when  she  heard  that,  her  heart  broke  wnth  the  shame  and  the  pity  that  came  on  her,  and  she  fell  dead  there  and  then,  and  they  buried  her. 

Now  at  that  time  Iliach,  son  of  Cas,  of  the  race  of  Rudraige,  was  living  in  the  North  with  his  son's  son,  Laegaire  Buadach.  And  it  was  told  him  how  the  four  provinces  of  Ireland  were  plimdering  and  destroj-ing  the  people  of  Ulster  since  the  day  before  Samhain,  and  driving  off  their  cattle  and  their  goods,  and  all  that  they  had.     So  he  consulted  \i-ith  his  people,  and  it  is  what  he 


ILIACH'S    STONE   FIGHT  251 

said,  that  he  would  go  out  himself  and  make  an  attack  on  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  let  loose  his  strength  on  them,  and  destroy  what  he  could  of  them,  and  do  what  he  could  for  Ulster.  "  For  as  to  myself,"  he  said,  "  if  I  come  out  of  it,  or  do  not  come  out  of  it,  is  all  one  to  me."  Then  his  two  old  spent  horses,  that  had  been  let  loose  for  life,  were  brought  from  where  they  were  on  the  shore  by  the  dun,  and  yoked  to  his  old  chariot,  that  had  neither  cushions  nor  skins  in  it.  And  he  took  his  rough,  dark,  iron  shield,  with  its  hard  rim  of  silver,  over  his  shoulder,  and  his  rough,  grey,  heavy  sword  at  his  left  side.  And  he  put  in  the  chariot  his  two  rusty,  blunt  spears,  and  his  people  gave  him  a  store  of  stones  and  bits  of  rocks  in  a  heap  about  him  ;  and  that  is  the  way  he  went  out  against  the  army,  and  no  armour  on  him  at  all. 

When  the  men  of  Ireland  saw  him  coming  that  way,  they  began  mocking  and  laughing  at  him,  but  it  is  what  Maeve  said :  "  I  would  be  glad  indeed  all  the  men  of  Ulster  to  come  and  meet  us  like  that."  Then  Doche,  son  of  Magach,  chanced  to  meet  him,  and  bade  him  welcome.  "  Who  is  it  bids  me  welcome  ?  "  said  Iliach.  "  The  comrade  and  friend  of  Laegaire  Buadach,"  said  he  ;  "  Doche,  son  of  Magach."  "  I  am  glad  of  that  welcome,"  said  Iliach,  "  and  for  the  sake  of  it,  let  you  come  to  me  when  I  have  spent  my  rage  on  the  army,  and  when  my  strength  is  going,  and  when  my  hand  is  tired,  and  let  you,  and  no  other  of  the  men  of  Ireland,  make  an  end  of  me.  And  keep  my  sword,"  he  said,  "  for  your  friend,  Laegaire  Buadach." 

Then  he  made  an  attack  on  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  when  his  spears  were  all  broken  in  pieces,  he  began  hitting  and  throwing  with  the  stones  he  had.  And  when  they  were  out,  he  attacked  the  men  that  were  near  him  with  the  strength  of  his  own  hands,  so  that  he  made  an  end  of  some  of  them.  And  when  all  he  could  do  was  done,  he  saw  Doche,  son  of  Magach,  near  him,  and  he 


252     THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

said  :  ''  Come  to  me  now,  Doche,  and  strike  my  head  off,  and  take  charge  of  my  sword  for  Laegaire  Buadach."  And  Doche  did  as  he  bade  him,  but  he  brought  his  head  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve. 

At  this  time  Sualtim,  son  of  Roig,  was  told  that  Cuchulain  had  fought  with  Calatin  and  his  sons,  and  with  Ferdiad,  and  of  the  hard  fight  he  had  made,  and  the  wounds  he  had  got.  And  it  is  what  Sualtim  said  :  "  Is  it  the  sky  bursting  I  hear,  or  is  it  the  sea  going  backward,  or  the  earth  breaking  up,  or  is  it  the  groaning  of  my  son  in  his  weakness  ?  "  With  that  he  set  out  to  visit  him,  and  he  found  him  covered  with  hurts  and  wounds,  and  he  began  to  cry  over  him.  But  that  did  not  please  Cuchulain,  and  he  knew  Sualtim  would  do  no  good  by  stopping  there,  for  he  was  not  the  man  to  avenge  him,  for  he  was  no  great  hero  ;  not  that  he  was  a  coward,  but  just  like  any  other  good  fighting  man.  And  Cuchulain  said  to  him  :  "  Well,  Sualtim,  stop  your  crying  over  me,  and  rise  up  and  go  to  Emain,  and  tell  the  men  of  Ulster  they  must  come  themselves  and  follow  on  with  the  war  from  this  out,  for  I  am  not  able  to  defend  them  any  more  ;  for  after  all  I  went  through,  not  one  of  them  comes  to  help  me  or  to  comfort  me.  And  tell  them,"  he  said,  "  what  way  you  found  me,  that  I  cannot  bear  to  have  my  clothing  next  my  skin,  but  it  is  with  crooks  of  hazel  I  have  to  hold  it  off  me,  and  it  is  grass  that  is  laid  over  my  wounds  ;  for  there  is  not  the  place  of  the  point  of  a  needle  on  me  from  head  to  foot  but  has  some  hurt  on  it,  except  my  left  hand  that  was  holding  my  shield  ;  and  tell  them  to  make  no  delay  in  coming,"  he  said. 

Then  Sualtim  set  out  on  the  Grey  of  IMacha  to  give  his  message ;  and  when  he  got  close  to  Emain  he  called  out :  ''  Men  are  being  killed,  women  brought  away,  cattle  driven  off  in  Ulster,"  but  he  got  no  word  of  answer.  Then  he  went  up  to  the  very  wall,  and  he  cried  again  :  "  Men    are   being  killed,  women    brought    away,  cattle 


SUALTIM'S    MESSAGE  253 

brought  away  in  Ulster " ;  but  the  second  time  he  got  no  answer.  Then  he  went  on  to  the  Stone  of  the  Hostages  at  Emain,  and  he  called  out  the  same  words  the  third  time.  Then  Cathbad,  the  Druid,  asked  :  "  Who  are  taken,  and  who  is  it  is  taking  them  ?  "  "  It  is  Ailell  and  Maeve  that  are  robbing  you  and  destroying  you,"  said  Sualtim  ;  "  they  are  bringing  away  your  women,  your  little  boys,  your  cattle  and  your  horses,  and  there  is  only  Cuchulain  to  delay  and  to  hinder  the  four  great  provinces  of  Ireland  in  the  gaps  and  the  passes  of  Conaille  Muirthemne."  But  Cathbad  was  vexed  at  being  waked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  said  :  "  Any  man  that  comes  to  scold  at  the  king  this  way  has  a  right  to  be  put  to  death."  But  Conchubar,  the  king,  said  :  "  It  is  true  what  Sualtim  is  saying."  *'  It  is  true  indeed,"  said  all  the  men  of  Ulster. 

Then  anger  came  on  Sualtim  that  he  got  no  better  answer  than  that,  and  he  turned  sharply,  and  the  Grey  of  Macha  reared  up,  the  way  the  sharp  edge  of  Sualtim's  shield  came  against  his  own  head,  and  cut  it  clean  off.  Then  the  Grey  turned  again  to  Emain,  and  the  shield  dragged  after  him  by  its  thongs,  and  Sualtim's  head  in  the  hollow  of  it,  and  the  head  said  the  same  words  as  before :  "  Men  are  being  killed,  women  brought  away,  cattle  brought  away  in  Ulster."  Then  Conchubar  said  :  "  The  sky  is  over  our  heads,  the  earth  is  under  our  feet,  the  sea  is  round  about  us  ;  and  unless  the  sky  with  all  its  shower  of  stars  comes  down  on  earth,  or  the  earth  breaks  open  under  our  feet,  or  the  blue  sea  goes  over  the  whole  face  of  the  world,  I  swear  that  I  will  bring  back  every  cow  to  its  own  shed,  and  every  woman  to  her  own  dwelling-house." 

Then  he  called  to  one  of  his  messengers,  Finnched  son  of  Troiglethan,  that  chanced  to  be  there,  and  he  bade  him  to  go  and  to  call  out  the  men  of  Ulster.  But  with  the  sleep  that  was  on  him  still,  and  the  weakness, 


254     THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

he  bade  him  go  and  call   those  of  his  people  that  were  dead,  as  well  as  those  that  were  living. 

It  was  easy  work  Finn  died  had  to  do  now,  for  the  men  of  Ulster  were  rising  from  out  of  their  weakness,  and  they  all  made  ready  to  come  out  with  Conchubar,  and  as  for  those  that  were  to  the  south  and  to  the  west  of  Emain,  they  did  not  wait  for  Conchubar  at  all,  but  set  out  on  the  track  of  the  army  of  Ireland. 

Then  Conchubar  and  his  men  set  out  from  Emain,  and  the  first  day  they  went  as  far  as  Irard  Cuillenn,  and  there  they  made  a  halt.  "  What  are  we  stopping  here  for  ? "  said  Conchubar.  "  We  are  waiting  for  your  own  two  sons,"  his  men  said,  "  Fiachna  and  Fiacha,  that  are  gone  to  meet  your  grandson  Ere,  son  of  Fedelm,  and  of  Cairbre,  king  of  Teamhair,  to  bring  him  with  us."  "  By  my  word,"  said  Conchubar,  "  I  will  not  make  any  more  delay  here,  for  fear  the  men  of  Ireland  might  hear  I  am  risen  from  my  weakness  ;  for  they  do  not  know  it  up  to  this,"    he  said,  "  or  even  if  I  am  alive  at  all." 

So  he  himself  and  Celthair,  and  thirty  hundred  fierce  chariot-fighters,  went  on,  and  it  was  not  long  before  they  came  on  eight  times  twenty  strong  men  belonging  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve,  and  each  of  them  bringing  away  a  woman  of  the  women  of  Ulster  with  him.  And  Conchubar  and  Celthair  struck  their  heads  off,  and  set  the  women  free ;  and  then  they  went  back  to  Irard  Cuillenn. 

Now,  as  to  the  men  of  Ireland,  they  spent  that  night  at  Sleamhain  of  Meath.  And  in  the  night  Cormac  Conloin-  geas  started  up  out  of  his  sleep,  and  he  called  out  that  there  had  a  warning  dream  come  to  him,  and  that  there  was  a  terrible  battle  before  them.  And  after  a  while  Dubthach,  the  Beetle  of  Ulster,  started  up  out  of  his  sleep,  and  called  out  the  same  thing,  that  there  had  a  warning  dream  come  to  him,  and  that  it  would  not  be  long  till  there  would  be  a  great  clashing  of  shields.     And  with 


MARCH    OF   MEN    OF   ULSTER     255 

these  dreams  and  foretellings,  great  fear  came  on  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  it  was  an  uneasy  night  they  spent  at  Sleamhain  that  time. 

And  in  the  morning  Ailell  said  :  "  We  have  been  harry-  ing Ulster  and  Cuailgne  this  long  time,  and  we  have  taken  the  women  and  the  cattle  and  the  goods  of  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  we  have  cut  down  hills  behind  us  ;  and  now,"  he  said,  "  it  is  time  for  us  to  turn  back  to  Magh  Ai,  and  they  can  follow  us  and  fight  with  us  there  if  they  have  a  mind  to.  But  before  that,"  he  said,  "  I  will  send  a  messenger  to  look  out  across  the  great  plain  of  Meath,  to  see  if  any  of  them  are  coming  against  us  ;  and  if  they  are,"  he  said,  "  I  will  not  go  from  this  without  giving  battle  to  them,  for  he  would  not  be  a  good  king  that  would  be  good  at  running  away." 

So  he  sent  out  Mac  Roth,  the  herald.  And  he  had  not  long  to  wait  before  he  heard  a  noise  that  was  like  the  falling  of  the  sky,  or  the  breaking  in  of  the  sea  over  the  land,  or  the  falling  of  trees  on  one  another  in  a  great  storm.  And  he  saw  the  plain  covered  with  wild  creatures  that  had  broken  away  out  of  the  woods.  Then  he  went  back  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve,  and  told  them  his  story,  and  they  asked  him  what  had  he  seen  ;  and  he  said  :  "  I  thought  I  saw  a  grey  mist  far  away  across  the  plain,  and  then  I  saw  something  like  falling  snow,  and  then  through  the  mist  I  saw  something  shining  like  sparks  from  a  fire,  or  like  the  stars  on  a  very  frosty  night."  "  What  was  it  he  saw,  Fergus  ?  "  said  Ailell.  And  Fergus  said  :  "  The  mist  he  saw  was  the  dust  that  went  up  from  the  march  of  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  the  flakes  of  snow  were  the  foam  flakes  from  the  bits  of  their  horses  ;  and  what  he  saw  shining  like  sparks  from  the  fire,  or  like  stars  on  a  frosty  night,  was  the  angry  light  of  their  eyes  shining  under  their  helmets." 

"  It  is  little  I  care  for  that,"  said  Maeve ;  "  we  have  good  fighting  men  to  meet  them."     "  It  is  a  pity  for  you 


256     THE    AWAKEN  I  XG   OF    ULSTER 

to  think  that,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  for  there  is  neither  in  Alban  nor  in  Ireland  an  army  that  can  put  down  the  men  of  Ulster  when  once  their  weakness  is  gone  from  them  and  their  anger  is  kindled." 

That  night  the  men  of  Ireland  made  their  camp  in  Clartha,  and  they  put  Mac  Roth  and  another  man  to  keep  a  good  watch,  the  way  the  men  of  Ulster  would  not  fall  on  them  without  warning.  Now  Conchubar  and  Celtchair,  with  their  thirty  hundred  men,  had  followed  them  to  Slieve  Sleamhain,  and  when  they  found  them  gone  from  there  they  followed  on  to  Clartha,  for  they  thought  to  get  the  start  of  the  rest  of  Ulster  in  red-  dening their  hands  upon  the  men  of  Ireland.  So  Mac  Roth  was  not  long  waiting  when  he  saw  men  and  horses  coming  from  the  north-east,  and  he  went  back  into  the  camp.  "  Well,  Mac  Roth,"  said  Ailell, "  have  }'ou  seen  any  of  the  men  of  Ulster  on  our  track  ? "  "I  saw  men  and  horses  coming,"  he  said.  What  is  the  number  of  them  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  Not  less  than  thirty  hundred  chariots."  "  Those  are  the  men  of  Ulster  coming  with  Conchubar,"  said  Ailell ;  "  and  what  did  you  mean  a  while  ago,  Fergus,  threatening  us  with  the  dust  of  a  great  army  in  the  plain,  when  a  little  troop  like  that  is  all  that  can  be  brought  against  us  ? "  "  You  are  too  quick  in  complaining  of  that,"  said  Fergus,  "  and  you  will  soon  know  what  their  number  is." 

"  Let  us  make  some  good  plan  now,"  said  Maeve,  "  for  I  am  sure  it  is  that  hot,  rude  man,  Conchubar,  king  of  Ulster,  that  is  coming  to  attack  us.  Let  us  make  a  pen  before  him,"  she  said,  "  of  all  the  army  standing  round  on  three  sides,  and  thirty  hundred  men  ready  to  shut  the  mouth  of  it  on  him  when  he  comes  in.  For  we  must  take  these  fellows  alive  and  not  kill  them,  for  it  would  be  unworthy  of  our  name  to  do  more  than  make  prisoners  of  them,  and  they  so  few."  Now  this  was  one  of  the  most  laughable  things  that  was  said  in  the  whole 


MAEVE'S    PEN  257 

course  of  the  war,  Conchubar  and  his  thirty  hundred  of  the  best  men  of  Ulster  to  be  taken  ah've.  And  when  Conchubar's  son,  Cormac  Conloingeas,  heard  this,  there  was  great  anger  on  him,  and  it  is  what  he  thought :  "  If  I  do  not  get  satisfaction  now  at  once  from  Maeve  for  this  boast  of  hers,  1  will  never  get  it  again."  So  he  rose  up  with  his  three  thousand  men  to  make  an  attack  on  her,  and  on  Ailell ;  and  they  rose  up  as  well,  and  their  sons  the  Maines  along  with  them,  and  the  sons  of  Magach.  But  then  the  Gailiana,  and  the  men  of  Munster,  and  of  Teamhair,  came  between  them,  and  made  peace,  and  persuaded  them  to  lay  down  their  arms.  But  for  all  that,  Maeve  did  make  a  pen  of  the  army  of  Ireland  to  shut  up  Conchubar,  and  she  had  men  ready  to  close  it  up  when  once  he  would  be  in.  But  it  is  what  Conchubar  did,  he  never  so  much  as  looked  for  an  opening,  but  when  he  saw  the  army  before  him,  he  went  straight  through  it,  and  he  broke  open  a  gap  of  two  hundred  on  the  right  hand,  and  a  gap  of  two  hundred  on  the  left,  and  went  through  them  all,  and  cut  them  down  in  the  very  middle,  so  that  eight  hundred  men  of  them  were  killed. 

And  then  he  went  away  from  them,  back  to  Slieve  Sleamhain,  to  join  the  army  of  Ulster. 

Then  the  men  of  Ulster  began  to  gather  upon  the  plain  in  their  full  strength,  and  when  Ailell  heard  it,  he  said  :  "  Let  some  one  go  up  and  watch  them  coming,  and  bring  us  a  report  of  the  appearance  that  is  on  them,  and  of  the  chief  men  that  are  leading  them."  "  Let  Mac  Roth  go,"  said  Fergus. 

So  Mac  Roth  went  out  and  took  a  post  on  the  plain  from  the  early  light  of  the  morning  till  the  fall  of  evening,  and  through  all  that  time  the  men  of  Ulster  were  coming,  so  that  the  ground  was  not  naked  under  them,  every  division  under  its  own  chief  man,  and  every  troop  under  its  own  lord,  and  each  one  of  them  apart 

R 


258    THE   AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

from  the  others,  and  they  came  on  till  they  had  covered  the  Hill  of  Sleamhain. 

And  when  evening  came,  Mac  Roth  came  back  to  Ailell  and  to  Maeve,  and  they  questioned  him  and  said  :  "  What  sort  were  the  men  of  Ulster  as  they  came  across  the  plain  ?  "  And  Mac  Roth  said  :  "  The  first  troop  I  saw  coming  had  three  thousand  men  in  it,  and  as  soon  as  they  got  to  the  hill,  they  took  their  armour  off,  and  they  began  to  dig  and  to  make  a  seat  of  sods  and  of  earth  on  the  highest  part  of  the  hill,  for  their  leader  to  sit  on  until  the  rest  of  the  army  would  come. 

"  He  had  the  appearance  of  a  tall,  proud  man,  used  to  giving  orders  ;  and  he  had  yellow,  curling  hair  on  him,  aud  a  yellow  forked  beard,  and  a  red,  pleasant  face,  and  blue  eyes  you  would  be  afraid  of.  A  five-folded  crimson  cloak  he  had  on  him,  and  a  gold  pin  over  his  breast,  and  a  white  shirt  with  threads  of  gold  woven  into  it  next  his  body."  "  Who  was  that  man,  Fergus  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  He  was  Conchubar,  son  of  Fachtna  and  of  Ness,  High-  King  of  Ulster."  "  There  was  a  man  stood  beside  him,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  with  scattered  white  hair,  and  a  purple  cloak,  and  a  shield  with  bosses  of  red  brass,  and  a  long  iron  sword  of  foreign  make.  And  he  looked  up  to  the  sky,  and  threw  his  hand  upwards,  and  with  that  the  clouds  seemed  like  as  if  they  were  rushing  at  one  another,  and  fire  came  from  them  towards  the  men  of  Ireland."  "  That  was  Cathbad  the  Druid,"  said  Fergus,  "  and  he  trying  by  his  enchantments  to  know  how  the  battle  would  go  to-morrow. 

"  I  saw  another  man  with  Conchubar,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  and  he  having  a  smooth,  dark  face,  and  white  eyes  in  his  head  ;  a  long  bronze  rod  in  his  hand,  and  a  little  bell  beside  him,  and  when  he  touched  it  with  his  rod,  all  the  people  near  him  began  to  laugh."  "  Who  is  that  man  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  It  is  easy  to  know  that,"  said  Fergus ;  "  that  is  Rocmid,  the  king's  fool.     There  was 


MAC    ROTH'S    REPORT  259 

never  trouble  or  tiredness  on  any  man  of  Ulster  that  he  would  not  forget  if  he  saw  Rocmid."  "There  came  another  troop  then,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "and  it  is  what  I  thought,  that  the  leader  they  had  was  the  handsomest  and  the  most  comely  of  all  the  men  of  Ireland,  tall  and  well  formed.  Deep  red-yellow  hair  he  had,  his  face  wide  at  the  top  and  narrow  below;  thin,  red  lips,  and  grey  eyes  that  were  laughing.  A  red  and  white  cloak  on  him,  that  the  wind  stirred  as  he  walked,  a  white  shield  with  gold  fastenings  at  his  shoulder,  a  long,  dark  green  spear  in  his  hand."  "  Who  was  that  man,  Fergus  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  That  man  is  himself  half  an  army,  Rochad,  son  of  Fatheman,  from  Rachlainn,  in  the  North,"  said  Fergus.  Now  this  was  the  same  Rochad  that  Findabair  had  loved.  "There  was  another  troop  came  then,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "and  a  quiet,  grey-haired  man  at  the  head  of  it.  A  dark-green,  long-woolled  cloak  he  had  about  him,  and  a  white  shirt,  and  a  silver  belt  around  his  waist,  and  a  bell  branch  at  his  shoulder.  He  sat  before  King  Conchubar  when  he  came  to  the  hill,  and  his  whole  company  sat  about  him.  And  the  sound  of  his  voice  when  he  spoke  before  the  king,  and  when  he  was  advising  him,  was  sweeter  than  a  three-cornered  harp  in  the  player's  hand."  "Who  was  that  man,  Fergus  ? "  said  Ailell.  "  That  was  Sencha,  the  orator,  the  best-spoken  of  all  the  men  of  the  whole  world,  and  the  peace-maker  of  the  army  of  Ulster,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  and  the  whole  of  the  men  of  the  world,  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun,  he  would  pacify  with  his  three  fair  words.  But  by  my  word,  it  is  no  cowardly  or  no  peaceful  counsel  that  man  will  give  his  king  to-day,  but  counsel  of  courage,  and  of  strength,  and  of  battle." 

"  There  came  another  troop,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  and  a  man  at  the  head  of  them,  and  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  a  man  with  a  better  appearance,  or  with  hair  more  like  gold  than  what  he  has.     There  was  a  sword 


26o     THE    AWAKENING    OF   ULSTER 

with  an  ivory  hilt  in  his  hand,  and  he  throwing  it  up  and  catching  it  in  his  hand  again,  just  when  it  was  coming  on  the  heads  of  the  people  near  him."  "  That  is  Aithirne,  the  poet  and  satirist,"  said  Fergus.  "  Covet-  ous he  is,  and  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  would  ask  the  one-eyed  man  for  his  one  eye,  and  that  the  rivers  and  the  lakes  go  back  before  him  when  he  makes  a  satire  on  them,  and  rise  when  he  praises  them.  And  one  time  when  the  men  of  Ulster  were  fighting  to  protect  him  against  the  men  of  Leinster,  that  he  had  stirred  up,  and  were  shut  up  in  Beinn  Etair,  he  had  plenty  of  cows  himself  in  the  fort,  but  he  would  not  give  a  drop  of  milk  to  man  or  boy,  or  to  a  wounded  man  itself,  but  left  them  without  food  and  without  drink,  unless  they  would  eat  the  clay  or  drink  the  salt  water  of  the  sea." 

"  I  saw  another  troop  coming,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  wild-  looking,  and  in  the  middle  of  it  a  young  little  lad,  red  and  freckled.  He  had  a  silk  shirt  on  him  with  a  border  of  red  gold,  and  a  shield  faced  with  gold,  with  a  golden  rim,  and  a  little  bright  gold  sword  at  his  side."  "  Who  is  that,  Fergus?"  said  Ailell.  "  I  do  not  remember  leaving  any  such  boy  as  that  when  I  left  Ulster,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  but  it  is  likely  it  may  be  Ere,  son  of  Cairbre,  that  has  come  without  leave  of  his  father  to  help  his  grandfather,  Conchubar ;  and  the  men  of  Teamhair  with  him.  And  if  what  I  think  is  true,"  he  said,  "you  will  find  that  troop  to  be  a  drowning  sea,  and  it  is  by  that  troop  and  by  that  little  boy  the  battle  will  be  won  against  you." 

Now  that  was  the  same  Ere  that  fought  afterwards  in  the  last  battle  against  Cuchulain  at  Muirthemne,  and  some  said  it  was  he  that  made  an  end  of  Cuchulain,  but  others  said  it  was  only  the  Grey  of  Macha  he  made  an  end  of.  And  Conall  Cearnach  killed  him  afterwards  in  his  red  vengeance ;  and  his  sister  Acaill  came  to  Teamhair  where  he  was  buried,  and  cried  for  him  through  nine  days,  till  her  heart  broke  like  a  nut  inside 


MAC   ROTH'S   REPORT  261 

her,  and  she  desired  that  her  grave  and  her  mound  should  be  made  in  a  place  where  the  grave  and  the  mound  of  Ere  could  be  seen  from  it.  And  it  was  made  in  the  place  that  used  to  be  called  the  place  of  the  poet  Maine,  but  that  is  called  now  the  place  of  Acaill. 

"  I  saw  another  company,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  having  at  its  head  a  tall,  large  man,  with  high  looks,  with  soft  brown  hair  in  thin  smooth  locks  on  his  forehead  ;  a  deep  grey  cloak  wrapped  around  him,  having  a  silver  brooch  in  it ;  a  soft  white  shirt  next  his  skin."  "  I  know  that  man,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  he  is  Eoghan,  son  of  Durthact,  king  of  Fernmaige,  one  of  the  twelve  chief  heroes  of  the  Red  Branch." 

"  I  saw  another  company  coming,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "  and  a  great  many  in  it ;  and  they  red  with  the  fire  of  their  anger,  strong  and  eager  and  destroying.  At  their  head  an  angry  man,  dreadful  to  look  at,  long-nosed,  large-eared,  with  coarse  grey  hair ;  a  striped  cloak  on  him,  an  iron  skewer  in  place  of  a  brooch,  a  coarse  striped  shirt  next  his  skin,  a  great  spear  in  his  hand." 

"  I  know  that  man,"  said  Fergus  ;  "  Celthair,  son  of  Uthecar ;  a  head  of  battle  in  Ulster.  And  the  spear  in  his  hand  is  the  great  spear,  the  Luin,  that  was  brought  back  from  the  East  by  the  three  sons  of  Tuireann." 

"  I  saw  the  troop  that  came  last,"  said  Mac  Roth,  "and  it  without  a  leader.  There  were  thirty  hundred  in  it,  of  proud,  clean,  ruddy  men  ;  long  fair  hair  they  had,  and  shining  eyes,  and  long  shining  cloaks  with  good  brooches,  blue  shining  spears,  good  coverings  on  their  heads,  and  shirts  of  striped  silk.  But  they  seemed  to  have  some  great  trouble  on  them,  and  to  be  very  down-hearted."  "  What  men  are  those,  Fergus  ?  "  said  Ailell.  "  I  know  them  well,"  said  Fergus.  "  It  is  well  for  those  on  whose  side  they  are,  and  it  is  a  pity  for  those  they  are  against ;  for  they  are  able  by  themselves," 


262    THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

he  said,  "to  fight  the  whole  army  of  Ireland  ;  for  they  are  Cuchulain's  men  from  Muirthemne." 

Now  all  this  time  Cuchulain  was  lying  on  his  bed,  with  the  dint  of  his  wounds.  But  when  he  knew  by  the  noise  on  the  plain  that  the  men  of  Ulster  were  gathering  for  the  battle,  he  used  all  his  strength  and  tried  to  rise  up ;  and  he  gave  a  great  shout,  that  all  his  own  troop  heard  it,  and  all  the  whole  army.  But  his  people  that  were  about  him  laid  him  down  on  the  bed  again  by  force,  and  put  ropes  and  fastenings  over  him,  the  way  he  could  not  move  from  it  to  open  his  wounds  again.  And  as  he  was  lying  there,  two  mocking  women  came  from  Ailell's  camp,  and  stood  beside  his  bed,  and  let  on  to  be  crying  and  lamenting ;  and  it  is  what  they  told  him,  that  the  men  of  Ulster  were  beaten,  and  that  Conchubar  was  killed,  and  that  Fergus  was  killed  along  with  him.  And  in  the  night  the  Morrigu  came  like  a  lean,  grey-haired  hag,  shrieking  from  the  one  army  to  the  other,  hopping  over  the  points  of  their  weapons,  to  stir  up  anger  between  them,  and  she  called  out  that  ravens  would  be  picking  men's  necks  on  the  morrow.  And  with  all  this  outcry,  Cuchulain  could  not  sleep,  and  when  the  day  began  to  break  he  said  to  Laeg :  "  Look  out  now,  and  bring  me  word  of  every-  thing that  happens  on  this  day."  So  Laeg  looked  out,  and  he  said :  "  I  see  a  little  herd  of  cattle  breaking  out  from  the  west  of  Ailell's  camp,  and  there  are  lads  following  after  them  and  trying  to  bring  them  back  ;  and  I  see  more  lads  coming  out  from  the  army  of  Ulster  to  attack  them."  "  That  little  herd  on  the  plain  is  the  beginning  of  a  great  battle,"  said  Cuchulain,  "  for  it  is  the  Brown  Bull  of  Cuailgne  and  his  heifers  are  in  it,  and  now  the  young  men  of  the  east  and  of  the  west  will  come  out  against  one  another.  And  go  now,  Laeg,"  he  said,  "  for  I  cannot  go  out  myself,  and  call  to  the 


THE   GREAT   BATTLE  263 

men  of  Ulster,  and  stir  them  up  to  the  battle."  So  Laeg  went  out  and  called  to  them  in  Cuchulain's  name  to  get  themselves  ready  and  to  come  out  to  the  battle. 

When  the  men  of  Ulster  heard  that  message  from  Cuchulain,  they  rose  up,  and  rushed  out  without  stopping  to  put  on  their  clothing,  but  only  taking  their  weapons  in  their  hands  ;  and  such  of  them  as  had  the  door  of  their  tents  facing  eastwards  did  not  wait  to  go  through  it,  but  broke  out  to  the  west. 

But  Conchubar  was  not  in  such  haste  to  bring  his  own  men  out,  but  he  said  to  Sencha :  "  Keep  them  back  till  the  right  time  will  have  come,  when  the  sun  will  have  lighted  all  the  valleys  and  the  hills." 

Then  Laeg  went  to  look  out  again,  and  he  saw  the  army  of  Ireland  coming  out  to  meet  the  men  of  Ulster,  and  there  began  a  great  fight  between  them,  and  it  went  on  a  good  while  without  one  side  getting  the  better  of  the  other.  And  when  Cuchulain  heard  it  he  said  :  "  My  grief!  I  not  to  be  able  to  go  among  them  !  " 

Now  as  to  Maeve,  she  was  sending  out  her  men,  the  three  Conaires  from  Slieve  Lis,  the  three  red  Luachras,  the  three  nimble  Suibhnes,  the  three  sky-like  Eochaids,  the  three  bards  from  Lough  Riach,  the  three  Fachtnas  from  the  woods  of  Navan,  the  three  sad-faced  Murroughs,  the  three  boiling  Laegaires,  the  three  dove-like  Conalls,  the  three  sons  of  Driscoll  that  fought  together,  the  three  Fintans  from  beside  the  sea.  And  some  say  that  besides  these  there  were  three  young  men  of  the  Sidhe  in  shining  armour,  that  mixed  through  the  army  to  stir  up  courage,  and  that  none  of  the  men  of  the  army  could  see  among  them,  Delbhaeth,  son  of  Eithlin,  and  Cermat  Honey-mouth,  and  Angus  Og,  son  of  the  Dagda. 

But  when  Maeve  saw  the  battle  going  on,  and  neither  side  getting  the  victory,  she  called  to  Fergus,  and  she  said  :  "  It  is  time  for  you,  Fergus,  to  go  out  and  avenge 


264    THE    AWAKENING   OF   ULSTER 

yourself  on  your  enemy  Conchubar  ;  and  besides  that,"  she  said,  "  it  is  right  for  you  to  go  and  to  fight  for  us  now,  after  all  the  good  treatment  you  got  from  us  in  Connaught."  "  I  would  go  out  willingly,"  said  Fergus,  "  if  I  had  my  own  sword  again,  the  Caladcholg,  the  sword  that  Leite  brought  from  the  country  of  the  Sidhe."  Then  Ailell  said  to  his  chariot  -  driver,  Ferloga :  "  Go  now  and  bring  Fergus's  sword  that  I  bade  you  to  hide  away."  So  Ferloga  brought  the  sword,  and  put  it 