[BRU-amadis-of-gaul  —  part 2 of 3, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

pleaseth him he will me, and recover your brother Amadis, whom you have lost, and whom we all lament. Anon an outcry was heard without, for Gandalin and the Dwarf seeing their Master's shield where it was hung, began to lament aloud, and the Knights were comforting them. What! cried Lisuarte, is Gandalin here? Florestan answered, I met him two months ago seeking for his Master, and made him bear me company. I hold Gandalin, said the King, to be one of the best Squires in the world, and we ought to comfort him. So he rose, and went out to him. When Oriana heard the name of Gandalin, and the lamentation that he was making, she grew pale, and would have fallen, but Galaor and Florestan caught her. Mabilia, who knew the cause, ran to her, and put her arms round her neck. Good and true friends, then said Oriana to the two brethren, if I do not show you what honour I ought and desire to show, I pray you impute it to its true cause, this sore illness! and then she went to her chamber. Dear friend, said she to Mabilia, since we entered this city of London, I have never been without some cause of sorrow: let us go to Miraflores, that is a delightful place, and there I can have the comfort of solitude. We will ask your parents' permission, said Mabilia, and there the Damsel of Denmark will find us, and there you may the more freely see him, when he shall be found. Ah, quoth Oriana, let us lose no time!

This castle of Miraflores was about two leagues from London, a little place, but the pleasantest abode in all that land, for it was in a wood by the side of a mountain, surrounded with orchards and gardens that abounded with fruits and flowers, and there were fountains in the courts canopied with trees, that all the year round bore flower and fruit. The King one day had taken the Queen and Princess there when he was hunting, and because the Princess was much pleased with the place, he gave it her for her own. About a bow-shot from the gate was a nunnery, which she had founded, and there were nuns in it of holy life. So that night she asked permission of Lisuarte and her Mother to retire there, which was readily granted.

The King being at table with Agrayes and his cousins, said to them, I trust we shall have good news of Amadis, for I have sent thirty Knights of the best of my household to seek him, and, if they fail, take you as many as you will and seek him; but I beseech you do not depart till after a battle which has been appointed between me and King Cildadan of Ireland, who is a King renowned in arms, and has married the daughter of King Abies, whom Amadis slew. The battle is to be an hundred against an hundred, and the quarrel this: That kingdom has been obliged to pay tribute to the Kings of Great Britain: Cildadan demands battle on condition, that, if he be conquered, the tribute shall be doubled; but, if he succeed, the country shall be freed therefrom. I trow he will need all his Knights and friends! The three companions, albeit loth to have their search delayed, yet could they not refuse to stay and share the peril. After the cloths were removed, Florestan bade Gandalin go to Mabilia, who wished to see him. He went accordingly, and, when they saw each other, they both wept. Ah, Lady, quoth he, what great wrong hath Oriana done to you and to your lineage, in depriving you of the best Knight in the world! and what wrong hath she done to him, who never erred against her in deed nor word! Ill hath God bestowed such beauty and such goodness, when this could be in her! and yet none hath lost so much by it as herself! Say not thus, Gandalin! cried Mabilia, what she did was from exceeding love, and in the belief that he was loving another. And then she related all that had been said by Ardian concerning the broken sword. O God! quoth Gandalin, where were all your understandings? he would have buried himself alive for her displeasure! and she believed this! and thus is the best Knight in the world destroyed! Oriana had listened to all this: she came forward as if she had heard nothing; and weeping, so that hardly could she speak, she said, O Gandalin! God preserve and bless you, as you shall do what you ought! Lady, said he, in tears also, what do you command me? Kill me! cried she, for I killed your master, and you should revenge his death, as he would have revenged your's! And then she fell senseless.

The King bade Grumedan accompany his daughter to Miraflores, and see that there were serving-men left there, and porters for the gate, and all things needful. Early the next morning they set out, and when Oriana saw the place, how fresh it was with flowers and roses, and the water-pipes and fountains, her mind felt greatly comforted. The keys of the castle and of the garden-gates were every night to be carried by the porters to the Abbess Adalasta, that she might keep them securely. I have desired to have the keys by day, said Oriana to Mabilia, that Gandalin may get another set made, so that if by good fortune Amadis should come, we may admit him by the postern-door thro' the garden; and there Oriana determined to remain till she saw Amadis, or till she died in that solitude. Her apartments were full pleasant, and before the chamber-door there was a little court wherein three trees grew, that quite shadowed it; and there they took their pleasure, but with great anxiety expected the Damsel of Denmark and her tidings. The next day the Porter came and said, a Squire asked for Mabilia. Let him in, quoth Oriana; it is Gandalin, a right good Squire, who was brought up with us, and is the milk-brother of Amadis, whom God preserve from harm! God preserve him, indeed! cried the Porter, for great loss to the world would it be if such a Knight were to perish. Lo now! said Oriana to her friend, as the Porter went away, how Amadis is loved by all, even by these simple men! and I who was so loved by him, I have been his death! Herewithal Gandalin entered, and Oriana making him sit by her side, related how she had sent the Damsel of Denmark to seek Amadis, and what she had written to him: think you, Gandalin, said she, that he will forgive me? You little know his heart, Lady, quoth the Squire; by God for the least word in the letter he will come: if you bade him, he would bury himself alive under the earth,—how much sooner will he come at your command! And the Damsel of Denmark will sooner find him than all the persons in the world; for, if he hid himself from me, he will not show himself to any other. And you, Lady, should take comfort with this hope, lest he should find your beauty so altered when he comes, and fly from you. What, Gandalin! seem I so ugly? quoth she, being well-pleased at his words. You seem so to yourself, said he, that you thus hide yourself where none may see you. I do it to this end, said Oriana, that, when thy master cometh, if he would fly, he may not be able. She then showed him the keys, and bade him get others made like them, that when his master came they might admit him at their pleasure.

Gandalin took the keys to London, and returned that same night with others so exactly like them, that there was no difference, except that these were new and the others old. Here they are! cried Mabilia, showing them to Oriana: come, we have supt, and all the people are at rest! let us try them. They took hand, and went in the dark to the posterns that opened from the castle into the garden. When they were near the first, Oriana cried, I cannot go on, I am dying with fear! Fear nothing! quoth Mabilia, laughing as she spake, when I am here to protect you, for I am cousin to the best Knight in the world, and am going on his service. Oriana could not but smile. I will take courage, and trust in your prowess in arms. Come on boldly, quoth Mabilia, and see how I finish the adventure! if I fail, I swear for one whole year never to hang shield from my neck, nor gird on a sword. In this merry mood she opened the first postern, and presently the other with as little difficulty, and then they were in the garden. How will he get over the wall? cried Oriana. At yonder corner, replied Mabilia, there must be a piece of wood laid on the other side, and we will give him our hands here. You must perform this labour, for it is you who will be paid for it. Oriana at this took hold of her cousin's coif and threw it on the ground, and they stood laughing for some time, then returned and fastened the gates, and went to rest. As Oriana lay down, Mabilia cried, I wish that poor wretch were here who is now despairing! eat, cousin! and sleep, that you may recover your beauty, as Gandalin advised!




_CHAPTER 12._


King Lisuarte was at table; the cloths were removed, and Galaor, Florestan, and Agrayes, were about to take their leave and conduct Corisanda to her island, when there came a strange Knight into the palace, all armed except his head and hands, and with him two Squires, and he carried in his hand a letter sealed with five seals, which on his knees he presented to the King, saying, let this be read, and then I will say for what I am come. Lisuarte saw that it was a letter of credence, and bade him speak his errand. Then said the Knight, King, I defy thee on the part of Famongomadan, the Giant of the Boiling Lake; Cartadaque, his nephew, Giant of the Defended Mountain; and Madanfabul, his marriage-brother, the Giant of the Vermillion Tower; and for Quadragante, brother of King Abies, and Arcalaus the Enchanter: they tell thee that thy death, and the death of all who call themselves thine is in their hands, for they are coming against thee on King Cildadan's side. Howbeit, if thou wilt give thy daughter Oriana to Madasima, the fair daughter of Famongomadan, to be her damsel and servant, they will not injure thee, nor be thine enemies, but will give her in marriage when it is time to Basagante, Madasima's brother, who doth well deserve to be Lord of her and thy land. Therefore, King, look to thy choice! such peace, or such war! Lisuarte smiled when he began to reply, as one who set at nought the defiance. Knight, said he, better is a dangerous war, than a dishonourable peace: a bad account should I render to Him, who hath placed me in this high rank, if for lack of heart I should so shamefully debase it! Tell them I would rather chuse war with them all the days of my life, and death in that war at last, than consent to the peace they offer! Tell me where I may send a Knight to carry them this answer? They may be found, replied the Embassador, in the Boiling Lake, which is in the Isle of Mongaza. I know not the manner of these Giants, quoth Lisuarte, whether a Knight can go amongst them safely? That, replied he, doubt not; where Don Quadragante is present, no wrong can be committed: I will be his warrant. In God's name! said Lisuarte, now tell me who you are?—Landin, the son of Quadragante's sister. We are come to revenge the death of King Abies of Ireland, and greatly it grieves us that we cannot find him who slew him, neither know we whether he be alive or dead. Quoth Lisuarte, I would you did know him to be alive and well! all would then be right. I know wherefore you say thus, replied Landin; you think him the best Knight living, but, be I what I may, you shall find me in the battle with King Cildadan, and see what I can do against you. I had rather have you in my service, answered Lisuarte; but there will not be wanting those who will oppose you there.

Meantime Florestan's anger was rising. Knight, said he, I am a stranger in this country, and not vassal to the King, so that there is no quarrel between us for what you have said to him, nor do I undertake it because there are many Knights in his household. But, you say, you seek for Amadis, and cannot find him; that I believe is not to your loss! but if it please you to do battle with me, who am Don Florestan, his brother, let it be with this condition: if you are conquered, you shall give over the pursuit of vengeance; if I am slain, your wrath will in part be satisfied, for whatever sorrow you feel for the loss of King Abies, that and much greater would Amadis endure for my death. Landin replied, Don Florestan I perceive you have a heart for battle, but I cannot satisfy you now, being bound to return with this embassy on an appointed day, and also having pledged myself to undertake no enterprize before the battle; but, if I come from that field alive, I will meet you in the lists. Landin, quoth Florestan, you answer like a good and honourable Knight, as you are bound to do; let it be as you have said. And he gave his gloves in gage to the King, and Landin gave the lappets of his armour; and the day for their combat was fixed for the thirtieth after the battle. Lisuarte then sent a Knight called Filispinel with Landin to carry his reply, and they departed together.

When they were gone, the King said to Galaor, and Florestan, and their cousin Agrayes, you shall see something that will please you! and he sent for his daughter Leonoreta to come with her little damsels and dance before him, as she used to do; a thing which he had never ordered, since the news that Amadis was lost. She came, and the King said to her, Daughter, sing now the song which Amadis, being your Knight, made for your love. So the child and the other young damsels began to sing.

    _Leonor, sweet Rose, all other flowers excelling,     For thee I feel strange thoughts in me rebelling._

    _I lost my liberty when I did gaze     Upon those lights which set me in a maze,     And of one free am now become a thrall,     Put to such pain thou serv'st thy friends withal;     And yet do I esteem this pain a pleasure,     Endured for thee whom I love out of measure.       Leonor, sweet Rose, all other flowers excelling,       For thee I feel strange thoughts in me rebelling._

    _I little joy in any other's sight,     My heart is thine, thyself my chief delight.     But yet I see the more that I do love,     More smart I feel, more pain, more grief I prove.     Well! let Love rage, though he be angry ever,     I'll take my loss for gain, though I gain never.       Leonor, sweet Rose, all other flowers excelling,       For thee I feel strange thoughts in me rebelling._

    _And though to you I manifest my woes,     My martyrdom, my smart, another knows;     One unto whom I secretly invoke,     Who is the cause of this my fire, my smoke.     She hath a salve to cure my endless grief,     And only she may yield me some relief.       Leonor, sweet Rose, all other flowers excelling,       For thee I feel strange thoughts in me[188:A] rebelling._

    [188:A] The song of Amadis has suffered much in this second     translation, this "shadow of a shade."


        VILLANCICO.

        Leonoreta, fin roseta,         blanca sobre toda flor,         fin roseta, no me meta         en tal cuyta vuestro amor.

        Sin ventura yo en locura         me meti;         en vos amar es locura         que me dura,                         ⁂         sin me poder apartar,         o hermosura sin par,         que me da pena y dulzor,         fin roseta, no me meta         en tal cuyta vuestro amor.           ⁂

        De todas las que yo veo         no desseo         servir otra sino a vos;         bien veo que mi desseo               ⁂         es devaneo,         do no me puedo partir,         pues que no puedo huyr         de ser vuestro servidor,         no me meta, fin roseta         en tal cuyta vuestro amor.           ⁂

        Aunque mi quexa parece         referirse a vos senora,         otra es la vencedora,         otra es la matadora,                 ⁂         que mi vida desfallece,         aquesta tiene el poder         de me hazer toda guerra;         aquesta puede hazer,         sin yo selo merecer,         Que muerto biva so tierra.           ⁂

You should know by what occasion Amadis made this song for the Princess Leonoreta. One day, as he was talking with Queen Brisena, Oriana, Mabilia, and Olinda, told Leonoreta to go and ask Amadis to be her Knight, and that he would then serve her and no one else. The little girl went to him, and did so; and Amadis, smiling, took her in his arms, and placed her on the estrado. Since you would have me be your Knight, said he, give me some jewel in token that you hold me for yours; and then she took from her head a gold clasp set with gems, and gave it him. All began to laugh at seeing how verily she believed the jest, and Amadis, being thus chosen her Knight, made for her this song. And when she and her damsels sung it they were dressed alike, having garlands on their heads, and garments of the same costliness and fashion as Leonoreta wore. She was a fair princess, albeit not so fair as Oriana, who had no peer, and afterwards she became Empress of Rome, and her twelve little damsels were all daughters of Counts and noble chiefs. So having sung their song, they knelt before Lisuarte, and then returned to the Queen.

Galaor and Florestan and Agrayes then asked the King permission to guard Corisanda home. He took them aside and said, Friends! there are no other three in the world in whom I have the same confidence as in you. This battle is to be the first week in August, and you hear who are coming against me, and they will bring others with them, who are brave and terrible in arms, and are also of the nature and blood of the Giants: therefore, I request you not to undertake any adventure that may delay you from being there to aid me, for with your aid, and the justice of my cause, I trust in God, my enemies, powerful as they are, will be put to shame. Sir, said they, this command was not needed: as Errant Knights, our wish is to be in danger, to be where, being conquerors, we may win the renown which we seek; or, if conquered, come to the end for which we were all born: we will presently return. So they took their leave, and departed with Corisanda.

Gandalin, who saw them depart, went to Miraflores, and related to Oriana and Mabilia all that had past. Now, quoth Oriana, is Corisanda in all happiness, for she hath with her Don Florestan, whom she loves. God ever continue her joy! for she is a good Lady. And then she herself began to weep, and cry, Lord God, let me see Amadis again, if it be but for a day!—Gandalin greatly pitied her, but he affected anger, and said, Lady, you will make me stay away from Miraflores, for here are we looking for good tidings, and you will make us thus unhappy! Oriana wiped away her tears: Do not reproach me, Gandalin! I would do otherwise if I could; but, whatever semblance I should put on, my heart is always weeping! But tell me, what will become of the King my father, since Amadis will not be in the battle? He cannot so have hidden himself, replied Gandalin, that such news should not reach him; and though you have forbidden him your sight, yet he may be present there, thinking then to merit pardon for a fault which he never committed, nor thought to commit. While they were thus communing, a little girl came running in, Lady, here is the Damsel of Denmark, and she brings noble presents for you! At this her heart trembled, and sunk within her, so that she could not speak, and she was altogether so agitated as one who expected life or death from the messenger who was coming. Mabilia answered for her: tell the Damsel to come to us alone, that we may speak with her in private. This she said that there might be none to witness Oriana's agitation; but she herself and Gandalin were dismayed, not knowing what was to come. The Damsel entered with a chearful countenance, and kneeling before Oriana gave her a letter; here, Lady, are tidings of joy! I have fulfilled all your commands: read, and see if Amadis have not written it with his own hand. The letter fell from Oriana's hand, she trembled so with exceeding joy: she opened it, and found in it the ring which she had sent by Gandalin to Amadis, the day whereon he fought with Dardan at Windsor, the which she knew well and kissed it many times, and said, blessed be the hour in which thou wert made, that art transferred with such joy from one hand to another! So when she had read the letter, and blest God with lifted hands for his mercy, she made the Damsel relate how she had found him. Greatly were they pleased at her wisdom in leaving a part of the presents with Amadis; now then, said they, produce the rest before those who are here, and say how you have forgotten the others, that we may send for them.

They showed Durin to what part of the garden-wall he was to bring Amadis, and he kissed Oriana's hands for sending him upon this errand, which might atone for what unwittingly he had carried before. It was agreed that Mabilia should publicly ask him to go; but he feigned himself little contented at the bidding, and said, angrily, to Mabilia, for you, Lady, I will go, but not for the Queen or Oriana, for I have had great hardships in this journey for their pleasure. Friend Durin, said Oriana, you should not upbraid us with your services, so that we shall not thank you for it. Your thanks, replied he, I believe will be worth about as much as my service! however, said he to Mabilia, since you desire it, I will set out to-morrow. He then took leave, and went with Gandalin to the town to sleep; and Gandalin bade him remember him to his cousin Enil, and tell him, said he, to come and see me as soon as he can, for I have much to say to him, and request him while he continues with that Knight, to see if he can learn any news of Amadis. This he said that Amadis might be the better disguised, and that he might not want a pretext to send Enil away. So Durin mounted his palfrey the next morning and departed.




_CHAPTER 13._


While Beltenebros remained in the Nunnery, his health and strength recovered, and he sent Enil to the next town to get arms made for him, a green shield with as many golden lions as it could hold, and to buy him a horse, and a sword and breast-plate, the best he could find. In twenty days all was ready, as he had ordered it, and at the end of that time Durin arrived. Beltenebros was right glad to see him, and asked him before Enil how the Damsel was, and wherefore he had returned. Durin answered, that the Damsel commended herself to him, and had sent for two jewels which she had left in her bed; and then he delivered to Enil the bidding of his cousin Gandalin. Who is Gandalin? said Beltenebros. A Squire, my cousin, replied Enil, who long time served a Knight called Amadis of Gaul. Then Beltenebros took Durin apart to walk with him, and heard the message of Oriana, and also how his brethren were to be in the battle with Cildadan, and of the defiance that Famongomadan had sent, and how he had demanded Oriana to be serving-damsel to his daughter, till he should give her in marriage to his son. When he heard this, his flesh shook with exceeding anger, and he resolved in himself, so soon as he had seen his Lady, to undertake no adventure till he had found Famongomadan, and fought with him a combat to the utterance for what he had dared propose.

That night Beltenebros took leave of the Nuns, and early the next day, armed in his green armour, he set forth, and Enil with him carrying his shield and helmet and lance. The day was clear, and he feeling himself in his strength and once more in arms, began to manage his horse so skilfully that Enil said to him, I know not, Sir, what the strength of your heart may be, but I never saw a Knight appear so well in arms. The worth, quoth Beltenebros, lies in a good heart, not in a good appearance! happy dole hath he whom God has gifted with both! You have judged the one, judge the other as you shall see it deserves when put to proof. Seven days they travelled without adventure, and Beltenebros, as he drew nearer, wore his helmet that he might not be known. On the eighth, as they were passing the foot of a mountain, they met a Knight upon a large bay horse, so huge in stature that he appeared to be a Giant, and two Squires carrying his arms. He cried out with a loud voice to Beltenebros, Stop, Sir Knight, till you have told me what I want to know! Beltenebros looked at the stranger's shield, and seeing three golden flowers in a field azure, he knew it was Don Quadragante, for he had seen a like shield in the Firm Island, hanging above all the others, as his who had approached nearest the Forbidden Chamber. Yet, remembering Famongomadan, he would willingly now have avoided battle; as also, because he was on his way to Oriana, and feared lest the great prowess of this Knight should cause him some delay. Howbeit he stopt, and bade Enil give him his arms if they were wanted. God protect you! quoth Enil, he looks to me more like a Devil than a Knight! He is no Devil, quoth Beltenebros, but a right good Knight, of whom I have heard heretofore. By this Quadragante was come up, and said to him, Knight, you must tell me if you belong to the household of King Lisuarte?—Why ask you?—Because I have defied him and all his household, and kill all of them whom I meet. Beltenebros felt his anger rising, and replied, you are one of those who have defied him?—I am; and I am he who will do to him and his all the evil in my power.—And who are you?—My name is Don Quadragante.—Certes, Don Quadragante, notwithstanding your high lineage, and your great prowess in arms, this is great folly in you to defy the best King in the world! they who undertake more than they can effect, are rather rash than hardy. I am not this King's vassal, nor am I of his land, but for his goodness my heart is disposed to serve him, so that I may account myself among those whom you have defied: if you chuse battle with me, you may have it; if not, go your way! I believe Knight, said Quadragante, you speak thus boldly because you know me so little: pray you, tell me your name?—They call me Beltenebros: you will know me by it no better than before, for it is a name of no renown; but, though I am of a far land, I have heard that you are seeking Amadis of Gaul, and, by what I hear of him, it is no loss to you that you cannot find him. What! quoth Quadragante, do you prize him, whom I hate so much, above me? Know, that your death-hour is arrived! take thy arms, and defend thyself if thou canst. I might do it with some doubt against others, he replied, but can have none in opposing thee, who art so full of pride and threats.

Then they ran their course; both felt the shock; the horse of Beltenebros reeled, and he himself was wounded at the nipple of his breast. Quadragante was unhorsed and hurt in the ribs; he rose, and ran at Beltenebros, who did not see him, for he was adjusting his helmet, and he mortally stabbed his horse. Beltenebros alighted, and went against him sword in hand in great anger. There was no courage in this! cried he; your own horse was strong enough to have finished the battle without this discourtesy! The blows fell as thick and loud as though ten Knights had been in combat, for both put forth all their strength and skill, and the fight lasted from the hour of tierce till vespers; but then Quadragante, overcome with fatigue, and with a blow that Beltenebros gave him on the helmet, fell down senseless. Beltenebros took off his helmet to see if he were dead; the air revived him; he placed the sword-point at his face, and said, Quadragante, remember thy soul, for thou art a dead man. Ah, Beltenebros, cried he, for God's sake let me live for my soul's sake!—Yield thyself vanquished, then, and promise to fulfil what I command! I will fulfil your will to save my life, said Quadragante, but there is no reason wherefore I should confess myself vanquished: he is not vanquished, who in his defence hath shown no fear, doing his utmost till strength and breath fail him and he falls; but he who does not do what he could have done, for lack of heart. You speak well, said Beltenebros, and I like much what I have learnt from you: give me your hand and your promise then; and he called the Squires to witness it. You shall go forthwith to the court of King Lisuarte, and remain there till Amadis arrives, and then you shall pardon him for the death of your brother, King Abies; for they by their own will fought in lists together, and such revenge, even among those of meaner degree, ought not to be pursued. Moreover, you shall make null the defiance against King Lisuarte, and not take arms against those who are in his service. All this did Quadragante promise against his will, and in the fear of death. He then ordered his Squires to make a litter, and remove him; and Beltenebros mounting the bay horse of his antagonist, gave his arms to Enil, and departed.

Four Damsels, who were hawking with a merlin, had seen the battle, and they now came up, and requested Beltenebros would go to their castle, where he should be honourably welcomed, for the good will which he had manifested to King Lisuarte. He thankfully accepted their hospitality, being sore wearied with the struggle, and accompanied them. They found no other wound than that upon the nipple of his breast, which bled much; howbeit, in three days he departed. On the second day at noon, from a hill top, he beheld the city of London, and, to the right thereof, the castle of Miraflores, where his Lady Oriana then abode. Here he stood awhile, gazing, and devising how he might dispatch Enil. Do you know this country? said he. Yes, replied Enil; that is London, in the valley.—Are we so near? but I will not go to the court till I have won some renown, and deserve to be there: go you therefore and visit your cousin Gandalin, and there you will hear what may be said of me, and when the battle is to be with King Cildadan.—But shall I leave you alone?—I sometimes go alone; but we will first appoint a place to meet at. They proceeded a little way and saw three tents pitched by a river side, the middle a rich one, and before it there were Knights and Damsels sporting; and he saw five shields at the entrance of one tent, and five at another, and ten armed Knights, therefore he turned aside from the road that he might not joust with them. The Knights called out to him to joust. Not now, said he, for you are many and fresh, and I am alone and weary. I believe, said the one, you are afraid you should lose your horse.—Why should I lose him?—Because he would be won by the man who dismounted you: a likelier chance than that you should win his. Since that is the case, said Beltenebros, I will ride on and secure him while I can; and he continued his course. The Knights cried after him, your arms, Sir Cavalier, are protected better by a smooth tongue than by a stout heart: they will last to be hung over your monument, tho' you should live these hundred years! Think of me as you please, quoth he, your words will not destroy my worth such as it is. I would to heaven you would break one lance with me! cried the Knight; I would not mount horse again for a whole year, if you rode to your lodging this night upon that bay steed! Good Sir, said Beltenebros, that is the very thing I am afraid of, and have therefore got out of the way. Holy Mary, they all exclaimed, what a cowardly Knight! He nothing heeding them, rode on to a ford, at which he meant to cross, when he heard a cry from behind. Stop, Knight! and looking round saw a Damsel following him upon a palfrey richly trappinged. Sir Knight, said she, Leonoreta, daughter to King Lisuarte, is in yonder tent, and she and all her Damsels request that for their sake you will joust with her Knights, a thing you will be more bound to do by this request than by their defiance.—What! quoth he, is the daughter of the Queen there?—Aye, truly!—I should rather do her service myself than commit enmity against her Knights, but at her command I will consent, on condition that they require from me nothing farther than the joust. With this answer the Damsel returned; and Beltenebros took his arms, and rode to an open part of the field to wait for the encounter. The first who came was the one who had such an inclination to win his horse. Beltenebros was pleased that this was the first: he unhorsed him, and bade Enil take his horse, and said, Sir Knight, if you keep your word, you will not have another fall for a whole year, for so you promised unless you won my bay; but he lay groaning, for he had three ribs and a hip broken. Three others shared the same fortune with less hurt; on the last, Beltenebros broke his lance. Enil took their horses one by one, and tied them to the trees, and then Beltenebros would have departed; but he saw another Knight making ready, and a Squire brought him four lances, and said, Sir, Leonoreta sends you these lances, and bids you do your duty with them against the other Knights, since you have overthrown their companions. For her sake, said he, who is daughter to so good a King, I will do what she requires; but for her Knights I would do nothing, for they are discourteous to make Knights who are travelling joust against their will. So he took a lance, and one after the other dismounted all the rest; only the last endured two encounters, and fell not till the third, for he was Nicoran of the Perilous Bridge, and was one of the good jousters in Great Britain. When Beltenebros had finished, he sent all the horses that he had won to Leonoreta, and bade her tell her Knights to be more courteous to strangers, or else to joust better, for they might find a Knight who would make them go afoot. The Knights remained greatly abashed; if Amadis were alive and well, quoth Nicoran, verily I should say this were he, for I know no other who would have left us thus. It is not he, said Galiseo, some of us should have known him, and he would not have jousted with us, being his friends. Giontes, the nephew of King Lisuarte, who was one of them, replied. Would it were Amadis, our dishonour would be well gained! but be he who he may, God prosper him wherever he goes! for he won our horses like a good Knight, and like a good Knight restored them. Curse him, quoth Lasamor, he has broken my hip and my ribs, but it was my own fault.

Beltenebros went on satisfied with his success, and admiring the lance which he held, for it was a good one. About a quarter of a league on, he saw a chapel overbowered with trees, and there he determined to alight for the sake of prayer, and because the great heat and the exercise of jousting had made him athirst. At the chapel-door were three palfreys equipped for women, and two for Squires. He went in, but there was no one there, and commended himself from his heart to God and the Virgin. As he was coming out, he saw the three Damsels and their Squires sitting under the trees beside a fountain, and made up to them that he might drink: but neither of them did he know. Knight, said they, are you of King Lisuarte's household? I would, quoth he, I were so good a Knight as to be approved in such a company: but whither go ye?—To Miraflores, to see our Aunt who is Abbess there, and to see Oriana the Princess; but we are waiting here till the heat of the day be over. In God's name, quoth he, and I will keep you company till it be time to travel: how is this fountain called?—We know not but there is one in yonder valley, by those great trees there, which is called the Fountain of the Three Channels. He knew it better than they, for he had often passed it when hunting, and there he determined to fix a meeting-place with Enil, whom he wished to send away while he went to his Lady.

Presently, while they were thus talking, there came along the road which Beltenebros had passed, a waggon drawn by twelve palfreys, and on it were two Dwarfs who drove. There were many Knights in chains in the waggon, and their shields were hanging at the side, and many damsels and girls among them weeping and lamenting loudly. Before it went a Giant, so great that he was fearful to behold; he rode a huge black horse, and he was armed with plates of steel, and his helmet shone bright, and in his hand he had a boar spear, whose point was a full arm's-length long. Behind the waggon was another Giant, who appeared more huge and terrible than the first. The Damsels seeing them were greatly terrified, and hid themselves among the trees. Presently the Giant who rode foremost turned to the Dwarfs, and cried, I will cut you into a thousand pieces if you suffer these girls to shed their own blood, for I mean to do sacrifice with it to my god, whom I adore. When Beltenebros heard this, he knew it was Famongomadan, for he had a custom to sacrifice damsels to an Idol in the Boiling Lake, by whose advice and words he was guided in every thing, and that sacrifice used to content his god, being the Wicked Enemy who is satisfied with such wickedness. At this time Beltenebros did not wish to encounter him, because he expected to be that night with Oriana, and also because his joust with the ten Knights had wearied him; but he knew the Knights in the waggon, and saw that Leonoreta and her Damsels were there, for Famongomadan, who always took this waggon with him to carry away all he could find, had seized them in their tents shortly after their encounter. Immediately he mounted, and called to Enil for his arms; but Enil said, let those Devils pass by first. Give me! quoth Beltenebros, I shall try God's mercy before they pass, to see if I can redress this villainy. O Sir, cried the Squire, why have you so little compassion upon your own youth! if the best twenty Knights of King Lisuarte's court were here, they would not venture to attack them. Care not thou for that, replied his Master, if I let them pass without doing my best I should be unworthy to appear among good men: you shall see my fortune. Enil gave him his arms, weeping, and Beltenebros then descended the sloping ground to meet them. He looked toward Miraflores as he went, and said, O Oriana, my Lady, never did I attempt adventure confiding in my own courage, but in you: my gentle Lady, assist me now, in this great need! He felt his full strength now, and all fear was gone, and he cried out to the Dwarfs to stop.

When the Giant heard him, he came towards him with such rage that smoke came through the vizor of his helmet, and he shook his boar-spear with such force that its ends almost met. Unhappy wretch! cried he, who gave thee boldness enough to dare appear before me? That Lord, quoth Beltenebros, whom thou hast offended, who will give me strength to-day to break thy pride. Come on! come on! cried the Giant, and see if his power can protect thee from mine! Beltenebros fitted the lance under his arm, and ran against him full speed: he smote him below the waist with such exceeding force that the spear burst through the plates of steel and ran through him, even so as to strike the saddle behind, that the girths broke, and he fell with the saddle, the broken lance remaining in him. His boar-spear had taken effect upon the horse of Beltenebros, and mortally wounded him. The Knight leapt off and drew his sword. The Giant rose up so enraged that fire came from him, and he plucked the lance from his wound, and threw it at Beltenebros so forcibly that if the shield had not protected his helmet, it would have driven him to the ground; but his own bowels came out with the weapon, and he fell, crying, help, Basagante! I am slain. At this Basagante came up as fast as his horse could carry him: he had a steel axe in his hand, and with this he thought to have cut his enemy in two; but Beltenebros avoided the blow, and at the same time struck at the Giant's horse: the stroke fell short, but the end of his sword cut through the stirrup-leather, and cut the leg also half through. The Giant in his fury did not feel the wound, though he missed the stirrup; he turned and raised his axe again. Beltenebros had taken the shield from his neck, and was holding it by the thongs: the axe fell on it and pierced in, and drove it from his hands to the ground. Beltenebros had made another stroke, the sword wounded Basagante's arm, and, falling below upon the plates of fine steel, broke, so that only the handle remained in his hand. Not for this was he a whit dismayed; he saw the Giant could not pluck his axe from the shield, and he ran and caught it by the handle also; both struggled; it was on that side where the stirrup had been cut away, so that Basagante lost his balance, the horse started and he fell, and Beltenebros got the battle-axe. The Giant drew his sword in great fury, and would have ran at the Knight, but the nerves of his leg were cut through; he fell upon one knee, and Beltenebros smote him on the helmet, that the laces burst and it fell off. He seeing his enemy so near, thought with his sword, which was very long, to smite off his head; the blow was aimed too high, it cut off the whole crown of the helmet, and cut away the hair with it. Beltenebros drew back; the helmet fell over his head upon his shoulders, and Leonoreta and the Damsels, who were on their knees in the waggon praying to God to deliver them, tore their hair and began to shriek and call upon the Virgin, thinking he was surely slain. He himself put up his hand to feel if he were wounded to death, but feeling no harm, made again at the Giant, whose sword falling upon a stone in the last blow had broken. Basagante's heart failed him now, he made one stroke more, and cut him slightly in the leg with the broken sword; but Beltenebros let drive the battle-axe at his head; it cut away the ear and the cheek and the jaw, and Basagante fell, writhing in the agony of death.

At this time Famongomadan had taken off his helmet, and was holding his hands upon his wound to check the blood. When he saw his son slain, he began to blaspheme God and his Mother Holy Mary, saying that he did not so much grieve to die as that he could destroy their monasteries and churches, because they had suffered him and his son to be conquered by one Knight. Beltenebros was then upon his knees returning thanks to God, when he heard the blasphemer, he exclaimed, Accursed of God and of his Blessed Mother! now shalt thou suffer for thy cruelties; pray to thine Idol, that, as thou hast shed so much blood before him, he may stop this blood of thine from flowing out with thy life! The Giant continued to curse God and his Saints; then Beltenebros plucked the boar-spear from the horse's body, and thrust it into the mouth of Famongomadan, and nailed him backward to the earth. He then put on Basagante's helmet that he might not be known, and mounting the other's horse, rode up to the waggon and broke the chains of all who were prisoners therein, and he besought them to carry the bodies of the Giants to King Lisuarte, and say they were sent him by a strange Knight called Beltenebros; and he begged the Princess to permit him to take the black horse of Famongomadan, because it was a strong and handsome horse, and he would ride him in the battle against King Cildadan. The bodies of the Giants were so huge, that they were obliged to bend their knees to lay them in the waggon. Leonoreta and her Damsels made garlands for their heads, and being right joyful for their deliverance entered London singing in triumph. Much was King Lisuarte astonished at their adventure, and the more for Quadragante had already presented himself on the part of Beltenebros, of whom nothing else was known except what Corisanda had related. I would he were among us, said the King, I would not lose him for any thing that he could ask and I could grant.




_CHAPTER 14._


Beltenebros having taken leave of the Princess, returned joyfully to the fountain where the Damsels were. He bade Enil go to London, and get him other arms made the same as those he wore, which were now so battered as to be useless, and he was to buy him another sword, and bring them in eight days to the Fountain of the Three Channels. Enil forthwith departed, and the Damsels also taking their leave, rode on to Miraflores, and there told Oriana and Mabilia what great feats they had seen that day atchieved by a Knight called Beltenebros. He meantime struck into the forest, and rode slowly the same way, till he came to a brook winding among the trees, and there, for it was yet early, he alighted and took off his helmet, and drank of the water, and cleansed himself from the sweat of the battle; and there he remained, musing over his past and present fortunes and the strange vicissitudes of life, till night approached; then he made for the castle. Durin and Gandalin met him at the garden-wall, and took his horse. Oriana and Mabilia and the Damsel were on the wall: they gave him their hands: presently he was over, and held Oriana in his arms; but who can tell what joy there then was in embracing and kisses, and the mingling of tears? Mabilia roused them as from a dream, and led them into the castle, and there Beltenebros remained eight days with Oriana in joys dearer to him than even Paradise.

Meantime King Lisuarte was preparing for the battle against King Cildadan, which he much doubted, knowing what Giants and mighty Knights would be with his enemy. Florestan and Galaor and Agrayes were returned, and Don Galvanes Lackland had arrived, and many other good Knights. The whole talk was of Beltenebros, and many said his deeds surpassed those of Amadis; whereat Galaor and Florestan were so enraged, that nothing but their promise to undertake no adventure before the battle, withheld them from seeking him and proving him in mortal combat, but of this they only communed with each other. One day there came into the palace an old Squire with two others, all clad in garments of the same cloth. The old man's beard was shorn, his ears were large, and the hair of his head grey. He, kneeling before the King, addressed him in the Greek language: Sir, the great fame which is gone abroad of the Knights and Dames and Damsels of your court hath brought me hither, to see if I can find among them what for sixty years I have sought through all parts of the world, and reaped no fruit for my labour. Noble King, if you hold it good, permit that a trial may be made here, which shall not be to your injury nor to the shame of any. All who were present, desirous to see what it might be, besought the King's assent, which he, feeling the like curiosity, readily granted. The old Squire then took in his hand a coffer of jasper, three cubits long and a span wide, its sides being fastened with plates of gold; this he opened, and took out a sword, so strange as the like was never seen; the sheath was of bone, yet green like an emerald, and so clear that the blade of the sword could be seen through, and it was unlike other blades, for the one-half was as bright as it could be, and the other burning red like fire; the hilt was of the same green bone, and the belt also, being made of such small pieces fastened together with gold screws, that it could be girt on like a common belt. This the Squire hung round his neck, and took from the same coffer a head-dress of flowers, the half whereof were as beautiful and fresh as though they had just then been cut from the living stem; the other half so withered and dry, that it seemed they would crumble at a touch. The King asked why those flowers, that all seemed to grow from the same stem, were yet in such different condition, and what was the nature of that strange sword? King, said the old Squire, this sword cannot be drawn from the scabbard, except by the Knight who of all men in the world loveth his Lady best; and as soon as he shall have it in his hand, the half which is now of burning red, shall become clear and bright like the other part, and the whole blade be of one colour; and when this garland of flowers shall be set upon the head of that Lady or Damsel, that with the same surpassing love doth love her husband or friend, the dry flowers shall again become fresh and green. And know, Sir, that I cannot be knighted except by the hands of that true lover, nor take sword except from that loyal Lady; for this, O King, having searched all other courts and parts of the world, I am come hither, after sixty years, hoping that as there is no court of Emperor or King like this, here I may succeed at last. Tell me, said Lisuarte, how is it that the half which is burning red, does not burn the scabbard? You shall hear, quoth the Squire: Between Tartary and India there is a sea so hot, that it boils like water over a fire, and it is all green; and in that sea serpents breed bigger than crocodiles, having wings wherewith they fly, and so venomous that all people run from them in fear; nevertheless, they who at any time find one dead esteem it much, being a thing excellent in medicine. These serpents have one bone reaching from the head to the tail, it is so strong that the whole body is formed upon this one bone, and green as you see it here in this scabbard and hilt and belt, and because it grew in that boiling sea no fire can burn it. Now I will tell you of this garland: the flowers are from trees in Tartary, in an island fifteen miles from the shore; the trees are only two, nor is it known that there are any such in any part elsewhere; but in that sea is a whirlpool, so terrible that men fear to venture to take them, howbeit they that have dared pass and succeeded, sell them for what they will to ask, for this freshness and life-green never fails. Having told you thus much, you shall know who I myself am. I am nephew of the best man of his own time, who was called Apolidon, and who long time dwelt here in your country in the Firm Island. My father was King Ganor, his brother, to whom he gave his kingdom, and my mother, daughter to the King of Panonia, and, when I was of age to be knighted, my father, because of the exceeding love between him and my mother, made me promise to be made Knight by none but the most true Lover in the world, and to receive sword only from the truest Lady. I lightly promised, thinking to accomplish this as soon as I should see my Uncle Apolidon and his Grimanesa; but so it was, that, when I arrived, Grimanesa was dead, and he knowing wherefore I came, greatly pitied me, for it is the custom of my land that no one who is not a Knight can reign therein. So having no remedy to give me then, he bade me return to him at a year's end, and at that time he gave me this sword and garland, telling me by the labour of this search to remedy the folly of such a promise. And now, Sir, I beseech you, as without wrong or shame it may be done, that you and your Knights and the Queen and her Ladies be pleased to make the proof; and if such can be found as shall accomplish it, let the sword and garland be theirs, the profit will be mine, and rest from my weary toil, and the honour yours above all other Princes, that they who could accomplish this adventure were found in your court. The King then said, that Santiago's day was but five days off, and then he had summoned many Knights to be present, wherefore if it pleased him to wait so long, his chance of success would be greater among so many more Knights. This the Squire thought good.

Gandalin was at this time in the court, and heard all that the Squire had said. Forthwith he rode to Miraflores. Beltenebros and Oriana were playing chess in the little court under the trees. When he had related all that had past, and how a day was appointed for the trial, Beltenebros sate musing for a while, lost in thought, till Gandalin and his cousin had left the place, and then, as he looked up, Oriana asked what had made him so deep in thought. Lady mine, quoth he, if by God's help and your's my thought could be accomplished, I should be a happy man for ever. Dear friend, she answered, she who hath made you master of her person will do for you any thing! He took her hands and kissed them often, and said, this is what I have been thinking; that, if you and I could win this sword and garland, our hearts would be for ever at rest, and all those doubts that have tortured us be utterly destroyed. But how can I do this, said Oriana, without great shame and greater danger to myself and to these Damsels, who are privy to our loves? That, replied Beltenebros, may easily be done, you shall go so disguised, and I will obtain such security from the King your father, that we shall be as unknown as before strangers. Then do your pleasure, quoth she, and God prosper it to good! I doubt not to gain the garland, if it is to be won by exceeding love. I will obtain your father's promise, said Beltenebros, that nothing shall be demanded from me against my own consent, and will go completely armed; and you, Lady, shall have a cloak fastened round you, and your face muffled, so that you shall see all, yet no one see you. Let us call Mabilia, cried Oriana, without her counsel I must not adventure. So they called her and Gandalin, and the Damsel of Denmark, and they, albeit they saw great peril, did not gainsay their inclination; and Mabilia said, there was a rich cloak among her mother's presents that the Damsel had brought, which never had been worn or seen in that land. She brought it, and took Oriana apart and dressed her in it, so that when she came out with her gloves on, and her face-cloths,[220:A] no one knew her, though they looked narrowly. Lady mine, cried Beltenebros, I never thought it would give me pleasure not to see and know you! He then bade Gandalin buy the fairest palfrey that could be found in all that country, and bring it at midnight before the day of the adventure, to the garden-wall; and he told Durin to have his horse ready for him this evening, that he might meet Enil, and send him to obtain the security from King Lisuarte.

    [220:A] Antifazes.

Beltenebros rode that night through the forest, and at day-break reached the fountain of the Three Channels. Presently Enil came up and brought with him the arms: they were good arms, and pleased him well. He then asked the Squire what news of the court, and Enil told him the talk there was of his prowess, and was about to relate concerning the sword and garland, but Beltenebros said, this I learnt three days since from a Damsel who made me promise to carry her secretly to this proof: this I must do, and will prove the sword myself; but, as you know it is my will not to make myself known to the King nor to any other till my deeds make me worthy, you must return directly and tell the King, that if he will promise and secure us that nothing shall be said or done to us against our pleasure, we will come and try the adventure; and say you, before the Queen and her Ladies, that this Damsel makes me go greatly against my inclination. On the day of the proof, meet me here at dawn, that the Damsel may know if she has this security; meantime I must return to bring her here, for she dwells far off. Beltenebros then took his arms, and while Enil went to the city, lay down by the same brook-side till night, then rode to Miraflores. Durin was ready to take his horse, and his fair friends expected him at the garden-wall. What, Sir Cousin! quoth Mabilia, seeing his arms, you return richer than you went. Do you not understand it? cried Oriana, he went to get arms, that he might free himself from this prison. Thus chearfully they entered the castle, and they gave him food, for he had not eaten the whole day, lest he might be seen.




_CHAPTER 15._


The next day the Damsel of Denmark was sent to London to learn what answer Enil obtained, and to tell the Queen and her Ladies that Oriana was ill, and did not rise. It was late before she returned, because the King had gone forth to meet Queen Briolania, who was come to his court, and brought with her three hundred Knights to go in search of Amadis, as his brothers might dispose of them. Twenty Damsels accompanied her, all dressed in mourning like herself, for in that dress had he found her, and that dress had she worn when he recovered for her her kingdom, and that she would wear till some tidings of him were known. Is she so handsome as they say? quoth Oriana. So save me God, Lady, replied the Damsel, as excepting yourself, I think her the fairest and most graceful woman that I have ever seen. And it grieved her much when she heard of your malady, and she bade me say, when it pleased you, she would come and see you. I should be much pleased, answered Oriana, for she is the person in the world whom I most wish to see. Honour her well, said Beltenebros, for she well deserves it, although, Lady, you have suspected something.—Dear friend, no more of this, I know my thoughts were false. But this trial, quoth he, will make you more free from this, and me more subject.—The garland, said Oriana, will prove whether my error proceeded from excess of love. The Damsel then told them how the King had promised Enil the security which he required.

They rose at midnight before the day of the proof. Oriana was wrapt in Mabilia's mantle, and her face muffled, and Beltenebros armed himself in his new arms. They crossed the wall; Gandalin was there with the horse and palfrey: they mounted, and rode alone into the forest. Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark remained in great fear lest ill should befal; but, when Oriana found herself in the midst of the forest at night, she was so affrighted that her whole body trembled and her speech failed, and she began to apprehend that she might fail to accomplish the adventure, and that if so her lover, who now trusted in her so fully, would suspect her truth, and then she wished she had never undertaken the danger. When Beltenebros perceived her agitation, he said, I would rather have died, Lady, than brought you here, if I had thought you would have been so terrified; we had better turn back, and he turned his horse and led her palfrey round. But then Oriana's heart changed, seeing that so great an adventure would be for her sake foregone, and she said, dear friend do not heed my fears, for I am a woman, and this is a strange place to me; regard only what you, as a good Knight, ought to atchieve. Dear Lady, mine, quoth he, your prudence guides my folly: I can neither do or say other than you command me: so they proceeded, and about an hour before the dawn reached the Fountain. When it was broad day Enil came up. Lady Damsel, said Beltenebros, this is the Squire of whom I spake, let us hear if the King grant your demand. Enil then told them what Lisuarte had promised, and that the proof was to begin immediately after mass. Beltenebros then gave him his shield and spear, the helmet he wore himself; they took the road to London, and in this guise entered the gate. All flocked to see them crying out, this is the good Knight Beltenebros, who sent here Don Quadragante and the giants! This is the prime of all knighthood! Happy the Damsel who comes in his guard! When Oriana heard this she felt a pride to know herself the mistress of him, who, by his great valour, could command all others. Thus they reached the palace, where the King and all his Knights, the Queen and her Ladies, were assembled for the adventure. As soon as their approach was known the King went to receive them at the entrance. They knelt to kiss his hand, but he withdrew it, saying, Good friend, I shall willingly observe your pleasure, for in a short time you have done more for me than ever Knight did for King before. Beltenebros bowed thankfully, but made no answer, and proceeded with his Damsel up to the Queen: But Oriana's flesh quivered with fear, seeing she was before her parents, but her true friend never let go her hand, and so they both knelt before Brisena. The Queen raised them and said, Damsel, I know not who you are, never having seen you; but for the great services which this Knight hath performed, and for your own deserts also, you are both honourably and deservedly welcome. Beltenebros thanked her, but Oriana held down her head as if for humbleness, and made no answer. The King and his Knights then went on one side of the hall, the Queen and her Ladies to the other; but Beltenebros said, that if it pleased the King he would stand apart with his Damsel, and prove the adventure last of all.

Lisuarte then took the sword and drew it a hands breadth, no more. Macandon, the old Squire, said, King, if there be no better lover in the Court than you, I shall depart without my wish, and he thrust the sword back, for so it was to be at every trial; then Galaor essayed, and could only draw it three fingers breadth. Florestan and Galvanes, and Grumedan, and Brandoyuas, and Ladasin, all tried, none so successfully as Florestan, who drew it at a full palm's length. Don Guilan the Pensive was the next, and he drew it half out; had you loved just as much again, said Macandon, you would have won the sword. Others there were who tried and could not move it, and these the old Squire called heretics in love. Then came Agrayes to the proof, he looked at Olinda, and thought surely the sword would be his, for his true and loyal love; he drew it within a hand of the point, and as he still attempted to pluck it forth the burning part of the blade touched his cloak and burnt it; then he retired sufficiently rejoiced that he had so far exceeded all others. Almost Sir Knight, quoth old Macandon, had you been the winner, and I satisfied. Palomir and Dragonis, who had arrived the day before, next essayed, and drew it no farther than Galaor. Knights, quoth the Squire, if you had only as much of the sword as you can draw, you would have but little for your own defence. True, said Dragonis; and if you should be knighted at the end of the adventure, you are not so young but that you may remember the ceremony. At this all laughed, but there remained no more to make the trial; Beltenebros then arose and took his Lady by the hand, and went towards the sword. Sir Stranger, quoth Macandon, this sword will become you better than the one you wear, yet I would not have you be so sure of it as to lay aside your own, for this is to be won by truth of heart, and not by force of arms. But he took the sword, and drew it from the scabbard, and immediately the whole blade became clear and shining with one brightness. When Macandon saw this, he knelt down and said, O good Knight, God give thee honour, for thou hast done great honour to this court! Reason is it that you should be beloved well by your Lady unless she be the falsest and most unreasonable of women. Now then give me the honour of Knighthood, which I may receive from no other hand but yours! and you will give me with it lands and the lordship over many good men. Good friend, replied Beltenebros, let the proof of the garland be made, then I will do with you what can rightly be done. And then he blessed the sword, and laying his own aside, hung it round his neck, and led his Lady back to her station. Great were the praises then which he received for excellence in arms and in love, so that Galaor and Florestan were moved to great anger, for they thought it shame that any other than Amadis should be esteemed above them, and they resolved within themselves that their first business after the battle with King Cildadan should be to fight him, and either die or show to the world the difference there was between him and their brother.

Lisuarte now called upon the Queen and her Ladies to make their proof, without fear, and in the hope of honour; for she who won the garland, if Dame should be more loved and honoured by her husband, if Damsel acquire the praise of loyalty above all. Brisena first placed the flowers on her own head, they did not in the least alter. Queen and Madam, quoth old Macandon, if the King your husband gained little by attempting the sword, it seems you have well requited him; she answered nothing, but drew back greatly abashed. Next was Briolania, that fair Queen of Sobradisa; she, like Brisena, produced no change. Lady and most fair Damsel, cried the Squire, you must be loved before you can love so as to gain the garland; four other King's daughters came on, Eluida and Estrelleta her sister, who was fair and proud, and Aldeva and Olinda the gentle. Upon her head the flowers began to revive so that all thought she would win the praise, but they only began, and when the garland was taken off they withered again as before; more than a hundred other Dames tried, but all with less success than Olinda, and all received their jest from the old Squire. Oriana had felt a fear when Briolania made the proof, and she rejoiced at the failure, lest, had she succeeded, her friend might deem it was for his love, for never had she seen so fair a Damsel, and she thought surely, that if his heart were not won by her, there was no danger of a rival. All others had now failed; she made sign to Beltenebros to lead her up, the garland was placed round her head, and immediately the dry flowers quickened with full freshness and verdure. Excellent Damsel, quoth Macandon, you are she for whom I sought forty years before you were born!

Then the old Squire besought Beltenebros to knight him, and that Damsel to give him a sword. Let it be presently, said Beltenebros, for I cannot tarry. Macandon then put on white garments, and white armour over it like a new Knight, and Beltenebros knighted him according to the manner, and put on his right spur, and Oriana girded on a rich sword which his Squires had brought. The Dames and Damsels laughed at seeing him, and Aldeva said so loud that all heard her. What a fair Child! and he will be a new Knight as long as he lives! How know you that? cried the rest. She answered, because the dress he has now put on will last as long as himself. Gentle Damsels, quoth the old man, I would not exchange my pleasure for your manners; my youth may be ranked with your modesty. The King was pleased at this reply, for he thought their speeches were unseemly.

This done, Beltenebros and his Lady took leave of the Queen; and Brisena said to her daughter, Lady, though it is your pleasure not to be known here, yet I beseech you, when you are returned home, ask of me whatever favour I can grant. I know her Lady, quoth Beltenebros, just as much as you do, though we have been seven days together; but this I can say, that she is fair, and she has locks that need not be thus concealed. Damsel, said Briolania, I know you not: but if your friend love you as you love him, and as he will do if he be wise, love never made a better union. Her words gave pleasure to Oriana; then they took their leave, and mounted, the King and Don Galaor accompanying them; and Beltenebros said to the King, take this Damsel and honour her, Sir, for she well deserves it, having honoured your court. Lisuarte took her bridle, and he went on talking with Galaor, who had little inclination for friendly talk with him, longing to engage him in battle. When they had gone a little way Beltenebros took the bridle from the King, and said, Now, Sir, God be with you, and if it please you that I should be one of your hundred in the battle, I shall willingly serve you. The King embraced and thanked him, and said, that great part of his fear was removed by having him on his part; they parted then, and Beltenebros and his Lady, Enil following, entered the forest, he having round his neck that green sword, and she that garland of flowers upon her head.

When they reached the fountain of the Three Channels, they saw a Squire on horseback coming down the mountain, who said, Knight, Arcalaus the Enchanter bids you send him that Damsel, if you make him fetch her, he will cut off both your heads. Where is Arcalaus the Enchanter? cried Beltenebros; the Squire showed him where he and another Knight were under a tuft of trees, both being armed, and their horses ready by them. At hearing this Oriana could scarce keep her seat upon the palfrey. Lady Damsel, fear not! quoth he, if this sword fail me not I will protect you. He then took his arms—tell Arcalaus I am a stranger Knight, who know him not, and have no reason to obey him. When Arcalaus heard this he grew greatly enraged, and said to the Knight with him, Nephew Lindoraque, take that garland which the Damsel wears for your Mistress Madasima; if the Knight attempts to hinder you cut off his head, and hang the woman by the hair to a tree. Lindoraque mounted and moved on to do it: he was a huge man, and well might be so, being son of Cartadaque the giant of the defended mountain, by a sister of Arcalaus. But Beltenebros held him at nought, and placing himself right in his way, for he had heard his errand, cried, Knight, you pass no farther! You shall not hinder me, quoth he, from performing the pleasure of Arcalaus. Beltenebros answered, we shall see what your pride and his villainy can do. They couched their lances and ran, the lances broke, Lindoraque fell with the truncheon in his body, he rose, being of stout heart, and seeing Beltenebros about to strike him, bent from the blow, and reeled and fell upon the truncheon, and drove it clean through his back, so that he died instantly. Arcalaus was riding up to help him. Beltenebros galloped up to him and made him lose the joust, and struck at him with his sword a blow that cut off the lance, and with it half the hand, so that only his thumb was left. He turned to fly, and threw away his shield, and by the fleetness of his horse escaped. Beltenebros then bade Enil take the shield and hand of Arcalaus, and the head of Lindoraque to the King, and tell him what had happened. He and his Lady went on their way, and rested beside a fountain till it was near night, then rode to Miraflores. The Squires were ready, and Mabilia and the Damsel joyfully received them, for if there had been delay they only expected death. Fair prizes have you won, quoth Mabilia, but they have cost us a great alarm and many tears.

As Lisuarte and Galaor were returning to the town, a Damsel came up and gave them each a letter, and rode away. The King read his thus: To thee Lisuarte, King of Great Britain, I Urganda, the Unknown, send salutation, and I tell thee that in the perilous and cruel battle between thee and King Cildadan, Beltenebros, in whom you confide, shall lose his name and his renown, and for one blow that he shall give all his great deeds shall be quite forgotten. In that hour thou shalt be in the greatest extremity, and in all danger of death, when the sharp sword of Beltenebros shall shed thy blood. Cruel and dolorous will the battle be; there will be great rage and cruelty, and no compassion. But at last by three blows from the hand of Beltenebros his party shall remain conquerors. Look to it King, for she who sends thee this warning knows what is to come!

Brave as the King's heart was, this letter dismayed him; he believed that Beltenebros was to lose his life, and that his own would be in the utmost danger; howbeit he put on a good countenance, and gave the letter to Galaor, and asked his counsel. Sir, quoth Galaor, I stand in need of your counsel myself; but if this battle can honourably be avoided, I should advise that it be done so; if that cannot be, you should not be in the field; by the sword of Beltenebros your blood is to be shed, and by three blows from his hand his party are to remain conquerors. This I do not understand, for he is to be on your side; and yet the letter says otherwise. Friend, quoth the King, your love for me makes you advise me ill. I must not, for the knowledge of any one, how wise soever, distrust the power of him who ordaineth all things. My good friend, I will be in the battle, and take what fortune it please God to give. The King's answer roused Galaor; rightly are you esteemed the best King in the world! quoth he, and he then shewed him his own letter.

You Don Galaor of Gaul, the strong and the brave, I Urganda, salute as him whom I esteem and love; know from me what must befall you in the dolorous battle, if you be there. After many cruelties and deaths that you will have witnessed in the last press, your strong body and stout limbs will fail your brave and ardent heart, and at the end your head will be in his power, who, with the three blows that he shall give, is to decide the day.

Friend, quoth Lisuarte, if this say true, you will be slain if you enter the battle; I will so order that you may honourably decline it. Sir, said Galaor, it seems the advice I gave displeased you, that you would command me to my shame. God forbid that I should herein obey you. Don Galaor! you are right, the King answered, we will trust in God. Meantime say nothing of these letters lest our friends should be discouraged. Before they entered the town two Knights came up to be present in the battle, they were Don Bruneo of Bonamar, and Branfil his brother; and Bruneo grieved much that he had not arrived in time to prove the sword, for he had passed under the arch of Loyal Lovers, and by his love to Melicia doubted not that he should have won it. Him Galaor courteously saluted, and took to his lodging as a right worthy Knight. Presently Enil arrived with the head of Lindoraque hanging from the horse's breast-plate, and the hand and shield of Arcalaus. Then was the great prowess of Beltenebros more praised, and Galaor and Florestan more desirous, to prove in battle that he was not equal to their lost brother Amadis. At this time Filispinel returned who had been sent with the King's defiance to the giants; he brought word that they were gone to Ireland, and would in four days time land in the port of the plain where the battle was to be fought, and he brought with him this letter. To the great Lord Lisuarte, King of Great Britain, and to all our friends in his dominions. I Arban, a wretch, once King of North Wales, and I Angriote of Estravaus, inform you that our unhappy fortune hath thrown us into the power of the fierce Gromadaza, wife of Famongomadan, who, in vengeance for the death of her husband and her son, inflicts upon us such torments, that we wish for death to relieve us; but she will not kill us that she may lengthen our sufferings, the which are such, that we should have ridden ourselves of life, if it were not for losing our souls thereby; but being now near death, we write this letter with our blood, praying God to grant you the victory over these traitors, who, in such inhuman sort torment us. Great sorrow had the King hereat, and all his Knights; however he comforted them, assuring them that there was no other remedy, or way of helping their friends, than by conquering in this great battle: so they all prepared, and set forth for the place appointed.




_CHAPTER 16._


Three days Beltenebros remained at Miraflores, on the fourth he departed alone at midnight. He had told Enil to meet him at the Castle of an old Knight, called Abradan, which was by the place of battle, and there on the next day he found him. The old Knight received him well, for he always, hospitably welcomed all Errant Knights. Presently two Squires arrived, the nephews of the host, and said, that King Cildadan was landed, and had pitched his tents upon the sea-shore, and his Knights with him, and they were landing their horses and arms. Grumedan and Giontes had been to them on the part of King Lisuarte, and made truce till the day of battle, and also concluded that neither party should bring out more than the hundred Knights appointed. Nephews, said the host, what think you of those enemies whom God confound! Good Uncle, said they, we must not speak of them; they are so strong and terrible, that unless God miraculously assist our King, he and his power will be nothing against them. Herewithal, the tears fell from the old man's eyes, who cried, O Lord, do not forsake the best and justest King in the world! Good mine host, quoth Beltenebros, be not dismayed for their fierceness, for worth and modesty often overcome proud valour. I pray you go to the King for me, and tell him that there is in your house a Knight called Beltenebros, who requests to know the day of battle that he may be there. How, Sir, cried old Abradan, are you he who sent Don Quadragante to the King my Master, and who slew Famongomadan and his son! Now am I overpaid for all the services that ever I have rendered to Errant Knights. So taking his Nephews to guide him, he went to King Lisuarte, who was arrived within half a league of his enemies. Greatly was the King rejoiced with what he said, and he told him the battle should be on the next day, and said, there lacked him but one Knight of the hundred. Don Grumedan replied, you are rather above the number, for Beltenebros should be counted for five. When the old man returned with these tidings, Enil took his Master aside, and kneeling down, said, Albeit Sir my services have not merited it, yet your great goodness emboldens me to ask a boon, and I beseech you for God's sake to grant it me. Beltenebros raised him and said, ask any thing that I can do. Enil would have kissed his hand; Sir, I ask you to make me a Knight, and to entreat the King that I may be one of the hundred since one is wanting. Friend Enil, replied Beltenebros, let it not enter your heart to begin so perilously. I do not say this because I will not make thee a Knight, but to advise thee to undertake lighter adventures first. My good Master, quoth Enil, where can I adventure so well? if I come from the field alive it will always be to my praise and honour, and if I die it will be dying well, and my memory will be joined with all those good Knights who must perish there. But then an affectionate pity was felt at the heart of Beltenebros, and he said within himself, thou dost well show thyself to be of the lineage of Gandales, my excellent and true fosterer! Be it so! said he, and he asked the host to give the Squire arms; and Enil watched them that night, and after dawn they heard mass, and Beltenebros knighted him, and they departed, their host and his Nephews carrying their arms. They found Lisuarte putting his battle in order to go against the enemies, who were ready in the plain. The King and his Knights rejoiced to see Beltenebros. Sir, quoth he, I come to perform my promise, and I bring with me this Knight to supply the one lacking. The King joyfully welcomed him, and placed his Knight to make up the complement. Then they moved on in one battalion: the King was in the middle of the rank, before him Beltenebros and his companion were placed, and Galaor, Florestan, and Agrayes; Gandalac, the Giant who had fostered Galaor, and his two sons Bramandil, and Gavus whom Galaor had knighted; Nicoran, of the Perilous Bridge, Dragonis and Palomir, and Pinorante, Giontes, nephew to the King, the renowned Don Bruneo of Bonamar, and his brother Branfil, and Don Guilan the Pensive. All these were together, and before them went that honourable and good old Knight Don Grumedan, Brisena's fosterer, with the banner of the King.

King Cildadan on his side placed the Giants in the front of the battle, and twenty Knights of his lineage of great valour. He stationed Madanfabul, the Giant of the Isle of the Vermillion Tower, upon a little rising ground, and with him ten of the best Knights, and directed them not to move till they saw that all were weary, and that then they should make way fiercely towards King Lisuarte, to kill him or carry him prisoner to the ships. In this array the two parties approached with deliberate pace till they came near, and then they met with such a shock that many a man fell, and many a horse ran over the field without a rider. That was a hard and dolorous day for all who were there present! for striking and struggling they continued thus without rest or intermission a third part of the day, with such toil and effort, being in the mid heat of summer, that they and their horses were so wearied, and the wounded bled so fast, that in many life could endure no longer, and there they fell dead, especially those whom the Giants had wounded with their great force. In that hour Beltenebros did wonders in arms with that good sword, striking and slaying all before him, though the care with which he kept watch over the King most employed him; for Lisuarte knowing that the great shame, or great glory of the day would be his, thrust himself into the hottest press of the battle. Galaor and Florestan, and Agrayes kept by him, being emulous to equal Beltenebros that day, and Don Bruneo watched to assist Galaor, who, like a lion made among the Giants, to equal him whom he thought the rival of Amadis, regardless of their great strength, and those whom he saw fall under their blows. In this heat he came before Cartadaque, the Giant of the Defended Mountain, who with a heavy battle axe, notwithstanding Florestan had given him a deep wound in the shoulder, had already killed six Knights at his feet. Galaor made at him, and with his sword struck him upon the helmet; it cut away all it touched, and lopt off his ear, and passing downward cut the battle-axe helve from his hand. When the Giant saw his enemy so near, and that he had no weapon to wound him, he laid hold on him with his hands, and plucked him so forcibly that the saddle girth broke, and he fell, but still the Giant held him; and Galaor thought he never could escape from that mighty grasp, and that all his bones were broken. Yet before his senses were gone he recovered his sword that hung from his wrist by the chain, and thrust it through the vizor of Cartadaque's helmet; the Giant's gripe relaxed, and he fell dead. Galaor arose then, but so weak and exhausted, that he could not pluck his sword from the Giant's head. The Knights on both sides pressed towards him, some to kill him at this disadvantage, his own friends to his help. The battle became fiercer there than it had yet been; King Cildadan came up, and on the other part Beltenebros. Beltenebros twice smote Cildadan on the head such stunning blows that the King fell from his horse at the feet of Galaor. Galaor caught up the sword of Cildadan, and laid about him till his strength and senses were gone, and he fell upon the body of King Cildadan.

At this time the Giants Gandalac and Albadanzor were engaged; they smote each other so furiously with their clubs, that they and their horses both fell. Albadanzor's arm was broken, and Gandalac's leg; howbeit he and his sons slew their enemy. The day was now half over, and on the two sides an hundred and twenty Knights had been slain. Madanfabul, the Giant of the Vermillion Tower, was looking on from the hill; he saw how the field was thinned, that they who remained were weary with their toil, their armour broken, and their horses stiff and exhausted. He thought that he and his companions could now have discomfited all that were left on both sides, and descended into the field, crying out, Leave not a man of them alive; I will kill or take King Lisuarte. Beltenebros had just mounted a fresh horse, which one of old Abradan's nephews gave him; he saw the Giant and his troop come on, and placed himself before the King, and called on Florestan and Agrayes, who were near; with these Don Bruneo of Bonamar joined, and Branfil, and Guilan the Pensive, and Enil, who had done much in that battle, and was therefore always held in high esteem, all these albeit they were grievously wounded, and their horses also, placed themselves before the King. Before Madanfabul came a Knight called Sarmadan the Lion, the Uncle of King Cildadan, and for strength and prowess the best of his lineage. Beltenebros stood foremost to meet him. Sarmadan drove his lance at him, it broke, yet pierced the shield and wounded him, though with no deep wound. Then Beltenebros hit him a thwart blow with his sword across the bever, straight over both eyes, and through both, that he fell dead. But Madanfabul and his other comrades came on so fiercely, that the most of those who were of King Lisuarte's part were beaten down before them, and he made right for the King, with such fresh strength, that the Knights about the King, bravely as they adventured, could not protect him; he seized Lisuarte round the neck, and grasped him so strongly that he lost all power of resistance, plucked him from the saddle, and carried him towards the ships. When Beltenebros beheld that he exclaimed, O Lord God, let not Oriana have this affliction! He struck the spurs into his horse and galloped after him sword in hand, and reaching him smote at him with his whole force. The sword fell on the right arm with which he held the King, and cut it clean through by the elbow; the weapon stayed not there, but passing on cut through the King's breast-plate, and wounded him so that the blood streamed down. Lisuarte was left upon the ground, and the Giant fled like a lost man, bleeding to death. When Beltenebros saw that with that one blow he had slain that mighty Giant, and rescued King Lisuarte from so great a danger, he shouted out, Gaul! Gaul! for I am Amadis. This he cried as he laid on among his enemies, felling them or slaying them, and in good season did he exert this prowess, for great havock had been made among the Knights of his party, so many slain, others wounded, and fighting on foot, and the enemies had come fresh against them with great strength, and an eager desire to kill all they could. For this cause Amadis put forth his strength, so that it might well be said his great prowess was the safety and support of his party that day; but what most kindled him was, that he had seen his brother Galaor afoot and sore wearied, and looking again saw him no longer, so that surely he thought him dead, and with this grief and anger he encountered no Knight whom he did not slay. When they of King Cildadan's party saw the great feats that he atchieved, they took for their leader a Knight of the race of the Giants, whose name was Gadancuriel, and who had made such slaughter that day that he was noted by all. They expected, being led by him to win the day, and at this time Amadis had thrust in so far among the enemy that he was beset by them and in great peril. King Lisuarte had mounted again, and with him were Don Bruneo of Bonamar, and Florestan, and Guilan the Pensive, and Ladasin, and Galvanes Lackland, and Olivas, and old Grumedan, from whose hand the banner had been cut. The King seeing Amadis in such danger made up to succour him like a worthy King, although he had many wounds, and all rejoicing that Beltenebros was Amadis, forced their way up to him, and released him from the press. He then turned whither he would, and chance guided him to where his cousin Agrayes, and Palomir and Dragonis were on foot, and many Knights upon them striving to slay them, but they standing together, and still defending themselves manfully. He seeing them thus, called upon his brother Florestan, and Guilan the Pensive, to their succour. There came against him a Knight of great renown, called Vadamigar, whose helmet had been struck off; he wounded the horse of Amadis in the neck, but Amadis reached him, and cleft him down to the ears, and as he fell cried out. Cousin Agrayes, take this horse! And Florestan struck down a good Knight, called Daniel, and gave his horse to Palomir, and Palomir then won one for Dragonis; and Guilan wounded Landin sorely, and unhorsed him, and gave his horse to Branfil: thus they were all helped, and then they followed in the path of Amadis, who went on cutting his way manfully, and shouting Gaul! Gaul! Amadis! that the enemy might know he was in the field. Such courage did he then display, and so well did Florestan and Agrayes, and those other Knights second him, and King Lisuarte also played his part so well, that they won the battle; the enemies who survived flying to their ships, and Amadis still among them raging for the death of Galaor. But Gadancuriel still made head with those whom he could turn from flight, and he turned upon the King. Florestan, who had seen his feats that day, thrust himself before Lisuarte to save him, though he had only a broken sword. Gadancuriel cut through the helmet and wounded him in the head, he with his broken sword smote him on the helmet so that it fell off, and then Lisuarte cleft his head; there was none other left to maintain the field: they who fled perished before they could reach the water, or in the water before they could reach their ships.

Then Amadis cried to Florestan and Agrayes, weeping as he spake, Good kinsmen, I fear we have lost Don Galaor, let us seek for him. They went to the spot where Amadis had smitten down King Cildadan, and seen his brother last on foot; but so many were the dead who lay there that they saw him not, till as they moved away the bodies, Florestan knew him by the sleeve of his surcoat, which was of azure worked with silver flowers, and then they made great moan over him. But when Amadis saw him thus with exceeding grief he threw himself from his horse, and his wounds over which the blood had clotted burst open with the fall, and bled abundantly, and he laying aside his shield and helm that were all hacked and bruised, went to Galaor and took off his helmet, and took his head upon his knees. Galaor at the fresh air began to move a little, and they all gathered round him weeping to see him thus. While they were thus standing twelve Damsels richly apparelled came up, and some Squires with them, who brought a bed covered with rich drapery. The Damsels knelt before Amadis and said, Sir, we are come hither for Don Galaor, if you would have him live give him to us: if not, all the Masters in Great Britain cannot help him. Amadis knew not the Damsels, and he saw the great danger of Galaor, and could not tell what to do; but those Knights advised him to trust his brother to this fortune, rather than see him die without any possibility of saving him. Good Damsels, said Amadis, may I know whither you would carry him? They answered, not as yet; but if you desire his life give him to us; else we must go our way. Then Amadis besought that they would take him also; this they refused, but at his request they suffered Ardian the Dwarf, and his Squire to follow them. Then they laid him in the bed, armed as he was, all except his helmet and gauntlets, and half dead; and Amadis and the Knights followed them, weeping, to the shore. A ship was ready there in which the Damsels placed him, and then returned and went to King Lisuarte, and besought him that he would be pleased to give them King Cildadan also, who lay among the dead, bidding him remember that he was a good King, and had suffered this evil in doing what he was bound to do: and they prayed the King to have pity upon him, that he might look for pity himself in his need. Lisuarte readily assented. They took up Cildadan more dead than alive, and carried him in the same bed on board, then made sail, and were speedily out of sight.

Meantime Lisuarte had secured the enemies fleet that nothing might escape, taking prisoners all who were not slain in battle. He now came up to Amadis, and the Knights that were weeping with him, and when he heard their lamentation was for the loss of Galaor, he was grieved at heart, for Galaor had faithfully and affectionately served him from the hour wherein he became his Knight; then he dismounted, his armour being all stained with blood, and embraced Amadis, and bade him take comfort, for God would not suffer such a man as his brother to perish. They all then went to the tent of King Cildadan, and there took food, and he ordered that all the Knights who had fallen on his side should be buried in a monastery that was at the foot of a near mountain, and he ordered the due service for their souls, and assigned rents for masses for them. Moreover he ordered a stately chapel to be built there, and rich monuments therein for them, and that their names should all be engraved upon their tombs. Messengers were sent to inform Queen Brisena of his good fortune, and he and his Knights then went to Ganota, a town four leagues off, and there they remained till their wounds were healed.

While this battle was expected Queen Briolania went to visit Oriana at Miraflores. Oriana had her apartments hung with rich hangings to receive a guest whom she so greatly desired to see. When they met both were somewhat abashed, for neither the proof of the Enchanted Arch, nor of the Green Sword, could keep Oriana's heart so calm, but that it beat fast with fear, thinking that no affection, how true soever, could resist such beauty as she saw before her. And Briolania, who had seen the tears and thoughtfulness of Amadis, and knew what proof of love he had given at the Firm Island, presently concluded it could be only for this Princess, before whom she felt her own beauty even as nothing. So as they were freely communing together, Briolania related at length all that Amadis had done for her, and said how in her heart she loved him. Oriana then willing to learn farther, asked her why, as they were of equal rank, and she at her own disposal, she did not make him master of herself and her own dominions? Friend and Lady, replied Briolania, much as you have seen him, I think you know him not. Do you not believe I should think myself the happiest woman in the world if this could be? But you shall know all—and keep it I pray you secret, as one like you should do. I ventured upon this proposal, and it shames me whenever I remember it, but he replied, that he could neither bear affection to me nor to any other; the which I then believed, for unlike all other Knights, I never heard him speak of woman. You tell me wonders, quoth Oriana, glad at heart of what she heard; but unless Amadis loved some one he could not have passed under the Arch of True Lovers, which yet showed him more honour than ever any other had received. He may love, replied Briolania, but in his love he is the most secret that ever yet Knight was.

Briolania remained ten days with Oriana, and then they both went to join Queen Brisena at Fenusa, a town, where she was waiting for Lisuarte. Greatly rejoiced was she to see her daughter so recovered. There the tidings came of the victory, for joy whereat Brisena gave great alms to the churches and convents, and to those who were in want. But who can tell what joy there was to hear that Beltenebros was Amadis! What think you now of Amadis, quoth Briolania to Oriana, who affected the same surprise as the rest; I was in doubt whether he or Beltenebros most deserved my love. Queen and Lady, replied Oriana, we will ask him when he comes, wherefore he changed his name, and who the Damsel is that won the garland of flowers.




_CHAPTER 17._


Now you shall know what became of King Cildadan and Galaor. The Damsels who removed them dressed their wounds, and on the third day they recovered their senses. Galaor found himself in a rich room, which stood upon four marble pillars, and had an iron grating on all sides, through which he saw that he was in a garden, surrounded with a high wall, in which was only one little door covered with plates of iron. Astonished to find himself in such a place, he thought he was in prison, and felt such pain from his wounds that he expected nothing but death; and he remembered the battle, but knew not who had carried him from it, nor how he had been removed there. King Cildadan also, when he came to himself, saw that he was lying in a rich bed in the vaulted chamber of a large tower. He looked round and saw no one, neither door nor any entrance into the chamber, but over the arch he heard voices. There was a window near his bed from whence he looked out and saw the sea, and it seemed that the tower he was in was a high tower upon a rock, and that the sea washed it on three sides. He too remembered the battle but nothing more: but he well knew that if he was thus a prisoner, his friends could not be in better plight, and seeing no remedy, lay down again in bed, groaning and in great pain with his wounds.

Don Galaor, as he was lying in the open chamber, saw the little door of the garden wall open, and raised his head with great difficulty; there came in a Damsel very fair and richly apparalled, and with her a man so feeble and old that it was a wonder how he could walk, they came up to the iron grating, and said to him, Don Galaor, look to your soul, for we cannot warrant you. The Damsel then produced two little boxes, one of iron the other of silver, and showing them to Galaor, said, She who brought you here wills not that you should die till she knows whether you will perform her will; if so, your wounds shall be healed, and you shall have food. Good Damsel, replied he, if what she desire be any thing that I ought not to do, it will be worse than death. Do as you please, quoth she, we care little for your answer: it is at your own choice to live or die. The old man then opened the door of the grating, and they both went in, and she took the box of iron, and told the old man to withdraw, and then she said to Galaor, Sir, I have such compassion on you, that I will venture my own life to save yours. I have been ordered to fill this box with poison, and the other with an ointment to make you sleep; the poison being then rubbed into your wounds will act more instantly and you would presently die; but instead of this I have put here a remedy, the which, if you take it daily for seven days, will so heal you, that by that time you shall be wholly recovered, and able to ride on horseback as before. She then applied the ointment to his wounds, and the pain was instantly assuaged. Good Damsel, quoth he, you do so greatly bind me to your service, that if by your help I may escape from hence, never was Damsel so well guerdoned by Knight as you shall be: but if you have not means for this and yet wish to serve me, contrive that Urganda the Unknown may know in what perilous prison I am laid, for in her I have great hope. The Damsel then began to laugh—what hope can you have in Urganda, who cares little for your weal or woe? So much, replied Galaor, that as she knows the wishes of all, she knows how greatly it is my wish to serve her. The Damsel then answered, Look for no other Urganda than me, Don Galaor; and take you good hope, for it is the part of courage, not only to encounter danger, but to endure its after-chances for the danger in which I place myself to heal you, and deliver you from hence, I ask one boon, which shall be neither to your dishonour nor hurt. I grant, quoth he, all that may rightly be performed. Now then, said she, it is time to depart, lie you down, and feign to sleep soundly. He did accordingly; she called the old man and said, Look how he sleeps! Now the poison will work. So it ought, quoth the old man, that he who brought him here may be avenged. Since you have obeyed so well you may come alone for the future, and see that you keep him fifteen days, that he die not, but live in great agony, and by that time they will be here who shall make him atone for the wrongs he hath done them. When Galaor heard this he found that the old man was his mortal enemy, howbeit he took hope for what she had said to him. The old man and the Damsel then went out of the garden; presently she returned, and brought with her two little girls, fair girls and well apparelled, who took food for Galaor; and she let them into the chamber to keep him company, and gave them books of history to read to him, that he might not sleep by day, and then she fastened the door and left them.

King Cildadan in the tower saw also a door open in the wall, a stone door so neatly fitted that it looked like the wall itself, and a Dame of middle age entered with two armed Knights, and approached the bed without saluting him; he on his part spake to them with courteous salutation, but they answered not. The Dame took off the bed cloaths, and applied salves to his wounds, then gave him food, and they went out again and fastened the stone door, not having spoken a word. The King thought that verily he was in prison, and where his life was not secure; howbeit having no remedy, he took as good comfort as he could.

When it was time the Damsel returned to Galaor, and asked him how he fared? So well, quoth he, that if it proceed so I shall be in good plight by the time you promised. Doubt not, said she, that what I have said shall be accomplished. But you must promise me the boon as a loyal Knight, for only by my help can you escape; the attempt would be to your mortal danger and hurt, and you could not effect it at last. That Galaor promised, and he besought her to tell him her name. What, quoth she, Don Galaor, know you not my name? I am deceived in you! Time was that I did you a service, which it seems you little remember. They call me the Wise[261:A] among the wisest. With that she departed, and he remained thinking who she might be; and remembering the good sword which Urganda had given him when he was knighted by Amadis, he thought it should be her, but Urganda was old, and this was a Damsel. He looked for the two little girls and they were gone, but in their stead he saw his Squire Gasavel, and Ardian the Dwarf of Amadis, both sleeping. He joyfully called them, they awoke; and when they saw who was there ran weeping for joy to kiss his hand, and exclaimed, O good Sir! blessed be God who has brought us here to serve you! He asked them how they came there: they replied, they knew not; only that Amadis and Agrayes, and Florestan, had sent them with him. Amadis, quoth he, was he found at such a time? Sir, said they, know that Beltenebros is your own brother Amadis, and that by his prowess the battle was won. Thou tellest me great things, cried Galaor, and great pleasure have I therein, though he has not given me cause for pleasure in keeping himself so long concealed from me. Thus abode King Cildadan and Don Galaor: the one in that great Tower, the other in the Garden-chamber, where they were both healed of their hurts. Then Urganda made herself known to them, for they were in her power in her Undiscovered Island; and she told them that the fear wherein she had put them was to effect their cure more speedily, for in their perilous state it so behoved. And she sent two Damsels to attend them and compleat their recovery; they were her nieces and fair Damsels, being the daughters of King Falangris, who was brother to Lisuarte by Grimota, Urganda's sister; by him begotten when he was a young batchelor. The one was called Julianda, the other Solisa: and it so chanced that the one bore a son named Talanque, to Don Galaor, and the other a son to King Cildadan, who was called Maneli the discreet, who were both valiant and strong Knights, and in this state of great pleasure these two Knights remained till it pleased Urganda to set them at liberty, as you shall hear hereafter.

    [261:A] Sabencia sobre sabencia.

When Lisuarte and Amadis, and the other Knights were all whole of their wounds, he went to Fenusa, where the Queen then sojourned, and there was he received with such joy by her, and by Briolania and Oriana, and the other Dames and Damsels, as never welcomed man before. But the joyful greeting which Queen Briolania gave to Amadis, that can in no way be written; she taking him by the hand made him sit between her and Oriana, and she said to him, my Lord, the grief and sorrow which I felt when they told me you were lost I cannot relate to you. I came hither with an hundred Knights immediately that your brothers might order them whither they would in your search, and because this battle delayed their departure, I resolved to remain here till it was decided. Now then direct me what I shall do, and it shall be done. Good Lady mine, quoth Amadis, if you felt sorrow for my mishap, great reason had you: for there is no man in the world who hath a better will to obey you; but since you desire me to direct you, I would have you abide here ten days, and dispatch your business with the King; in that time we may know something of my brother Don Galaor, and there will be a battle which has been appointed between Don Florestan and Landin, after that I will conduct you to your kingdom, and from thence I must go to the Firm Island, where I have much to do. So let it be, replied Briolania, and I beseech you tell us the wonders which you found in that Island. He would have excused himself, but Oriana took his hand and said, You shall not leave us till you have told us something of them. Good Ladies, quoth Amadis, trust me, labour however I should, I could never relate all; but this I say, that that Forbidden Chamber is the most rich and beautifullest thing in the world, and if by one of you it is not atchieved, I believe none else will ever win it. Briolania, after a while of silence, answered, I do not esteem myself such a one as can accomplish that adventure, yet such as I am, if you will not impute it to folly, I will prove it. Lady, quoth Amadis, I hold it no folly to attempt that wherein all have failed for want of beauty, especially in you whom God hath gifted so bountifully therewith, rather I hold it honourable to desire to win a fame which may endure through long ages. At this was Oriana greatly displeased, and her countenance fell, so that Amadis, whose eyes never left her, understood her feelings, and repented him of what he had said, albeit that all his design had been to her greater praise, for having seen the likeness of Grimanesa he knew that Briolania, fair as she was, did not equal her beauty, and of his own Lady's success he nothing doubted. But Oriana feared that whatever was to be won by beauty Briolania could win, and having requested her if she succeeded to let her know all the wonders of the Chamber, she withdrew, and went to Mabilia and told her what had passed. This always is the case with your Cousin, said she, my poor heart thinks only of pleasing him, neither regarding God nor the anger of my parents, and he knowing his full power holds me at little price, and then the tears came and coursed down her fair cheeks. Mabilia answered, I marvel Lady what manner of heart is yours! you are no sooner out of one trouble than you seek another. What great wrong is this that my Cousin hath committed? If Apolidon left this Chamber to be proved by all, shall he forbid the proof to Briolania? Certes I believe that neither her beauty nor yours will avail to accomplish that which none in a hundred years for lack of beauty could effect. But this is his over-ruling destiny that hath made him forsake all his lineage for your service, and thus it is you reward him; you do not desire his life, and will therefore drive him to death. This will be his reward! and mine, for all the friendship I have borne you, will be to see the flower of all my family, him who so dearly loves me, perish before my eyes. This will I never remain to see: for my brother Agrayes, and Galvanes my Uncle, shall take me home to my own country! and with that she wept and exclaimed, God grant that this cruelty toward Amadis may be well requited to you, and this wrong you do his friends! but their loss, great though it be, will be less than yours, destroying him who for your sake has deserted them, to give himself wholly to you. When Mabilia spake thus Oriana's heart was so overcharged that she could not speak, till at last the tears came, and she cried, wretch that I am above all others! I came to you for relief and you increase my sorrow, suspecting that which was never in my heart! Let God never help me if ever I had such thought! but what distresses me is, lest another woman should accomplish that proof which would be to me worse than death, and this fear has made me think wrongly of him who perhaps had but good in his intention: but come—forgive me—and for the love you bear your Cousin advise me! And then with a sweet smile she embraced Mabilia, True friend and dearest, I promise you I will never speak of this to your Cousin, nor let him know that I have had such a thought, but say you to him what you think best. Mabilia answered, I will forgive you on one condition, that whatever anger you conceive against him you never discover it to him till you have first consulted me, that no evil like the past may happen again. With this were they well reconciled, between whom there could never be a want of love.

But Mabilia sharply reprehended Amadis, and warned him to be wary in his conduct to Briolania, remembering what he had suffered on her account, and how difficult it is to root out jealousy from a woman's heart. Amadis replied, Lady and good Cousin, my thoughts were very different. Briolania is held by all for one of the most beautiful women in the world, so they make no doubt she can enter the Forbidden Chamber, but I who have seen the likeness of Grimanesa know that it will not be so. That honour which any one hitherto has won, that certainly will Briolania win: but Oriana has only to try and to succeed. But if Oriana atchieves the adventure before Briolania has essayed it, all will say that the other would have won had she been first; on the contrary, when she will have failed, as sure I am she must fail, my Lady will have her full glory. Well was Oriana satisfied at hearing this, and greatly repented her of her fault, to atone for which they appointed that Amadis should come to her apartment, through an old water way that issued into a garden. Presently Oriana and Briolania called Amadis, and requested him to answer them truly what they should ask, the which he promised. Tell us then, said Oriana, who the Damsel was who won the garland when you gained the sword? Then was Amadis grieved at the question because he was bound to answer it truly. As God shall help me Lady, said he, I know no more of her name than you do, though I was seven days in her company; but this I can say, that she had beautiful locks, and as far as I could see was right fair. Thus was Oriana sporting with him, when there came a Damsel to summon him on the King's part, saying, that Don Quadragante and his nephew Landin were come to acquit themselves of their promises. Being all assembled Quadragante rose and said, I come to discharge a promise made to Amadis of Gaul; and he then related how they had done battle together, and added, that both by the event of that battle, and by reason he was bound to forgive him the death of King Abies, who had been slain in fair combat, and to receive him for a friend even in what degree it pleased him. Then Amadis embraced him and thanked him; and notwithstanding this friendship appeared a thing constrained, yet did it long and faithfully continue. And because Florestan and Landin were to fight upon the same quarrel, it was judged, that since Quadragante, who was principal in the cause had forgiven it, their dispute should cease; the which pleased Landin not a little, for he had witnessed the prowess of Florestan in the great battle.

King Lisuarte now called to mind the cruel prison of King Arban of North Wales, and Angriote of Estravaus, and determined to pass over to the Island of Mongaza to deliver them; this resolution he imparted to his Knights. Then Amadis answered, Sir, you know what loss to your service is the absence of Don Galaor; if it please you I and my brother and my cousins will go in search of him, and if it please God return with him by the time that you make this voyage. The King replied, God knows with what good will I myself would seek him, if so many things did not prevent me, since I cannot, do what you say. Then more than an hundred Knights arose, all good men in arms, and said that they would enter upon that quest, for in no worthier adventure could they be employed. Thereat was King Lisuarte well pleased, and he besought Amadis not to depart, for he would speak with him.




_CHAPTER 18._


After supper, it being almost the hour of sleep, as the King was in the gallery looking toward the sea, he saw two fires coming on through the water, whereat all were greatly astonished, marvelling how the fire and water could exist together. As they drew nearer, a galley was seen between the two fires, and on its mast there were great torches burning, so that the whole vessel seemed ablaze. The uproar was great, for all the people ran to the walls to see this wonder, expecting that if the water could not quench this fire nothing else could, and the city would surely be consumed; so they were greatly terrified. The Queen with all her Ladies went in their fear to the chapel, and the King mounted, and with his guard of fifty Knights rode down to the shore, and found there the most part of his Knights, and in the front of all Amadis, and Guilan the Pensive, and Enil, so near the fires that he wondered how they could endure them; then spurring his horse, whom the tumult had frightened, he rode up to them. Presently he saw come from under a cloth that covered the deck a Dame clad in white holding a golden casket in her hands, the which she opened and took out a lighted candle and threw it into the sea, where it was extinguished. At once the two great fires were quenched so that no trace of them remained, only the torches upon the mast remained burning, and cast a light along the shore. Then was the cloth which covered the galley withdrawn, and they saw how it was all hung with green boughs, and strewed with roses and flowers, and they heard instruments within sounding very sweetly; and when the instruments ceased, ten Damsels came forth, all richly garmented, with garlands on their heads and wands of gold in their hands, and before them was the Lady who had quenched the candle in the sea: and they coming to the galley's edge opposite to the King made obeisance to him, and he on his part returned the greeting. Then said Lisuarte, Dame, you have put us in great fear with your fires, if it please you tell me who you are, though I believe with little difficulty we can divine. Sir, quoth she, in vain should he labour who strove to strike fear into your great heart, and into these Knights in whom no fear is; these fires I bring to protect me and my Damsels: and if you think I am Urganda the Unknown, you think aright; I come to you as the best King in the world, and to behold the Queen, who for virtue and goodness hath no peer. Then said she to Amadis, Sir, draw nearer, and I will tell you of your brother Galaor to save you and your friends the labour of searching him; for though all in the world were to seek him it would be but labour lost: he is healed of his wounds, and leads a life of such pleasure as he never till now enjoyed. Lady, quoth Amadis, I always thought that next to God the safety of Don Galaor was in your hands, else would I rather have died than suffer him to be carried from me as he was. You shall soon see him, quoth she. The King then said, it is time that you should leave the galley and come to my palace. Many thanks, she answered, but this night I will remain here, to-morrow I will be at your command; then let Amadis and Agrayes, and Don Bruneo of Bonamar, and Don Guilan the Pensive come for me, for they are all lovers and of high heart, even as I am myself. Use your own pleasure, replied Lisuarte, in this and every thing; then ordering all the people to return into the town he took his leave, and appointed twenty cross-bowmen to keep guard that none should go down to the shore.

In the morning the Queen sent twelve palfreys richly accoutred for Urganda and her Damsels. Amadis and the other Knights whom she had named, being clothed in costly garments, went with them; they found Urganda and her company in a tent which she had pitched upon the sand, and they placed them on their palfreys, and went towards the town, the four Knights surrounding Urganda. Now, said she, is my heart glad, because I see those around me who are like myself, and this she said because of the love she bore to that fair Knight who was her friend. When they arrived at the palace the King welcomed her right courteously, and she kissed his hand; and looking round and beholding the Knights on every side how many they were, she said, Sir, you are well accompanied, and this I say, not so much for the valour of these Knights as for the love they bear you, for when princes are loved by their people then are their kingdoms safe. Therefore preserve their love, and beware of evil counsellors! Now if it please you I will see the Queen. So she and the four Knights went to Brisena, by whom and by Oriana, and Briolania, and all the Dames and Damsels, she was lovingly received. Much did she admire the beauty of Briolania, and saw that it fell far short of Oriana's perfection. Lady, quoth she, I came to this court to see the greatness of the King and you, the height of prowess and the flower of beauty, and the perfection of true love; for as valour was proved in the conquest of the Firm Island, and in the death of the giants, and in that dolorous battle with King Cildadan, so was true love in the proofs of the burning sword and of the garland. When Oriana heard her say this her colour changed, and she greatly feared, as did Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark, fearing that Urganda should tell all; and Oriana looked at Amadis, but he seeing her apprehension drew near to her and said, fear nothing, she will not say what you imagine; and then he went to the Queen and said, Lady, ask Urganda who she was who won the garland, and the Queen replied, if it please you friend, tell us what Amadis desires to know! She smiled and answered, he better ought to know than I for he was in her company, and with great toil delivered her from Arcalaus and Lindoraque. I? quoth Amadis; it cannot be that I should know either her or myself better than you know us, for from you nothing is concealed. Then, said she, I will tell you what you know of her, and raising her voice that all might hear her she pursued: Though Amadis brought her here as a Damsel she is certainly no Damsel: and because she loves so truly she won the garland. She is a native of this kingdom, and in this kingdom she dwells and hath here her heirship; but her mother is not of this land; and if she lacks any thing it is only because she cannot have him whom she loveth. He who would discover her must seek her in this kingdom, and he will lose his labour. She said no more, and Oriana's heart was then at rest. Then went they to their meal.

Urganda besought the Queen that she might be lodged with Oriana and Queen Briolania. That shall you, replied Brisena, but I believe their follies will disquiet you. Their beauty, quoth Urganda, will more disquiet the Knights, whose valour cannot protect them against that danger. They may easily, replied the Queen, be pardoned the deaths of all they have yet slain! So taking her leave Urganda went to Oriana's apartment, where there were four beds, one for Briolania, and one for Mabilia, and for Urganda and herself. When Urganda saw that they were all asleep except Oriana, she said to her, Lady and friend, if you do not sleep reason it is that he should keep you waking who has no rest but in your sight. Oriana was abashed at her words: but she added, fear nothing, I will not divulge your secrets. Speak low, cried Oriana, that they may not hear you. I will relieve you of that fear, quoth Urganda; therewithall she took forth a book which was so little that a hand might have shut over it, and began to read. Now, said she, do what you will they shall not awake, and if any one should enter the room she would fall down asleep. Oriana rose and went to awaken Briolania but she could not, and she laughed and took her by the head and hands and pulled her out of bed, and did the same to Mabilia, but they neither of them awakened; and then she called the Damsel of Denmark, who was just without the door, and she, so soon as she entered, fell upon the floor in a deep sleep. Then Oriana joyfully went into Urganda's bed and said, I beseech you, since you know what is to come, tell me what will happen to me! Urganda looked at her and smiled. Dear daughter, said she, do you think to escape it, if it be evil, by knowing it aforehand? Believe not so! for that which is permitted and ordained by the Most High none can alter, whether it be good or ill, unless he remedies it; but since you so greatly wish me to say something I will speak: look now, if when you have the knowledge you can profit by it! At that time, when great sorrow shall be present with you, and many shall because of you be greatly afflicted, the strong Lion with his beasts shall come forth, and with his loud roaring shall in such sort astonish those who have you in their keeping, that you shall be left in his strong talons. And the famous Lion shall throw from your head the lofty crown which shall no longer be yours, and the hungry Lion having your body in his power shall bear it into his den that his extreme famine may be slacked. Now daughter dear look how you act, for this must come to pass! Lady, quoth Oriana, I should have been better content if I had not enquired, for you have made me in great terror of this strange and cruel end. Lady and daughter fair, replied Urganda, seek not to know that which neither your prudence nor strength can avert. Of these dark things men often dread that for which they ought to be joyful. Meantime be you happy, for God has made you daughter of the best King and Queen in the world, and has gifted you with such beauty that it is ever spoken of as a wonder, and has made that Knight love you, who shines above all other in prowess, even as day above darkness. Now it is time to awaken these ladies; she then opened her book again, and read, and they recovered.

After some days Urganda besought the King to summon all his Knights, and the Queen to assemble her Dames and Damsels, that she might speak to them before her departure; accordingly they met together in a spacious hall that was richly furnished, and Urganda placed herself where all might hear her. Then she said to the King, Sir, since you have kept the letters which I sent to you and Don Galaor just after Beltenebros had won the sword, I beseech you let them be produced, that all here may know that I knew what was to come to pass. The letters were then read, and it was seen how all had been accomplished, whereat the Knights marvelled, and still more admired the courage of the King who, notwithstanding that fearful forewarning, had dared enter the battle. In like sort was it certainly known that by three strokes from Beltenebros the battle was won; the first when he felled King Cildadan at Galaor's feet, the second when he slew Sarmadan the Lion, the third when succouring the King he lopt off the arm of Madanfabul the fierce giant of the Vermilion Tower. That also was fulfilled which had been written of Don Galaor, that his head should be in the power of him who should strike the three strokes, for so it was when Amadis held it in his lap as dead. Now, said Urganda, I will tell what shall come to pass in process of time. Contention shall arise between the great Serpent and the strong Lion, in which many fierce beasts shall take part; anger and fury shall come upon them, so that many shall suffer cruel death. The great Roman Fox shall be wounded by the claw of the strong Lion, and his skin cruelly torn, whereby a part of the great Serpent shall be in great affliction. In that time the gentle Sheep covered with black wool shall come between them, who by his humble and loving blandishments shall assuage the fury of their hearts. But presently the Wolves shall come down from the mountains against the great Serpent, who being with all his animals by them conquered, shall be blocked up in one of his dens; and the tender Unicorn putting his mouth to the ear of the strong Lion shall rouse him from his sleep, and make him hasten to the succour of the great Serpent, whom he shall find so wounded and bitten that the blood shall flow over his scales, and he shall deliver him from the mouths of the Wolves, and they shall all be destroyed. Then the great Serpent having his life restored, and casting all his poison from his entrails shall consent that the white Doe shall be placed in the cruel talons of the Lion. Now good King, let all this be written, for so it must be. The King said it should be done, albeit he understood it not. Time will come, she answered, when it shall be manifest to all. Then looking at Amadis, who was musing, she said, Amadis, you muse upon that which cannot avail you: let that be, and think of a bargain you have to make. At that time you shall be brought near to death for another's life, and for another's blood shall expend your own, and of that bargain the martyrdom will be yours, and another will have the gain; and the guerdon which you shall have will be wrath and the long delay of your will; then shall that keen and beautiful sword so pierce thy flesh and bones that you shall be poor of blood, and in such plight that if half the world were yours you would give it so that that sword were broken or thrown into some lake from whence it could never be recovered. Look to it! for so it must be. Amadis saw that all eyes were upon him, and he answered chearfully as he felt. Lady, by what you have said of the past we may believe this also, but I knowing that I am mortal, and that my life cannot be prolonged one minute longer than it pleaseth God, am desirous to end it justly in some great and honourable enterprize. It were as easy, quoth Urganda, to rob your heart of its courage as to drain the sea dry. Then said she to the King, Sir, I must depart; remember what I have said as one who desire your honour and would serve you,—shut your ears to those whose works you know to be evil! With that she departed, suffering none but the four Knights whom she had chosen to conduct her to the shore; then she embarked, and the ship put forth to sea, and was presently covered with a great darkness.




_CHAPTER 19._


Some few days after, as King Lisuarte was consulting with his Knights about the passage which he would make to the Isle of Mongaza, to deliver King Arban of North Wales, and Angriote of Estravaus, they saw a ship making toward the port, and went thither to see whom it brought. When they came near a Damsel and two Squires were in the boat, and when they landed the Damsel asked if King Lisuarte were there? They answered yes, but they were all astonished at her greatness, for there was not a Knight in the court who equalled her by a full palm in stature, and her features and limbs were in proportion; she was fair enough, and richly attired. Sir, said she to Lisuarte, I bring you a message which, if it please you, I would deliver before the Queen. Be it so, said the King, and he returned to the palace, and the Damsel with him. Then being in presence of the Queen and of all the Knights and Ladies of the Court, she asked if Amadis of Gaul were there, he who had called himself Beltenebros. He answered, good Damsel I am he. She looked at him with an evil eye and said, you may well be he! but now it will be seen if you are as good as you are famous! Then she produced two letters with seals of gold; the one she gave the King, the other to the Queen; they were letters of credence, and the King bade her say her bidding.

Sir, quoth the Damsel, Gromadaza, the Giantess of the Boiling Lake, and the fair Madasima, and Ardan Canileo the Dreadful, who is with them for their defender, know that you design to come against their country, and as that cannot be attempted without great loss, they are willing to put it upon trial of a battle in this guise, that Ardan Canileo shall combat Amadis of Gaul. If he conquer or slay him the land shall be free, and he shall be allowed to carry his head to the Boiling Lake; if he be conquered or slain himself, the land shall be yours, and King Arban of North Wales, and Angriote of Estravaus shall be delivered. They shall be brought hither, and if Amadis loves them as they believe, and will fulfill the hope they have in him, he will accept the battle to deliver two such friends; if he be conquered, Ardan Canileo will still hold them prisoners, and if he will not accept the defiance he shall presently see their heads cut off before him. Good Damsel, quoth Amadis, if I accept the battle, how shall the King be certain that the terms will be accomplished? She answered, the fair Madasima, with twelve Damsels of great birth, will put themselves as prisoners in the Queen's power, in security that the terms shall be observed, otherwise they are content to lose their heads, and they demand no other assurance than that she may carry away your head if you be overcome; and moreover the old giant Andanguel and his two sons will enter the King's prisons, and nine Knights beside, who have the towns and castles of the Island in their keeping. Said Amadis, if this be done the security is sufficient; but from me you shall have no answer unless you and your Squires come and eat with me. Why do you invite us? quoth she; this is no wisdom, your trouble will all be lost, for I hate you to death. Good Damsel, said Amadis, I am sorry therefore, for I love you, and will show you all the honour that I can; if you desire to be answered you must grant this. I grant it, quoth she, more to get my answer than for any good will. Then said Amadis, good Damsel to venture myself for two such friends, and to increase the dominions of the King is a just thing, and therefore I undertake the battle in the name of God, let therefore those whom you have named come as hostages. Truly you have answered to my will, replied the Damsel; but let the King promise, that if you fail to perform your word he will never protect you against the kindred of Famongomadan. That promise, quoth Amadis, may be excused, the King would have no one in his company who lacked truth: now let us go eat, for it is time.—I will go, more joyfully than I expected; to-morrow Madasima and her Damsels will be here, and the Knights will put themselves in the King's hands, for Ardan Canileo would have the battle without delay; but you must give him a safe conduct from all but Amadis, whose head he will take from hence. Don Bruneo of Bonamar answered, Lady Damsel, sometimes it happens that he who thinks to take away anothers head loses his own, and so it may fall out to Ardan Canileo. Amadis besought him to be silent, but the Damsel replied to Bruneo, who are you who speak for Amadis? A Knight, quoth he, who would willingly bear a part in the battle if Ardan Canileo will bring a companion. She answered, you may be excused from that battle, but if you are desirous of combat, after that is finished I will produce a brother of mine to answer you, as much the mortal enemy of Amadis as you are his friend, and one who will prevent you from taking up the quarrel again. Good Damsel, quoth Don Bruneo, your brother had need be as you boast to perform all that you have promised! See, here is my gage that I defy him, and he stretched out the end of his cloak towards the King. The Damsel took a silver net from her head—here Sir, you see mine that I will make good my words. The King took the pledges, though against his will, for he thought the combat of Amadis against Ardan Canileo enough to trouble him, for that enemy was so dreadful that for four years he had found no Knight hardy enough to do battle against him.

This being settled Amadis took the Damsel to his lodgings, which he ought not to have done for the best castle in his father's lands; and to do her more honour he lodged her in the Chamber where Gandalin kept his arms and accoutrements. She looking round saw the sword of Amadis, and seeing how strange a one it was, she told her two Squires, and the others who were present, to leave her alone[288:A] for a little while; when they were gone she drew the sword, and leaving the sheath and belt so that the theft might not be discovered, she wrapt it under her mantle; then opening the door she gave it secretly to one of her Squires under his cloak, and bade him carry it to the vessel—this she spake softly; then spake aloud, go bring me my cup! and all present thought that the Squire was sent for that. Then Amadis and Branfil entered, and they made the Damsel be seated on the Estrado, and Amadis asked at what hour of the morrow Madasima would arrive.—Before breakfast: but why ask you?—Because we would go out to receive her and show her every honour, that if she have received any displeasure from me I may make her such amends as she shall demand. If you keep your promise, quoth she, and Ardan Canileo be what he always hath been in arms, you will give her your head for amends; any other amends will be good for little. That, said Amadis, I shall keep if I can; but if it could be I should gladly obtain her pardon. With that he went out, leaving Enil and others to attend her, but she was so desirous to be gone, that the number of dishes provoked her, and as soon as the cloths were removed she rose and said to Enil, Knight, tell Amadis that I am gone, and that all the pains he has taken to please me are lost. God save me, quoth Enil, as I believe it! and whoever should strive to please such a one as you would lose his pains. She answered, you please me little, and he still less! Enil replied, neither he nor I nor any one else can like so insolent a Damsel. With these words they parted.

    [288:A] Y pensando que alguna cosa de las naturales que no se     pueden escusar hazer queria, dexaron la sola.

The Damsel entered the ship glad for the sword which she had stolen, and she told Ardan Canileo and Madasima how she had sped. Ardan thanked her for what she had done, and he said to Madasima, my Lady, account me not for a Knight if I do not bring you back with honour; and if I give you not the head of Amadis in less time than a man can go half a league, how swift soever he be, never grant me your love. She answered him not, for albeit she greatly desired vengeance for the death of her father and her brother, yet for nothing in the world would she have seen herself married to Ardan Canileo, for she was fair and noble, and he foul and deformed and hideous, that there was none like him, and this agreement was made at her mother's will, not at her own, who had promised, if he would defend and revenge her, to give him Madasima and leave him all her lands. Now whereas this Ardan Canileo was a Knight famous in the world, and of great prowess, the history shall tell you of what land he was native, and the fashion of his body and face, and what else to him appertaineth. Know then that he was born in the province called Canileo, of the blood of the Giants, who abound there more than in other parts; he was not unreasonably great of body, albeit exceeding in stature any man who was not a giant; his limbs were large, and his breast broad, and his shoulders square, and his hands and legs proportioned; his face was large and flat and like a dog, wherefore he was called Canileo, and his nose was flat and spreading, and his colour purple freckled with black spots, which were all over his face and neck and hands; his look was fierce like a lion, and his lips were thick and curling out, and his hair so woolly that it could scarcely be combed, and the beard like it. He was now five and thirty years old, and for ten years past neither Knight nor Giant had been able to withstand him, and so bony was he that there was scarcely a horse could carry his weight. When the Insolent Damsel heard him promise the head of Amadis to Madasima, she said to him, we may well hope so Sir, since Fortune already shows herself adverse to your enemy. Here is his good sword which I bring you, which could not have been gained for you without great mystery of his ill fate, and your good fortune; then she gave it him and related how she had stolen it. He took it and replied, I thank thee for the gift, more for the good manner in which you took it than for any fear I have of a battle against a single Knight. Then he ordered tents to be taken from the ship, and pitched in a plain near the town, and there they all went with their horses and palfreys, and the arms of Ardan Canileo, expecting the next day to appear before King Lisuarte. Right joyful was Ardan that the combat was thus appointed, and for two reasons: the one because he made no doubt that he should carry off the head of Amadis, who being so famous all his glory would remain upon him, and the other because he should win the fair Madasima whom he loved so well.

Meantime Amadis was with his friends who greatly feared this combat, so dangerous did they esteem it. Presently Agrayes, and Don Florestan, and Galvanes Lackland, and Don Guilan the Pensive, came in, knowing nothing of what had past, for they had been hunting in the forest; but when they heard how the combat had been appointed, they complained that it had not been fixed for a greater number of Knights, that they might have entered it, and he who most passionately lamented this was Don Guilan who had heard how Ardan Canileo was the strongest of any Knight in arms, and the most powerful, and it grieved him to death, for he thought that Amadis would never escape with life from him, fighting him man to man in lists, and he greatly wished to share his fortune if Ardan had brought a companion. Don Florestan too exclaimed in great anger, as God shall save me, brother, you think me of no account as a Knight, or you do not love me, since you did not remember me on such an occasion! you make me perceive that it is bootless to accompany you longer, for you always withhold me from such perils. Agrayes also and Don Galvanes complained in the like manner. Sirs, quoth Amadis, you blame me with little cause; the combat was demanded of me alone, so that without showing cowardice I could not otherwise have answered; else, if I might have had assistance whom else should I have looked to but you, whose great valour might have aided mine in danger. Thus having excused himself he said, it will be well that we ride forward to-morrow before the King goes forth, to meet Madasima, who is greatly esteemed by all who know her.

In the morning they apparalled themselves richly, and having heard mass mounted on palfreys and rode to receive Madasima. Don Bruneo of Bonamar went with them and his brother Branfil, and Enil, who was a goodly Knight and of great worth, and of chearful heart, so that he was beloved and esteemed by all, so they were eight companions. And as they drew nigh the tents they saw Madasima coming, and Ardan Canileo and their company. Madasima was arrayed in black, mourning for her father and brother, but her beauty was so lively and excellent that it was a marvel, and her Damsels went near her all drest in the same cloth. Ardan Canileo led her bridle, and there came the old Giant and his sons, and the nine Knights who were to be hostages. As they drew near to each other the Knights made their obeisance, and she in like manner bowed to them with good semblance; then Amadis approached her and said, Lady, if you are praised it is with great reason I see, and happy ought he to be esteemed who is allowed to honour and serve you; that would I willingly do in what it might please you to command me. Ardan Canileo, who looked at him and saw how handsome he was, so that he had seen none like him, was nothing pleased at this. Knight, quoth he, give back, and dare not speak to one whom you know not. It is that we may know her and serve her, replied Amadis, that we are come. And who are you? cried Ardan scornfully; let me know if you are worthy to serve her? Such as I am, quoth Amadis, I have the will to serve her, and shall not cease to have that will, however unworthy I may be, and since you ask who I am, tell me who are you?—I am Ardan Canileo, who can better serve her in a day than you can in your whole life, though you were of twice your worth.—That may well be: but your great service would not proceed from so good a heart as my trifling one, this is plain from your pride and evil mind. Know that I am Amadis of Gaul of whom you have demanded battle. If I have offended and grieved that Lady by doing that which without great shame I could not have left undone, right willingly would I atone for it by some good service. Ardan Canileo answered, if you dare perform your promise, certainly she shall receive atonement with your head which I will give her. That amends, quoth Amadis, she shall not have with my good pleasure, but she shall receive a greater; for I will break off your marriage. No man can so lack judgment as to hold it good that your beauty and hers should be united! At this Madasima being nothing displeased, laughed a little, and her Damsels likewise, but Ardan became so wroth that his whole body shook, and his face became so exceeding terrible, that many thought Amadis was nothing in comparison with him, and that this would without doubt be his last battle, and the last day of his life.

Thus they proceeded till they came before the King, to whom Ardan Canileo said, you see here the Knights ready to become your hostages, if Amadis dare keep his word. Then Amadis came forth and answered, you see me here: let the battle be without delay, and I tell you that though I had not promised it, I would undertake it now solely to save Madasima from so monstrous a marriage; but let King Arban of North Wales, and Angriote of Estravaus be brought here, that they may be delivered if I conquer. They shall come, replied Ardan, but let Madasima be where she may see the combat and the vengeance which I shall take for her. So the old Giant and his sons, and the nine Knights put themselves in the King's power, and Madasima and the Damsels went to the Queen, and so meekly and decorously did Madasima demean herself, that albeit by her means Amadis was brought into this great danger, yet were they greatly pleased with her, and did her all honour. But Oriana and Mabilia seeing the fierceness of Ardan Canileo were greatly affrighted and retired in great fear and weeping to their chamber, for they thought the strength of Amadis was not enough to resist that Devil: yet did they remember his good fortune, how often it had brought him off with honour, and Mabilia comforted her friend the best she could. The following day was appointed for the battle; King Lisuarte ordered his huntsmen and bowyers to surround the lists with chains and stakes, that neither Knight might lose honour by the fault of his horse. The lists were before the palace, and when Oriana saw them preparing them from her window, the thought of how great a danger was there designed for her Amadis so overpowered her, that she fell almost senseless in Mabilia's arms.

Lisuarte went to the lodging of Amadis where many Knights were with him, and said to him, that as the Queen and his daughter, and Queen Briolania and the other Dames and Damsels would pass that night in the chapel, beseeching God to preserve their Knight, he would have him return in his company to the palace, and with him Florestan and Agrayes, and Don Galvanes, and Guilan and Enil, and that there they should regale themselves, and he desired Amadis to send his armour to the chapel, that he might arm himself to-morrow before the Virgin Mary, that so she and her glorious son might be his protectors. They went therefore with the King, and Amadis ordered Gandalin to carry his arms thither as Lisuarte had advised. But he taking them in obedience missed the sword from the scabbard, whereat so amazed was he and exceeding sorrowful that he wished himself dead, not only because the loss fell out at a time of such danger, but because he held it as a sign that his Master's death was nigh at hand. He sought for it every where, and enquired of all who might know any thing; but when he could learn no tidings he was on the point of throwing himself from a window, if the thought had not come upon him that in that case he should destroy his soul; forthwith in trouble of heart he went to the palace, and calling Amadis apart said to him, Cut off my head Sir, for I am a traitor to you; and if you do not kill me I must slay myself. How now? quoth Amadis: are you mad? or what mishap is this? Better Sir, he said, that I were mad or dead than that such a mishap should have befallen. I have lost your sword, it has been stolen from the scabbard. Is it for this you are so distressed? replied Amadis, I thought something worse had chanced; trouble yourself no more, there will be no want of another wherewith God will assist me, if it be his good pleasure. But though he spake thus to comfort Gandalin, yet was he grieved at heart for the loss of that sword, as well for the lack of it now in such need, being one of the best in the world, as because he had won it by the force of his true love, and it was a comfort to him to look at it, and remember that when he was absent from his Lady. Howbeit he bade Gandalin say nothing thereof to any person, but bring him the scabbard, and he bade him learn of the Queen if he could have the sword which Don Guilan had brought there together with his own arms; and if he could see Oriana he made him request her in his name that she would be somewhere where he might see her when he was in the lists, for the sight of her would make him become conqueror in that or in a worse danger. Gandalin went to perform his bidding, and the Queen commanded the sword should be given him; but Briolania and Olinda said to him, Ah Gandalin, what think you can your Master do against that Devil? he answered smiling, and with a chearful countenance, Ladies, this is not the first perilous enterprise which he hath undertaken, and as God as hitherto preserved him so he will now. God grant it, cried they. Then went he to Mabilia and told her what his Master requested of Oriana, and then returned to Amadis, and said that all things were done as he desired, whereat he had great pleasure and took more courage, knowing that his Lady would be where he might see her from the lists. Amadis then took the King aside, and said to him, Sir, I have lost my sword, and knew it not till now; they have stolen it and left the sheath. The King was grieved thereat and answered him, although I had determined and promised never to give my sword to any Knight who was to fight man to man before me, yet will I now give it you, remembering how many dangers you have encountered for my sake. God forbid, quoth Amadis, that I who ought to maintain your royal word should make you break it, and that too when you have pledged it before so many good men. The tears came into Lisuarte's eyes, and he said, such a man are you for maintaining justice and right! but what will you do?—I have here the sword which was laid in the Ark with me, which Don Guilan brought hither, herewith and with your prayers to the Lord which will avail before him, I may be assisted. Then he placed the sword in the sheath, which became it well, although the sword was somewhat short, and the King was glad he took the sheath because of its virtue, which would protect him from exceeding heat or cold, for the bones of the serpents whereof it was made were of such a constellation; but of very different goodness was this sword from the other.

Thus they passed that day till it was the hour of sleep, and then all those Knights had their arms around the King's bed. But all that night Ardan Canileo had merry-making in his tents, with music and dancing, and ever at the end of his songs his people all cried out, come Morning, come! and let the day be clear, that Ardan Canileo may perform what he has promised to the fair Madasima! but it fell out otherwise than they expected. That night Amadis slept in the King's chamber, but the sleep which he slept was of no avail, for presently at midnight he rose without speaking, and went to the chapel, and having awakened the chaplain confessed all his sins to him, and there they both were before the altar of the Virgin Mary making prayers, and beseeching her to be his patroness in this battle. When it was dawn the King and those other Knights arose, and heard mass, and Amadis was armed by such Knights as well knew how to do it; but before his breast-plate was put on Mabilia came up and hung round his neck certain reliques shrined with gold, saying, that the Queen her mother had sent them to her by the Damsel of Denmark; but it was not so, for Elisena had given them to Amadis when she knew him for her son, and he gave them to Oriana when he delivered her from Arcalaus. When he was armed they brought him a goodly horse, which Corisanda had sent with other presents to her friend Florestan. Florestan carried his lance, and Don Guilan his shield, and Don Bruneo his helmet, and the King went before on a great horse, holding a wand in his hand. All the people of the court and town were assembled about the lists to see the battle, and the Dames and Damsels were at the windows, and the fair Oriana and Mabilia were at their chamber window, and with the Queen were Briolania and Madasima, and other princesses. As Amadis came up to the lists they loosened one of the chains and he entered and took his arms, and as he put on his helmet he looked at his Lady, and felt therewith such strength as though no one in the world could withstand him. Then the Judges entered the field, who were to assign to each his right; they were three in number, that good old man Don Grumedan, who was well skilled in such things, and Don Quadragante, who was now the King's vassal, and Brandoyuas; then came Ardan Canileo well armed, and upon a great horse: his harness was of thick mail, and his shield and helmet were of steel, so polished that it was bright like looking-glass; and he had girded at his side the good sword of Amadis, which the Damsel had stolen, and he bent his huge lance as if he would have broken it, and thus he entered the lists. When Oriana saw him, she said in great agony, ah my friend, how fierce and terribly my death approaches, unless God in his mercy prevent it. Leave this, quoth Mabilia, and make good chear, for so shall you encourage your friend.

Then Don Grumedan led Amadis to one end of the lists, and Brandoyuas placed Ardan Canileo at the other, with their horses heads fronting each other; and Quadragante at an equal distance between them held a trumpet in his hand to sound the signal. Amadis, who was looking at his Lady, exclaimed, What is Quadragante about that he does not blow the trumpet? Quadragante then blew the blast, and the two Knights ran full speed, and encountered lance against shield so fiercely that the lances shivered, and they hurtled with such force that the horse of Ardan Canileo fell and broke his neck and died, and the horse of Amadis broke his shoulder and could not rise. Amadis presently arose, though with some difficulty, for a truncheon of the lance was sticking in his shield, and through the lappets of his armour, though it had not reached the flesh; he plucked it out, and laid hand to sword and made at Ardan, who had risen hardly and was adjusting his helmet. But Ardan seeing his approach drew his sword, and they joined battle so furiously that there was not a man who saw them but was greatly amazed, for their strokes fell so fierce and so fast that flames of fire seemed to proceed from their helmets and swords as if they burnt, and chiefly from the shield of Ardan Canileo, for that being of steel, and the blows of Amadis so rapid and heavy, it appeared as if the whole shield and arm were in a blaze of fire, but the great hardness of the shield protected him and saved his body, which was to the mortal evil of Amadis; for as his arms were not so good, and as Ardan had one of the best swords in the world, never blow reached him that did not pierce through and reach his flesh, so that in many parts the blood ran down, and his shield was all hacked. The sword of Amadis could make no impression upon the shield and helmet of his enemy, and though his own harness was of thick and strong mail, it was pierced in more than ten places, and the blood streamed from them all. What then most profited Amadis was his activity, for by that he made Ardan miss all his heaviest blows, though Ardan was well practised and expert with the sword. Thus they continued till the hour of tierce, striking and foyning, and grappling and struggling so manfully that Ardan Canileo was in great amazement, for he had never before found Knight nor Giant so strong as to resist him thus much; and what made him doubt the issue was, that he always found his antagonist more active and stronger than at the beginning, whereas he himself waxed weary and faint, being full of blood. Then Madasima knew that he had boasted vainly when he promised to conquer Amadis before the swiftest footman could run half a league, whereat she was little grieved, nor would she though Ardan were to lose his own head there, for such was her mind, that she would rather lose all her lands than be joined in marriage with such as he. The Knights still continued in battle, striking at each other in every part where they could work most harm, each striving for the other's death; and if Amadis had then had arms good as his own activity and breath, Ardan could not have held the field against him, but all his efforts were now needed, for his arms were broken, and his shield broken, and the blood flowing from many wounds, and he had to deal with a Knight fierce and strong in battle. When Oriana saw him in such plight her heart failed her for sore anguish, and she threw herself upon the ground, and beat her face, thinking that Amadis was come to his death. Mabilia seeing this, notwithstanding her own exceeding trouble, put on an appearance of much anger, and told her that at such a time and in such danger she ought not to forsake her lover, and because she could not endure to see his danger, Mabilia made her stand with her back to the window that Amadis might see her long hair. At this time Brandoyuas, who was one of the Judges, said, I am grieved to see the arms and shield of Amadis so battered! and I, quoth Grumedan, I am much troubled. Sirs, said Quadragante, I have proved Amadis in combat, and his strength seems to double while he fights, and of all Knights whom I have seen he endures the best, and is the best breathed; he is now in his full strength, which is not the case with Ardan, if any fault be in Amadis it is that he is too eager: he should suffer his enemy to press on him, and then his own weight would weary Ardan. But his great courage will not let him thus spare himself. When Oriana and Mabilia heard these words they were greatly comforted; but Amadis, who had seen his Lady retire from the window, knew that it was for sorrow at beholding him, and he made a blow at Ardan with exceeding fury, and smote him so rudely upon the helmet that he brought him down upon one knee, but that blow was so mighty, and the helmet so hard, that the sword broke in three pieces, and a piece only remained in his hand. Then was Amadis in all fear of death, and they who beheld him expected his death also. When Ardan saw this he rose and drew back, and took his shield by the straps, and brandishing his sword cried aloud to Amadis, Look! here is the good sword which thou hast won to thy own destruction. Look at it! this is it, and thou shalt die by it. Come, Lady Madasima! come to the window, and you shall behold the full vengeance which I will give you! When Madasima heard this she fell at the Queen's feet, and besought her to protect her from Ardan, which, said she, you may lawfully do, for Ardan promised to win the battle before a man could run half a league, and it has now lasted four hours. I hear you, replied Brisena, and will do what is just. But when Amadis saw in what plight he stood, his arms in pieces and without a sword, he remembered the words of Urganda when she told him that he would give half the world if it were his, so that that sword were sunk in a lake; and he looked toward Oriana's window, and seeing her back towards him, knew why she had turned away, and his courage revived so that he resolved to die rather than fail to do his utmost. He made at Ardan Canileo as if he were about to strike him; Ardan raised his sword and awaited him, and struck at him as he came up, but Amadis bent aside and closed with him so close that Ardan could not interpose his sword, and he seized the shield by the rim, and plucked it with such force that he tore it from his arm and well nigh brought him to the ground, then he drew back, and put that shield upon his own arm, and took up the truncheon of a lance which had its point, and again turned to Ardan, being now defended by Ardan's shield. Ardan in great fury for this loss ran at him thinking to smite him on the helmet; Amadis caught the blow upon his shield, and though it was of fine steel, such was the temper of that good sword that it pierced through the rim and entered three fingers' depth, and with the broken lance Amadis wounded him in the right arm by the wrist, thrusting the iron half through between the two bones, therewith Ardan lost all power to pluck the sword out, and Amadis forced it from his hand; if he was then right glad and satisfied need neither be asked nor said; he cast away the broken lance, and drew the sword from the shield, thanking God for his mercy. Mabilia, who beheld, caught hold of Oriana and made her turn and see her lover obtain this victory over so imminent a danger. Ardan Canileo grew faint as he beheld his death at hand, howbeit he attempted to recover the shield in the like manner as he had lost it, but Amadis smote him upon the left shoulder, and cut through armour, and flesh and bone. Ardan felt the use of his arm was gone, and he fled round the lists, fearing that good sword. Amadis followed close and caught him by the helmet, and plucked it off, and brought him to the ground at his feet, then knelt upon him and cut off his head, to the great joy of all, especially of King Arban of North Wales, and Angriote, who had endured great agony while they witnessed the danger of Amadis. Then Amadis cast the head out of the lists, and he dragged the body to a rock and threw it into the sea, then he wiped the blood from his sword and placed it in its sheath.

The King sent him a horse, on which he rode well accompanied to his lodging, but he was sore wounded and had lost much blood. With him he took King Arban and Angriote, whom he had delivered from their cruel chains. Brisena sent for her nephew Arban, and Angriote remained in the chamber of his true friend Amadis, and there were they both healed; and they were lovingly visited there by many Knights and Dames and Damsels of the court, and his cousin Mabilia came to Amadis, and brought with her that true medicine wherewith his heart could heal all lesser evils.




_CHAPTER 20._


On the day after the battle Don Bruneo of Bonamar appeared before the King, and there he found the Insolent Damsel, who said that her brother was ready to do combat with him, and take that poor vengeance for Ardan Canileo. Forthwith they armed and went to the field, Don Bruneo accompanied by many good Knights, and Madaman the Envious, for so he was called, by them who bore his arms. At the first encounter Madaman was thrown and Bruneo slightly hurt in the breast; he kept his seat, but when he turned the reins Madaman cried out to him, sword in hand, Don Bruneo, if you would not lose your horse, alight or let me mount. Take your own choice, quoth Bruneo. Alight then, said Madaman, for being of huge stature he thought to have the advantage afoot; then began a brave battle, and while they were thus engaged there happened a strange thing, whereby it was manifested that beasts know their masters, for the horses being loose in the field attacked each other, fighting with their feet and teeth so furiously that all were amazed thereat, and this lasted till Madaman's horse being no longer able to hold out ran away, and in his fear leaped over the barriers, the which, all they who wished for the victory of Bruneo, held as a good sign; and turning their eyes now to the two combatants they saw how Don Bruneo prest upon the enemy hard, so that Madaman drew back and said, Why do you fatigue yourself? is not the day long enough? Hold awhile and let us rest; look at your arms and the blood which you have lost, and you will find it needful. Madaman, quoth he, if our combat were of another nature you should find in me all courtesy, but for this pride and hatred I will not suffer thee to rest, and show thy own faint-heartedness, lest my own fame should be lessened; with that he prest upon him and foyned so fast at him, that Madaman had enough to do to defend himself from the blows; and he thinking he might protect himself better among the rocks drew back towards the cliff, and there he stood upon the edge, being affrighted at the depth, till Bruneo came up, and with his shield and hand thrust him over, so that he was all shattered before he reached the water; then Bruneo knelt and returned thanks to God.

But when Matalesa the Insolent Damsel beheld the fall of her brother, she ran furiously to the cliff and looked over, and seeing the bloody fragments floating on the waves, she caught up his sword which he had dropt and cried, Here, where the blood of my Uncle Ardan Canileo and my brother has been shed, shall mine be shed also, that my soul may be with theirs; and she ran herself through, and fell backward into the sea. Don Bruneo then rode to the lodging of Amadis, and his bed was placed by the beds of Amadis and Angriote, and there were they all healed, and during their confinement the Knights and Ladies of the court often went there to amuse them.

Now Briolania perceiving that the malady of her love increased, with the advice of Amadis departed for her own kingdom; but she determined first to see the wonders of the Firm Island, and prove the Forbidden Chamber. So she took Enil with her, and promised to tell Oriana all that she should see there, as shall be related hereafter.

As this history now proceeds you will see the little power of human wisdom when it pleases God to leave man to himself. You have heard how King Lisuarte being a prince, and possessing nothing but his arms and his horse, and going about with only a few servants seeking adventures, came to Denmark, where Brisena, the King's daughter, preferred him to all her many suitors, and chose him for her husband; this was his first good fortune. But ere long his brother died, and he became King of Great Britain, and subdued other Kingdoms, and the sons of Kings, and Princes, and Dukes, abode in his court, so that his name was famous above all Emperors and Kings in the world. Now there were two Knights in his court who had served his brother King Falangris, and for this, and because of their age more than for their goodness, they were of Lisuarte's counsel: the one was named Brocadan, the other Gandandel. This Gandandel had two sons who were thought passing good Knights in arms, before Amadis and those of his lineage arrived there, whose exceeding worth and courage had now made them be forgotten. On this account Gandandel neither fearing God nor regarding his duty to the King, nor the good deeds done by Amadis to himself, devised in his evil heart a foul treason. He led the King apart and said to him, Sir, I have long forborne to speak to you upon this matter, hoping some other remedy might be devised, and therein have I greatly sinned against you; but I should sin both against you and God if I were longer to keep silence, and I have been always careful to preserve my soul and honour, and do evil to no one, so that my judgment is free from all passion. You know Sir what great quarrels have subsisted between the kingdoms of Gaul and Great Britain, because that country ought to be subject to this as all the other neighbouring countries are, and this is an evil which will never be thoroughly healed till it be so. But now Amadis, who is not only a native of Gaul, but the chief person of his lineage, is come hither with his kinsmen, and has acquired such power that the kingdom is in his hand, as if he were right heir thereto. True it is that from him and his friends I have never received any wrong, but great honour and pleasure; but you are my natural Lord, and I must discharge my duty lest I fall into a wretched plight in this world, and my soul be cast into hell in the other. The King without any seeming alteration answered him, These Knights have already served me well to my honour and profit, so that I cannot think of them otherwise than well. Sir, quoth Gandandel, that is the worst sign, for if they did any thing against your service you would be upon your guard against them, but the treachery is concealed under their good services. Thus have you heard all the talk, for the King answered nothing farther. But Gandandel took counsel with his cousin Brocadan, whose evil mind was like his own, and they two both working upon the King to the same effect wrought in him a great change against those who had done him such services, so that he seemed to have forgotten how Galaor rescued him from the ten Knights of Arcalaus, and Amadis from the arms of Madanfabul, although in both cases they saved his life and his [315:A]kingdoms.

    [315:A] Here follows a column of caution against evil     Counsellors.

So much was Lisuarte moved thereby that he now began to hate Amadis and his friends, and he left off visiting Amadis where he lay wounded, and would pass by his lodging without asking how he fared. All who saw this novelty marvelled much thereat, and they sometimes talked concerning it before Amadis, but he knowing his own true meaning would not believe but that the King also was like himself, and that business occupied him, and this he said to his friends, and particularly to Angriote of Estravaus, who was the most troubled. While things were in this state King Lisuarte sent for Madasima and her Damsels, and the old Giant and his sons, and the nine Knights whom he held as hostages, and he told them that if they did not forthwith cause the Island of Mongaza to be given up to him, according to terms, he would have their heads cut off; which, when Madasima heard, the tears came abundantly, and not knowing what to reply her flesh all shook with exceeding fear. But Andaguel the old Giant replied, that if he would send him with a certain force he would cause the Island to be surrendered to him, or else return again. The King therefore dismissed him with this force, and Madasima returned to prison, accompanied by many Knights, among whom was Don Galvanes Lackland; he beholding the tears on that fair face was moved to exceeding pity, and yielded up that liberty which he had before preserved, and without delay speaking apart to her, he opened his heart and said, that if it pleased her to marry him he would so deal that both her life and lands should be safe. Madasima, who well knew his great worth, and of what lineage he was, was nothing averse; then Galvanes knelt down and kissed her hand, and it was not long before he acquainted Amadis and Agrayes of his love, and besought them to enable him to perform what he had promised as they regarded his life. They marvelling at this sudden change told him that, considering his good services to King Lisuarte, what he required was a little thing, especially as the Lordship of the Island would remain to the King, and Amadis promised, as soon as he could ride, to request the boon for him.

Meantime Gandandel often went to visit Amadis with semblance of great regard, and always spoke to him of the King as being changed, and warned him to beware of him lest some evil should happen, which, said the old traitor, would be a great grief to me, because of the many favours I and my sons have received at your hands; but never could he kindle any wrath or suspicion in the mind of Amadis, though he persisted so that Amadis grew angry at him, and told him to say no more, for if all in the world were to tell him so he never would believe that so wise and good a King could be moved against one, who sleeping and waking had no thought of any thing but his service. After some days, when the three Knights were healed of their wounds, they rode out one morning being richly apparelled, and after hearing mass went to the palace, where they were right welcomed by all except by the King, who neither looked at them nor received them as he was wont. Amadis did not conceive that this proceeded from any ill will, but that traitor Gandandel came up to him, and embracing him, said with a smile, people are sometimes not believed when they tell the truth. Amadis made him no answer, and he seeing how Angriote and Don Bruneo were offended that Lisuarte did not notice them, went up to the King and said, so that no one could hear him, Do you not see Sir how those Knights look towards you? Lisuarte did not reply, and Amadis then, who suspected no evil, came up with Galvanes and Agrayes and said courteously, Sir, if it please you we would speak with you, and let whom you will be present; the King said, Gandandel and Brocadan; thereat was Amadis well pleased, for he believed them to be his true friends. Then they went together into a garden, where the King seated himself under a tree, and they round about him, and Amadis said, Sir, it has not been my fortune to serve you according to my good will, yet though I may not have deserved it, relying upon your virtue and great nobleness, I venture to ask a boon, which shall be to your service, and wherein you shall show great courtesy and do what is right. Certes, said Gandandel, if it be as you say you ask a fair boon, but let the King know what you would have. Sir, replied Amadis, what I and Agrayes and Galvanes, who have served you also, now request, is the Island of Mongaza, that reserving to yourself the Lordship you would give it with Madasima in marriage to Don Galvanes, wherein you will show favour to him who is of such lineage and hath no lands, and will gain a good vassal for yourself, and also deal courteously with Madasima, who by us hath been disherited. Gandandel and Brocadan hearing this looked at the King, and made signs to him that he should not grant it; but he remained silent for awhile, calling to mind the great worth of Galvanes, and the services which he had received from him, and how Amadis had won that Island with the extreme peril of his life, and knowing also that what they asked was a reasonable and becoming thing, and just. But because his will was perverted he answered as one who had no inclination to consent, He is not wise who asks for what he cannot have. I say this with respect to you, for you ask that which five days ago I promised the Queen for her daughter Leonoreta; this answer he made to excuse himself, not because it was true. At this Gandandel and Brocadan were well pleased, and made signs to him that he had said well, but Agrayes, whose heart was warm, when he heard with how little courtesy the King had refused them would not keep silence. You make us feel Sir, quoth he, that our services will profit us little here; if my advice be taken, our lives shall be differently employed. Nephew, exclaimed Galvanes, services are worth little when they are done to those who know not how to reward them: men should look where they bestow them. Sirs, quoth Amadis, do not complain that the King cannot give you what he hath already promised to another. I will ask the King to give you Madasima and let him keep the land, and I will give you the Firm Island till the King shall have something else to bestow upon you. The King answered, Madasima is in my prison in hostage for her lands, and if they be not surrendered I will have her head cut off. Then Amadis replied, of a truth Sir you should have answered us more courteously, and you would not have committed this wrong if you had known us better. If I do not know you, said Lisuarte, the world is wide enough; go through it, and look for those who may know you better. Certes Sir, quoth Amadis, till now I thought there was no King in the world who had wisdom such as yours; but seeing how strangely different you are from what I believed, since you are in this new mood we must seek a new way of life. Lisuarte answered, Do your own will as I shall mine, and he rose angrily and went to the Queen.

Gandandel and Brocadan commended him much for what he had done in thus dismissing such dangerous enemies, and he told Brisena all that had passed, and how he rejoiced thereat. But she told him that what he rejoiced at was to her cause for sorrow, for Amadis and his friends had ever served him faithfully and well; and that other Knights seeing how they were recompensed would have great reason to seek one who would know and reward them better. Say no more, cried he, I know what I am doing, and remember to say what I tell you, that you asked that Island for Leonoreta, and that I have given it her. I will do as you command me, replied Brisena, but God grant that it come to good!

Amadis returned to his lodging in a more melancholy mood than he was wont, he would say nothing to the Knights of his company till he had spoken with Oriana, so calling Durin aside he bade him tell Mabilia that he must see Oriana that night, and that they should expect him by the water course in the garden. Then he ate and regaled with the Knights as he used to do, and he desired them to assemble there on the morrow for he had something to impart to them. When day was gone and night was come, after they had retired and all were at rest, he went with Gandalin to the water course, and having entered it went forthwith to the chamber of Oriana, where she with as true love expected him; and being in her arms she asked him why he had sent that message by Durin, and he told her all that had past. Now Lady mine, said he, since it is so that for my honour I must depart I beseech you do not command me otherwise, for I am more yours than my own, and if I am shamed the shame will be yours also. But Oriana, though she felt as though her heart were breaking, took courage as she could and answered, True friend, with little reason can you complain of my father, for it is not him but me whom you have served, for my sake you abode here, and for my sake have done so many great actions, and from me you have had your guerdon, and shall have while I live; yet should not my father have done thus, seeing what you have been to him. Howbeit, though your absence will be like as if my heart were breaking, I will regard reason more than my unbounded love. Do as you think best! my father will find when you are gone that all that is left will be to him cause of sorrow and evil! Amadis kissed her hands; my own true Lady many and great kindnesses have I received from you which have saved me from death, but for this I thank you above all, inasmuch as honour is above all delights. Thus past they that night mingling tears with their love, thinking of the long solitude that was to come, and towards day-break Amadis rose; that dear cousin Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark went out with him, and he embraced them, and commended Oriana to their consolations, and so they parted weeping.

Amadis went to his lodging and slept the remainder of the night and some part of the morning, but when it was time he arose, and the Knights assembled, they heard mass and rode forth, and being assembled in the field he addressed them after this guise:—It is notorious to you good Sirs and honourable Knights, whether the affairs of King Lisuarte have prospered or declined since I and my brethren and friends for my sake came to Great Britain. I may therefore be excused from recalling what is past to your memory, this only I ought to say, that ye as well as myself might reasonably have expected great recompence; but either that Fortune hath been using her accustomed inconstancy, or by the influence of evil counsellors, or perhaps because age hath altered the conditions of the King, we have found him different from what we expected; for when I myself and Agrayes, and Don Galvanes besought him that he would give Madasima to Don Galvanes in marriage, and with her her lands in vassallage, he nothing regarding the worth of this Knight nor his high lineage, not only would not grant us the boon, but denied it in terms so discourteous and dishonourable, that because they proceeded from a tongue so true, and from a judgment so sound, I would not willingly repeat them were not things at this extremity that it cannot be excused. Know then Sirs that towards the end of our talk, when we said to him that he did not know our services, he replied, the world was wide enough and we might seek those who would know them better. So therefore as we have hitherto obeyed him in concord and friendship, now must we in discord and enmity, fulfilling that which he thinks fitting; it seemed right to me that you should know this, because it not only concerns us in particular but all in general.

When these Knights heard what Amadis had said they were greatly astonished, and they talked one with another and said, that ill would their poor services be recompensed when what Amadis and his brethren had done was so forgotten, so that their hearts were moved against the King. And Angriote of Estravaus, as one who had resolved to take his share in the good or evil which might befall Amadis, said to them, Sirs, I have long known the King, and have always seen him temperate in all his actions, and never moved without great and just cause, therefore I cannot believe that this should proceed from his own nature or inclination but from some meddling traitors who have bereft him of his wisdom. Not for this do I excuse the King! for many days I have seen him speak more with Gandandel and Brocadan than he was accustomed to do, they being false and treacherous men, and I believe that they have done this thing hoping to obtain thereby for themselves and their sons that which they have never merited, and that you may see how the justice of God comes to pass I will arm myself, and challenge them for their villainy which they have done to the King and to Amadis, and will do combat against them both, or against their sons in their stead, if they dare sustain their father's treason. Forthwith he would have departed but Amadis withheld him saying, God forbid my true and loyal friend that your life should be put in danger for an uncertain cause. I am certain, quoth Angriote, that it is as I say by what I have long known of them, and if it pleases the King to speak truth he will confirm it. If you love me, replied Amadis, let this rest at present, that the King may not be offended; if these men who seemed so friendly are indeed my enemies, that will be known hereafter, and then may you better proceed against them. Then Angriote albeit unwillingly consented to delay vengeance. Amadis then turned to the assembled Knights and said, Sirs, I will take leave of the King and Queen if they chuse to see me, and will go to the Firm Island, where they who shall please to live with me shall be partakers with me in all the honour and pleasures that I can command. The land is rich and aboundeth with all things, there is store of forests and of fair women. I have treasure enough for our wants; they who know us will come thither to see us, and strangers to demand our help, and there we may return from our adventures to recover strength. While my father King Perion lives the kingdom of Gaul will not fail us, nor after his days. I have letters from the lesser Britain telling me that they give me that land, that then you may esteem our own; I must remind you also of Scotland, the country of my Cousin Agrayes, and of Queen Briolania's kingdom, which will not fail us for weal or for woe. That you may say truly Sir Amadis, quoth a Knight present, whose name was Tantiles, and who was governor of that kingdom. Sobradisa and its fair Queen, whom you have established there, will be always at your service. Now then Sir, cried Don Quadragante, take leave of the King and then will it be seen who they are who love you, and will continue in your company. Amadis answered, greatly shall I esteem those who at this time will so honour me, yet do I not say, that if they can profitably remain with the King they should not do so, for of a truth so good a Lord cannot soon be found. As they were thus talking the King and Gandandel past by with many other Knights, hawking with merlins, and sported near them awhile without speaking to them or noticing them, and then returned to the palace.




_CHAPTER 21._


Then Amadis taking with him all those Knights went to take leave of the King; they who were in the palace, when they saw with how altered a countenance he entered, and at that hour when the tables were placed, all drew nigh to hear what he should say. He being before the King spake thus: Sir, whether or not you have dealt ill with me God and yourself can witness: of this I say no more, for though my services may have been great, much greater was the will I had to requite those honours which I from you received. Yesterday you told me that I might go about the world and seek for one who would know me better, giving me to understand that what you wished was my departure from your court; since this would please you it becomes me so to do. I do not come to discharge myself of vassallage, for I never was subject to you, nor to any but God alone; but I take leave of that good will which you once manifested to honour and favour me, and of that great love wherewith I ever strove to requite and serve you. Then Don Galvanes also took leave, and Agrayes and Florestan, and Dragonis and Palomir, who were cousins to Amadis, and Don Bruneo of Bonamar and his brother Branfil, and Angriote of Estravaus, and Grindonan his brother, and Pinores his nephew. Don Quadragante then came before the King and said, Sir, I abode with you only at the request of Amadis, and because I have been yours for his sake, for the same reason I will continue so no longer; small hope of recompence can there be for my poor services when he is so rewarded! for ill have you remembered how he saved you from the hands of Madanfabul, from whence none other could have saved you, and how he won for you that battle against King Cildadan, and how his brethren and kinsmen there shed their blood for you; how he delivered you from my enmity, and from Famongomadan and his son Basagante, who were the strongest giants in the world, and from Lindoraque, who was so mighty a Knight, and from Arcalaus the Enchanter—all this you have forgotten; but I tell you that had all we been in the field and Amadis away, how think you would it then have fallen out? The King answered, Don Quadragante I well perceive by your words that you have no love towards me, neither are you so beholden to Amadis that you should desire his welfare; perchance what you say of that is not so true as it sounds. Quadragante replied, you are of that rank that you may say what pleases you, but sure am I that you will not move Amadis with mischief-making words as others have been moved, who will discover their error when too late. Then Landin came up and said, Sir, of all your household I could find no help or healing for my wounds save only from Amadis, therefore shall I go with him and with my uncle Don Quadragante. Certes, quoth Lisuarte, if you staid I should not have a friend the more. Landin replied, such as they are towards you will I be. At this time were assembled together in another part of the palace, Don Brian of Monjaste, a right good Knight, who was son of King Ladasan of Spain and of a sister of King Perion, and Gandal, and Orlandin, son to the Count of Orlanda, and Grandores, and Madancil, he of the Silver Bridge, and Listoran of the White Tower, and Ladadin of Fajarque, and Branfiles the haughty, and Don Gavarte of the Perilous Vale; and when they saw how all those other Knights were about to depart for the love of Amadis, they also went before the King and said, Sir, we came to your court to see Amadis and his brethren, and to obtain his friendship, and as he was the cause of our coming so will he be of our departure. These Knights having departed, and there remaining no other, Amadis would have taken leave of the Queen but Lisuarte would not permit him, because she had always opposed this quarrel, so he sent his excuses by Don Grumedan. Then went he to his lodging, and after they had made their meal they all mounted being fully armed, five hundred Knights were they in all who followed Amadis, among whom were the sons of Kings and of Counts, and others, who for their prowess as well as birth, were renowned throughout all the world.

Mabilia beheld them from a window of the Queen's palace, in what order they went, their arms how rich they were, and how glittering in the sun, so that none who saw them depart but marvelled and thought the King unhappy, that he would so lose such a Knight and so goodly a company. Then Mabilia went to Oriana and said, Cease thy sorrow and come look at your vassals! and let your heart rejoice that you have such a lover; for if till now he has led the life of an Errant Knight serving your father, now that he has left his service, he appears like a powerful Prince, and that Lady will redound to your honour. Oriana being comforted by her words looked at the company, subduing by her fortitude that grief and passion which tormented her heart. There went out with Amadis to honour him, King Arban of North Wales, and Grumedan the Queen's fosterer, and Brandoyuas and Quinorante, and Giontes the King's nephew, and Listoran the good jouster. All these rode with him apart from his company and very sorrowful for his departure, and Amadis besought them that they would still be his friends so far as they could without breach of honour, for he should still esteem and love them as he had done; nor though the King had ceased to love him, having no cause for this change, should they do so likewise, nor for that cease to serve the King and honour him as for his worth he deserved. They answered, that they should never cease to love him however they were bound by loyalty to serve the King. Then said Amadis, I beseech you tell the King that what Urganda said before me is now made manifest, how I should gain for another, and my guerdon should be wrath, and the long delay of my will! So has it come to pass! but the just Judge of all will allot to every one his right. Don Grumedan cursed Urganda for prophesying so truly, and then they returned to the town. Presently Don Guilan came up and he was in tears; and he said, Sir, You know how it is with us, that I have neither will nor heart of my own, but must obey her for whom I suffer so much, and she has forbidden me to follow you, and thus am I put to great shame: now would I repay those honours which I have ever received from you and your brethren, but I may not! But Amadis, who knew the great and excessive love of this Knight, and remembered how he himself loved and obeyed Oriana, embraced him and said, Don Guilan my dear friend, God forbid that a Knight like you should disobey your Lady, not so would I advise you, nor so advising should I be your friend; obey her and serve the King, and sure am I that you will keep your loyalty and yet that I shall have in you the same friend. So Guilan answered, he trusted in God to serve him yet; and he took his leave. They rode on about three leagues to the shore where Amadis had ordered tents to be pitched; there they regaled that night, congratulating each other that they had not remained longer in the service of one so thankless, but Amadis felt his heart fail him, for he knew not when he should again see Oriana. In the morning they set forth again and took the straight road to the Firm Island.

On the day after Amadis had departed, the King when mass was over sate in his palace according to custom, and looked on one side and on the other, and beholding how desolate the place appeared without those Knights who were gone, he began to muse upon his own conduct, and was lost in thought. Gandandel and Brocadan, who knew what Angriote had said of them, when they saw him thus thoughtful began to fear that he was ill satisfied with what had been done. Howbeit as they could not now retreat they resolved to push farther on, for this is the ill fate of all great errors. So Gandandel went up to Lisuarte and said to him, henceforth Sir you may rest secure since those who could have injured you are dismissed from your service; the trouble of your state and household you may lay on us and we will attend to it more carefully than to our own concerns, and when you think of the treasures which you must have bestowed upon those Knights but which are now your own, you should greatly rejoice. Lisuarte looked sternly at them and answered, I marvel much at what you say, that I should commit the management of my state and household to you! that I and those about me are not equal to the task—but you, in whom I did not perceive such great ability are capable thereof! Even if you were, my vassals and household would be ill contented with the authority of such as you! You tell me too that I shall save the wealth which would else have been bestowed among those Knights. I would know how it could be better employed than to my own honour and service, my honour was defended by it, my dominion increased, and so it at last returned to me again, for the wealth that is bestowed where it ought, lies in a good treasury whence it never can be lost. No more of this! I shall not take your counsel! He then arose and called his huntsmen and went forth to the field, leaving them in amazement and great dismay.

At this season arrived a Damsel from Queen Briolania with tidings to Oriana, whereat all greatly rejoiced for that Queen was much beloved by all. Lady, quoth she, I come from Briolania to tell you the wonders of the Firm Island, that you may know all, for I was witness. God grant long life to her! said Oriana, and good fortune to you for the trouble which you have taken. So all drew round to hear her. Then said the Damsel, when Briolania and her company had arrived at the Firm Island she was asked if she would attempt the Forbidden Chamber or the Arch of True Lovers, but she answered, that she would leave those two proofs till the last. They then led us to a fair dwelling about a league from the Castle, which, because of its goodly situation, was one of the chief habitations of Apolidon, and when it was dinner time they led us to a large hall, at the one end whereof was a deep cave so dark and fearful that none durst go nigh to it, and at the other end of the palace was a fair tower where they led us, and we found the tables and benches placed by the windows, and from thence we could see all that past below in the large hall. So there were we well served by Dames and Damsels, and the Knights and our people feasted below in the hall. But when the second service was brought in loud hissings were heard from the cave, and a hot wind came forth therefrom, and there issued out a great serpent into the middle of the hall, so fierce and terrible that none dared look on him, and he breathed smoke from his mouth and nostrils, and lashed the ground with his tail so that the whole palace shook; presently two Lions came out of the cave and attacked him, and began such a battle that there is not heart of man which would not have felt fear at beholding it. The Knights and people fled with all speed from the table, and though the windows whereat we were were very high, yet were we greatly terrified. Half an hour that battle lasted till the Lions were so wearied that they lay as though they were dead, and the serpent so exhausted that he could scarce draw breath; but after he had rested a little he took one Lion in his mouth and carried him into the cave, then returned for the other, and they were seen no more that day. The men of the Island laughed at our fear, and assured us that they would appear no more that day, so we then returned to the tables and finished our meal.

The next day they led us to a place still fairer, where we were well feasted, and at night they showed us a rich chamber, marvellously fair where there was a rich and costly bed for Briolania, and other good ones for us. But about midnight the doors flew open with so great noise that we all awoke in terror, and a hart came in, having lighted candles upon his horns, so that the whole chamber was as light as day. One side of that hart was white as snow, and the neck and the head were black as pitch, and the one horn seemed gilt and the other was red; four dogs pursued him in full cry, and behind them an ivory horn moved and sounded in the air as if a man were sounding it, and gave the proper sound of the chase, and cheared the dogs so that they pursued the hart and allowed him no respite, and drove him from one part of the chamber to another, and sometimes they leaped over our beds, and sometimes they fell on them, so that we rose up in our shifts and our hair hanging about and fled from them, and some hid themselves under the beds, till the Hart finding no safety there leaped through a window and the dogs after him; then were we right glad, and taking up the cloaths which were thrown about covered ourselves, and gave a robe to Briolania wherein she drest herself, and then as the fear was past we laughed at the confusion into which we had been thrown. While we were making our beds again, a Dame and two Damsels entered and a little girl with candles, and she spake to Briolania and said, How is it Lady that you have risen at such an hour? but when she heard they laughed and answered, Now then Ladies go to sleep again, for you have nothing more to apprehend to-night.

Early in the morning we went to a wood where there were fine groves and fair gardens, and there we had tents pitched by a brook side. We found there a round building with twelve marble pillars, the walls were of crystal so curiously made that they who might be within could see all without; the doors were made of plate of gold and of silver, and by every pillar there was placed the image of a Giant made in copper, and these images had bows in their hands, and the arrow heads were of fire. We were told that nothing could enter that chamber but would be presently reduced to ashes by those arrows which never failed of their mark; and they put in two fallow deer and a stag, immediately the images shot at them and they were reduced to ashes, and the arrows returned to the bows from whence they fled. On the doors of the chamber there were letters written which said, Let no man or woman dare enter here except they twain who love each other truly, as truly as did Grimanesa and Apolidon, and they must enter here together, else will they die the cruellest death that ever was seen. This enchantment will endure till they twain shall have entered the Forbidden Chamber, and then shall all the enchantments of the Firm Island be done away. Then Briolania called Ysanjo and Enil, and told them she wished to see nothing more except the Arch of True Lovers and the Forbidden Chamber, and she asked Ysanjo the meaning of the Lion and Serpent, and of the Hart and the Dogs. Lady, he replied, we know nothing more than that always at that hour they appear; and the Hart and the Dogs run from the window into a lake which we believe proceeds from the sea, but were you to remain here a whole year you could not see half the wonders that are in this Island.

On the morrow we mounted our palfreys and returned to the Castle; without delay Briolania went to the Arch of True Lovers and past through the Forbidden Perrons like one who had never failed in her love, and the image with the trumpet made so sweet a sound that we were all astonished, and when she entered where the images were of Apolidon and Grimanesa, it ceased with so sweet a finish as was marvellous to hear. There beheld she those images as fair and fresh as life, and being alone with them she thought herself in good company; and while there she saw letters newly written in the Jasper, saying, this is the name of Briolania, daughter to King Tagadan of Sobradisa, the third Damsel that hath entered here. Then she felt a fear of being alone and returned. The fifth morning she went to attempt the Forbidden Chamber; she was in rich attire, and she wore nothing upon her beautiful head except a gold clasp with jewels, and all who saw her said, that if she did not enter the Chamber there was none in the world who could, and that they should now see the end of all those enchantments. She commended herself to God, and passed through the copper Perron, and came up to the marble Perron and read the writing there, and proceeded so far beyond that all surely thought the adventure was atchieved; but when she was within three paces from the door three hands seized her by those beautiful locks, and pitilessly cast her out of the Forbidden ground as they had done all others, and she lay in such plight that we could not soon recover her. Till now Oriana's heart had been misgiving her, but now she looked at Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark, and they at her, being all well pleased; the next day pursued the Damsel, Briolania departed for her own kingdom. So the Damsel then received her bidding from Brisena and Oriana, and the other Ladies, and set out on her return to her Mistress.

Now Amadis and his company arrived at the Firm Island, where they were joyfully received by all the dwellers therein, who, as they had felt great sorrow for the loss of their new Lord, so now had they double pleasure in welcoming him. But when those Knights who were with him beheld the Castle how strong it was, and how there was no other entrance to the Island large as it was, and that the land was so fertile, and peopled with so many and such inhabitants, they thought it might maintain war against all the world; so they were lodged in the largest town which stood under the Castle. You are to know that this Island was nine leagues long and seven wide, all full of villages and rich dwelling-houses of the Knights of the land. And in the pleasantest parts thereof Apolidon had built four palaces for himself, the strangest and most delightful that ever man could behold. One was that of the Serpent and the Lions. Another that of the Hart and the Dogs. The third was called the Whirling Palace, for three times in the day and as often in the night it whirled round, so that they who were in it thought it would dash to pieces; and the fourth was that of the Bull, because every day a wild Bull issued out of an old covered way, and ran among the people therein as though he would kill them, and when they fled from him he ran against the iron door of a tower and burst it open and went in, and presently he came out again being quite tame, and ridden by an old Ape, so wrinkled that his skin hung all in folds, which Ape flogged him into the place from whence he came. Great pleasure had all these Knights in beholding these enchantments, and enough pastime had they there, and they were all firm in their love to Amadis, and ready to follow him wherever he would.

At this time came Andalod the Hermit of the Poor Rock to establish the monastery as had been appointed, and he seeing Amadis gave thanks to God for giving life to so good a man, and looked at him and embraced him as if he had never seen him before. But Amadis kist his hands, and with all humility thanked him for his preservation and for his life, which he owed to God and to him. So a