[BRU-amadis-of-gaul  —  part 3 of 3, continuation of part 2]
============================================================

monastery was founded at the foot of the rock, where that Chapel of the Virgin stood, wherein Amadis had prayed in his despair before he departed into the mountain. A good man called Sisian, whom Andalod brought, remained there, and thirty Friars with him, and Amadis assigned to them rents enough, and Andalod then returned to the Poor Rock as before. Then Balays of Carsante arrived, he whom Amadis had released from the dungeon of Arcalaus, who had gone to take leave of King Lisuarte, so soon as he knew that Amadis had left him in discontent; with him also came Olivas whom Agrayes and Don Galvanes had helped in battle against the Duke of Bristol. They asked of Balays, what news in the court? he answered, enough to tell. King Lisuarte Sir has summoned all his people; for Count Latine and they whom he sent to take possession of the Island of Mongaza, have informed him that the old Giant had given up to them all the Castles which he and his sons had in their keeping. But Gromadaza refused to yield the Castles by the Boiling Lake, which is the strongest place in the Island, and also three other strong Castles, for she says she will never yield the place where she was Mistress in the life of her husband Famongomadan, and Basagante her son, but always annoy Lisuarte to the utmost of her power, and for Madasima and the Damsels she cares not what may become of them so she can do any harm to the King. The King therefore has summoned his forces, and hath sworn, if Gromadaza does not yield up her Castles within a month, that he will behead Madasima and the Damsels, and that he will go against the Castle of the Boiling Lake, and not depart from before it till he shall have won it, and if he can take the old Giantess he will throw her to the Lions. At this news they were all greatly troubled, and Galvanes said to them, Sirs, you all know the promise which I have made to Madasima, to defend her with reason, or if that failed by force of arms; and for this cause was it that Amadis and all of us forsook Lisuarte; now I beseech you, if he will not hear reason, assist me in arms to fulfil my word. At that uprose Don Florestan, and said, Don Galvanes, there are better advisers here than I, but if reason fail I will undertake the battle in the name of God. Good friend, replied Galvanes, I thank you with all my heart; but if it must be by battle I have promised and I will perform it. Then Don Brian of Monjaste and Quadragante said that the quarrel appertained to all, and all ought to bear a part, for all Knights were bound to succour Damsels who were opprest, and as Madasima and her Damsels had gone as hostages in obedience to her mother, they were innocent before God. Sirs, said Amadis, you rejoice me in what you say; for whatsoever is undertaken with such concord will have good issue. But I will tell you what seems to me good: these Damsels are twelve in number, and therefore ought to be succoured by twelve Knights. Sure I am that such as ye will think such danger but pastime, if it please ye I will name twelve champions, and let the other Knights remain here for greater perils if they should befal us. You, Sir Don Galvanes shall be the first, as it is your quarrel, and Agrayes your nephew, and my brother Florestan, and my cousins Palomir and Dragonis, and Don Brian of Monjaste, and Nicoran of the White Tower, and Urlandin and Gavarte of the Perilous Vale, and Ymosil brother to the Duke of Burgandy, and Madansil of the Silver Bridge, and Ladadin of Fajarque; let those twelve go, there are among them the sons of Kings and Dukes and Counts, so that their peers will not be found. Hereat were all well pleased, and the Knights appointed made ready forthwith, and shortly after midnight armed themselves and rode towards Tafilana, the town where Lisuarte then was.




_CHAPTER 22._


Now Oriana felt herself great with child, and she asked counsel of Mabilia and the Damsel of Denmark in that danger; they albeit they were sore dismayed dissembled that, and Mabilia bade her take heart for all should be remedied. I always expected, said she, that to such[347:A] a saint such an offering would be brought. Oriana could not forbear a smile. I will feign myself worse, she said, and withdraw as much as I can from all company; and if the Damsel of Denmark will hazard her honour for me, my honour and life may both be saved. Lady, quoth the Damsel, I am at your command even were it to my death. Good friend, quoth Oriana, this I hoped, and if I live you shall recover your honour and with great praise. Then the Damsel knelt and kissed her hands, and Oriana proceeded: continue to visit Adalasta the Abbess of my Nunnery as you have hitherto done, and when it is time tell her that you are pregnant, and beseech her to help you, so that you may lay the child at the church door, and that she will order it to be taken in and brought up for Charity's sake; thus will my secret be safe, nor will you be shamed, for none but this honourable Lady will know what you shall tell her, and she loves you much. Thus they determined that it should be.

    [347:A] This is D'Herberay's phrase, it is better than the     original: Siempre me tuve por dicho que de tales juegos     auriades tal ganancia.

When Lisuarte knew how Gromadaza persisted in her warfare, by advice of Gandandel and Brocadan he sent for Madasima and her Damsels, and told them that they must all be put to death for an example. When she heard this so rigorous doom the fair and fresh colour of her cheeks suddenly changed to a pale and deadly hue, and falling at the King's feet she said, Sir, the fear of death doth make my heart weaker than it naturally is, weak Damsel as I am, so that I have neither thought nor words to answer you; but if in this court there be any Knight willing to uphold the right let him speak for me as a Knight is bound to do, for I did not enter your prison willingly but in obedience to my mother. If there be none such here, do you O King, whom hitherto never distressed Dame or Damsel hath implored in vain, do you deal justly by me, and let not anger have the mastery over you. Gandandel, who was present, was greatly desirous that Madasima should be slain, knowing that then Amadis could never be reconciled with the King; and he said, Sir, do not hear her, these Damsels were given you as hostages to die if the conditions were not performed, and therefore justice ought to be executed without delay. But Don Grumedan, who was a good Knight, and well versed in all the laws of Knighthood, as one who had not only practised but read much, replied, that shall not the King do if it please God! nor ever shall such cruelty and wrong be by him committed. This Damsel came hither in obedience to her mother, and as that obedience will in secret be by God rewarded, so should it be in public by the King as his servant, and one who obeys his will. Moreover I have learnt that within three days here will arrive certain Knights from the Firm Island to take up their quarrel; and if you Gandandel, or your sons are willing to maintain the justice of your advice; you will there find those who will answer you. Gandandel answered, Don Grumedan, tho' you wish me ill I have never deserved it at your hands; if you had offended my sons you know they are such Knights that they can maintain what I have said. We shall soon see that, quoth old Grumedan; as for you I only wish you well or ill as it shall be found that you have counselled the King. Albeit that Lisuarte had acted much amiss toward Amadis, and had it in his heart to do him all displeasure, yet could not that new passion subdue his old virtue, so that he was glad at what Grumedan said, and asked who the Knights were that were coming to defend the Damsels, and when Grumedan had told their names, he observed that they were enough good and prudent Knights. But then was Gandandel sore dismayed, and he repented him of what he had said concerning his sons, knowing that they were nothing equal in arms to Florestan and Agrayes, and Don Brian of Monjaste, and Gavarte of the Perilous Vale. So when Madasima was remanded to prison he went to his brother-in-law Brocadan in trouble of heart, receiving now the guerdon which the merits of his misdeed deserved.

Here came to pass what the Gospel saith, That no hidden thing but shall be made known; for Gandandel retiring with Brocadan to a private chamber to consult with him how they might prevail upon the King to execute Madasima and her Damsels before the Knights of the Firm Island arrived, Brocadan began to reproach him for the wrong he had done to Amadis, greatly repenting his own wickedness now that he saw his own honour and his sons in danger. Now it happened that a niece of Brocadan was enamoured of a young Knight called Sarquiles, who was nephew to Angriote of Estravaus, and she had hidden him near this chamber, so that he heard the whole secret of this treachery; and when it was night he went out and armed himself, and mounting his horse he rode on the morrow into the town as if he came from another place, and he went before the King and said to him, Sir, I am your natural subject and was brought up in your household, and therefore would save you from all treachery, that you may not commit wrong in compliance with another's will. It is not three days since I was in a place where I heard persons counselling how to instigate you to do an evil thing against your own honour and good reason. I say to you, give no heed to Gandandel and Brocadan in what they say to you, touching Madasima, for there are others in your court who more honestly advise you; you and all here shall know wherefore I say this, within twelve days, if you will delay following their will for so long. Now Sir, God be with you, for I go to my Uncle Angriote. God be with you, replied Lisuarte, and remained musing on what he had heard.

Sarquiles rode on by the shortest way he knew to the Firm Island, and when he arrived there his horse was so overspent with the speed he had made that he could scarcely carry him. He found Amadis, and Angriote, and Don Bruneo, riding on the shore to hasten the equipment of some vessels which they had ordered to pass over to Gaul, for Amadis was desirous to see his parents. Right well was Sarquiles received, and Angriote said to him, Nephew, what business have you that your horse is in such plight? Very great, replied he, and he told him how his Mistress Gandaza had hidden him in Brocadan's house, and what he had there heard. Now Sir, quoth Angriote to Amadis, was my suspicion right? You would not suffer me to bring the matter to an end, but now if it please God neither you nor ought else shall let, but that this great treason against the King and against you shall be made manifest. Good friend, replied Amadis, you may now do it with reason and certainty, and God therewith will speed you. I will depart to-morrow, said Angriote, and Sarquiles upon another horse with me. Accordingly on the following morning they twain set out for the dwelling of King Lisuarte.

Meantime the King mused much upon that Sarquiles had told him. One day Gandandel and Brocadan came before him and said, Sir, we are grieved to see how little you regard your own welfare; that, quoth Lisuarte, may well be, but why say you this?—Because these Knights who are your enemies are coming to your Court without any fear to defend these Damsels for whom you ought to have the land given up. If you will take our advice you ought to behead them before these champions arrive, and send to forbid the Knights to enter your kingdom; thus would you make them fear you, and Amadis would not venture to offer you any wrong, for if they do not forbear for fear, for nothing else will they; the sooner this is done the better will it be, and the more terror will it strike. The King then called to mind the words of Sarquiles, and saw how he had spoken truth. You tell me two things, he replied, against all reason: the one that without any form of judgment I should have these Damsels slain, what account could I give to the Lord whose minister I am if I should do this? He has appointed me here in his stead to administer right in his name, and if I did this wrong which you counsel to strike fear into others, it would fall upon my own head at last. Those Kings who follow their own will instead of what is reasonable rely on themselves and not on God, which is the worst error into which they can fall. Their best security is to chuse out good counsellors, and honest ones, and to remember that however evil actions appear at first, the just Judge directs, and the end thereof cannot be good. You tell me also to forbid these Knights from coming to my court; a dishonourable thing would it be to prevent any one from claiming justice before me, much more they being my enemies, for it is to my honour that I have the power and inclination to do what they request. I do not like your counsel! you have done ill to those who deserved no ill at your hands! I have sinned and I have my punishment; and if you have been false so I trust will you have yours at the end. And with that he went away and left them.

The following day Lisuarte rode forth after mass with a great company, and seeing that the twelve Knights were approaching he rode forward to receive them, for he was a courteous man to all, and they well deserved such honour being what they were. They made obeisance to him, and while their people pitched tents in the field Don Galvanes spake to the King. Sir, confiding in your virtue and in your wonted goodness, we are come hither to request that you will hear Madasima and her Damsels, that they may have their right; we are come to plead their cause, and if by that means we cannot succeed, let it not offend you Sir if we support it by arms, for there is no cause wherefore they ought to die. The King answered, go now and rest yourselves, I will do all that can justly be done. Don Brian of Monjaste then replied, So Sir we hoped, that you would do what behoved your royal dignity and your conscience, and whenever you have failed so to act it has been the work of evil advisers, and that, if it did not offend you, I would prove upon any one who dared gainsay. Don Brian, quoth the King, if you would listen to your father I know that you would neither forsake me for another, nor come hither to plead against me. Sir, replied Don Brian, my pleading is for you, it is that you should do justice, and not listen to those who would serve you less faithfully than I, and stain your worth. You say Sir, that if I had listened to my father I should not forsake you: I have not forsaken you Sir, for I never was yours, albeit I am of your lineage. I came to your court to seek my kinsman Amadis, and when you were pleased that he should be no longer yours, then I departed with him; in all this I have not erred a single point of duty. The King then returned to the town, and they remained in their tents where they were visited by their friends. But for Oriana I tell you she never left the window, looking at those who so loved her lover, and beseeching God to give them the victory in this appeal.

That night did Gandandel and Brocadan pass in great perplexity, wishing that they could recall what was past, but now perforce must they go on. On the morrow the twelve Knights heard mass with the King, and that done accompanied him to his palace. He then called for Gandandel and Brocadan, and said to them, You must now support the advice which you have always given me in the affair of Madasima, and make these good men understand why she ought not to be heard, and he bade them stand where all might hear them. Ymosil of Burgandy, and Ladadin of Fajarque then came forward and said, We Sir, and these Knights beseech you of your goodness that Madasima and her Damsels may be heard, for so we conceive it is right. Then answered Gandandel, many talk about the right and few know what it is; you say that of right these Damsels ought to be heard, which of right they ought not, for without any such condition they bound themselves to death, and entered the prison of the King thereupon, that if Ardan Canileo were slain or vanquished, and the whole Island of Mongaza were not then freely surrendered, they and the Knights with them should suffer death. The Knights delivered up the Castles in their keeping, which Gromadaza will not do, therefore there neither is nor can be reason for which they should be excused from death. Ymosil replied, Certes Gandandel, you might have been excused from uttering such reasons before so good a King and such Knights as are here! It is manifest to all who have any knowledge, that man or woman are to be heard, of right in their own defence, in all cases except in treason and conspiracy; this is the custom in all lands wherein justice is observed, and this is what we require. Gandandel replied, that nothing more was to be said: the King was to decide, so the matter was at issue, and the King remained with certain Knights, all the others leaving the hall.

The King wished his Uncle Argamonte, an honourable Count and of great prudence, to deliver his opinion, but he referred it to the King, saying that none so fully understood what was right as he himself; the other counsellors did the same. Lisuarte seeing this then said, Since you leave the decision to me, I think Ymosil of Burgundy hath spoken to the purpose, and the Damsels should be heard. Certes Sir, quoth the Count, and all they who were present said the same, you have determined justly, for thus it ought to be. They then called in the Knights and said what had been resolved; for this Ymosil and Ladadin of Fajarque kissed his hands and said, be pleased therefore Sir to let Madasima and her Damsels be summoned, and we will save them by fair reason, or by arms if need shall be. Let them come, replied the King, and see if they will commit their cause to you. Presently they came before the King so modestly and in such fear that not a man could behold them without great pity. The twelve Knights of the Firm Island took them by the hand, and Agrayes, Florestan, Ymosil and Ladadin said to Madasima, Lady Madasima, these Knights come to save you and your Damsels from death, will you commit your cause to us? Sirs, she replied, if the cause of Damsels so forlorn and wretched may be undertaken, we commit it to you, and trust in God and you. Since it is so, quoth Ymosil, let who will come forward against you! if he be one I will defend you by reason or by arms; if more, twelve shall be answered. The King looked at Gandandel and Brocadan, and saw that they looked down, and were dismayed, and did not answer. Return to your lodgings till the morrow, said Lisuarte, and meanwhile those who are to answer you will take counsel. The Knights then conducted Madasima to her prison and went to their tents.

Lisuarte led Gandandel and Brocadan aside, and said to them, you have often urged me to put those Damsels to death, and said you would maintain the justice of the deed by reason, or your sons should in arms, if need should be, now then do as you said, for what Ymosil advances seems just to me, and I will not appoint any of my Court to combat against these Knights. Look ye to it! Else will the Damsels be delivered, and I shall have been ill advised by ye, and wrongfully. They replied, that to-morrow they would be ready with their reply, and returned very sorrowfully to their homes. And they agreed to persist in their advice and maintain it by reason, but not put their sons in danger, because the cause was not just, and they were not such in arms as those Knights. But that same evening tidings came to the King how Gromadaza the Giantess was dead, and had ordered her Castles to be delivered up to save her daughter and the Damsels, and that they had accordingly been yielded to Count Latine. Greatly pleased thereat was Lisuarte, and when the Knights came before him on the morrow he said, proceed no farther in this cause, for you are quit of your defence, and the Damsels are free; the Castles for which I held them in pledge having been surrendered. Gandandel and Brocadan then rejoiced, for they surely expected to be dishonoured. Then Lisuarte sent for Madasima and the Damsels, and said to them, ye are free; do what it pleases you, the Castles have been given up; but he would not tell her that her mother was dead. Madasima would have kissed his hand but the King permitted not that, for he never suffered Dame or Damsel to kiss his hand save when he bestowed upon them some boon. Then said she, since you leave me at my own disposal; I give myself to my Lord Galvanes, who hath been so willing to help me. Agrayes took her by the hand and said, good Lady, you do that which is right; and though you are now disherited of your own land, you shall be honoured in another till it please God to remedy your loss. But Ymosil then said to the King, Sir, if right be done to Madasima she will not be disherited, for children who are in the power of their parents must obey them, however unwillingly, but not for that should they be disherited, when obedience and not free will hath made them bind themselves to what their parents commanded. And because you Sir are appointed here to make every one render to another his right, so ought you yourself to do as an example. Ymosil, replied the King, you have the Damsels at liberty, say no more upon this other matter; I have had sufficient trouble about that land, and will defend it now it is mine, nor can I take it from my daughter Leonoreta, to whom I have granted it. Don Galvanes then said, Sir, that right which Madasima has to the land of her fathers is now mine. I beseech you remember some services which I have done you, and do not disinherit me, for I would willingly be your vassal and stand in your favour, and serve you as loyally as it is possible. Say no more Don Galvanes, quoth Lisuarte, that is done which cannot be undone. Since it is so, quoth he, that I find neither right nor courtesy here, I shall strive to win it how I can. Do your utmost, replied the King, it was in the power of those who were stronger than you, and easier will it be to defend it from you, than it was to win it from them. You won it, answered Galvanes, by means of one who was badly guerdoned, he will help to recover it. If he helps you, cried Lisuarte, many others will serve me who would not serve me before for his sake, when I had him in my household and protected him from them. Agrayes then grew angry and exclaimed, Certes all here, and others beside can tell whether Amadis was protected by you or you by him, though you are a King and he was always as an Errant Knight. Don Florestan seeing how Agrayes was moved laid hand upon his shoulder and drew him back, and then said himself, it seems, Sir, you prize the services of these you speak of above those of Amadis, whether they be so indeed, we shall soon see. Don Brian of Monjaste then stept forward, however little you esteem the services of Amadis and his friends, they must be of great worth indeed who can reasonably make them to be forgotten. It is plain Don Brian, replied the King, that you are one of those friends!—Sure Sir I am; he is my kinsman and I shall do what he pleases. We have enough, quoth Lisuarte, to dispense with you. All you have, replied Don Brian, will be wanted to resist what Amadis can do. The Knights on both sides drew nigh to answer, but Lisuarte stretched out a wand which he held and commanded them to say no more, and they returned to their places.

Just then Angriote of Estravaus, and his nephew Sarquiles entered, compleatly armed, and approached to kiss the King's hand. The twelve Knights marvelled at their coming being ignorant of the cause thereof, but Gandandel and Brocadan were put in fear, and they looked at each other, for they knew what Angriote had said of them before, and albeit they held him for the best Knight in the King's dominions, yet they took courage to answer what he might say; and they called their sons and bade them say nothing more than they should tell them. Angriote stood up before the King and said, Sir, let Gandandel and Brocadan come hither, and I will say that to them which shall make you and all present know them better than ye have hitherto done. The King accordingly called on them to come forward, and all the Knights drew nigh to hear. Then said Angriote, know Sir that Gandandel and Brocadan are disloyal and false toward you, they counselled you wickedly and lyingly, neither regarding God, nor you, nor Amadis, who had so honoured them, and had never done them wrong. They, villains as they are, told you that Amadis designed to seize your kingdom, a thing which never was in his thoughts, for what he desired hath ever been your service, and thus have they made you lose the best Knight that ever King had to serve him, and many other good Knights with him, for no fault of their own. Therefore I say that these wicked and false men, in whom you trusted, have committed a great treason against you, which if they deny, I will do battle with them both; but if their age excuses them, let their sons come forward, and by God's help I will make them confess the disloyalty of their fathers before you, that you shall understand it. Sir, replied Gandandel, you see how Angriote comes to dishonour your court! and this is because you permit those to enter your land who do not seek your service, if you had prevented that at first this would not have happened; and now Sir do not marvel if Amadis should come hither to-morrow and defy you yourself! If Angriote had met me in those days when I did good service in arms for this kingdom, and for your brother King Falangris, he would not then have dared to say what now he says, but now he sees me old and weak, and dares insult me as one already overcome; this shame Sir falls more upon you than me. No Sir Knave, quoth Angriote, I am not come hither to dishonour the Court, but for its honour to destroy treason, and root out the tares which you have scattered among the good seed! Then said Sarquiles, Sir, you know the words which I spake to you upon this matter; with my own ears I heard the villainy which these old traitors were devising; they are old, but their sons are young and strong; let them answer for them, they are three and we are two, then will God discover the truth, and it will be seen if they are such as to make amends for the loss of Amadis and his lineage as their fathers have boasted! When the two sons of Gandandel heard this, and saw that the whole Court were smiling to see their fathers so prest, they thrust angrily through the throng, and came before the King and said, Sir, Angriote lies in all that he hath said and we will combat with him; here are our gages, and they threw their gloves into his lap. Angriote then held out the lappet of his armour—here Sir is mine! let them go arm themselves, and do you Sir behold the battle. The King answered, the day is far spent and there will not be time, let it be after mass to-morrow. With that Adamas came up, the son of Brocadan by a sister of Gandandel; he was great of stature and strong, but of so villainous a nature that none esteemed him. He said to the King, Sir, Sarquiles lies in all he hath said, and if he dare enter the field with his Uncle I will combat him! at this Sarquiles right joyfully gave his gage; the Court then broke up. Angriote and Sarquiles went with the twelve Knights and Madasima, who had taken leave of the Queen and of Oriana, and Brisena sent her a rich tent to lodge in.

The King remained with Don Grumedan and Giontes his nephew; he sent for Gandandel and Brocadan, and said to them, I marvel at you! you have so often told me that Amadis designed treason and meant to seize my kingdom, and now when the proof was necessary you shrunk from it! and have suffered your sons to risque themselves who know not what is the justice of their cause. You have sinned against God and me; great evil have you done me in making me lose such a man and such Knights, but you will not escape without your punishment, for that just Judge will give to every one his due. Sir, said Gandandel, my sons came forward hastily thinking that the proof was delayed. Of a truth, quoth Grumedan, they thought right; for there neither is nor can be proof that Amadis in this or in aught else hath done wrong toward the King, and if you suspect it, it is against all reason; even the devils in hell cannot think so! If you had a thousand heads, and the King were to cut them all off, he would not be enough revenged for the wrong you have done him, and now you will be left for more mischief, which God forbid! and your wretched sons must suffer for your fault! Don Grumedan, said they, whatever you believe and wish we trust that our sons will save their honour and our own. God never save me, replied he, if I wish more than that you be rewarded as your counsel deserves. The King then bade them cease, and he went to table, and they departed to their homes.

That night the arms and horses of the champions were made ready. Angriote and Sarquiles past the remainder of the night from midnight in a chapel of Saint Mary, which was near their tents. At day-break the twelve Knights armed themselves, for they doubted the King seeing how wroth he was against them, and with Madasima and her Damsels, each upon her palfrey, they rode through the town to the field of battle, Angriote and Sarquiles going before them. The King and his Knights were already assembled, and three Judges were appointed: King Arban of North Wales, and Giontes the King's Nephew, and Quinorante the good Jouster; they placed Angriote and Sarquiles at one end of the lists. Presently the two brothers Tarin and Corian came with their cousin Adamas, well armed and mounted, and disposed to do their part well, if the wickedness of their fathers had not been against them. They being opposed each to the other, Giontes blew his trumpet and they ran the career, Corian and Tarin at Angriote, and Adamas against Sarquiles. Tarin broke his lance upon Angriote, who encountered Corian, and bore him from his saddle, then turned and saw Tarin sword in hand. Tarin struck at him but the blow fell upon the horses' head and wounded him, and cut away the headstall, so that the reins fell on his neck, and the horse being thus at liberty, Angriote was carried against his enemy, and they dashed against each other and Tarin fell; then Angriote leaped lightly from his horse as one accustomed to such perils, and took his shield, and laid hand upon that sword with which he had heretofore dealt so many and mighty blows. He saw his nephew maintaining a brave sword-combat on horseback, and then made at the two brethren who stood by each other, and laid on him a heavy load like brave and strong Knights. But Angriote well defended himself, holding out his shield against one and laying on the other with the sword, so that he made them give back, for never stroke came from him that did not shear away the armour, for as I have told you this Knight was the best foyner with the sword of any in the King's dominions. So that their shields were soon chipt away, and their harness broken that the blood started through, nor was he so whole but that the blood ran from many wounds. When Sarquiles saw how his Uncle sped, and that he was still coping in equal battle with Adamas, he spurred his horse and grappled with his enemy, and there they struggled each to overthrow the other. Angriote seeing them drew nigh to succour Sarquiles if he should fall undermost, and the two brethren followed him to help their cousin. At length the two Knights fell from their horses, still grappling; then might you have seen a great conflict, Angriote pressing to help his nephew and the brethren to assist Adamas. But in that hour Angriote did such wonders in arms, and laid on such terrible and heavy blows that the brethren, albeit they did their utmost, could not save Adamas from the hands of Sarquiles. When Gandandel and Brocadan saw this, who till now had hoped that the valour of their sons might have defended their wickedness they withdrew from the window in great sorrow and pain of heart, and the King withdrew also, for all the good fortune which befell the friends of Amadis displeased him, and he would not witness the victory of Angriote. But all else who were present rejoiced to see that Gandandel and Brocadan would suffer some part of the punishment on earth which they deserved. The four Knights meantime continued their fierce conflict, but it did not long endure, for now Tarin and Corian gave ground and fled, seeking some place of safety, but finding none they turned, and struck again at their pursuers and then again fled, till they were smitten down and slain to the great joy of Madasima and her Damsels, and the Knights of the Firm Island, but above all of Oriana, who had never ceased praying to God to grant her friends that victory. Angriote then asked the Judges if there was aught more to be done? they replied, he had done enough for his honour, and led the two champions from the lists; their comrades then received and took them with Madasima to their tents where they were healed of their wounds.


_Here endeth the Second Book of Amadis of Gaul._


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.




INDEX.

VOL. II.


  CHAPTER 36.                                                           Page   _How Amadis and Galaor knew of this great treason and   took counsel to procure, if they could, the liberty of   the King and Oriana_                                       1

  CHAPTER 37.

  _How Don Galaor delivered King Lisuarte from the   captivity to which they were treacherously leading him   away_                                                      9

  CHAPTER 38.

  _How tidings came to the Queen that King Lisuarte was   made prisoner, and how Barsinan executed his treason,   and how at last he was overthrown and the King restored   to his kingdom_                                           17

  CHAPTER 39.

  _How Amadis came to succour the City of London, and   what he did there_                                        21

  CHAPTER 40.

  _How King Lisuarte held a Cortes which lasted twelve   days, at which great feastings were made, and of the many   Chiefs and Knights who came there_                        29

  CHAPTER 41.

  _Of the battle which Amadis had promised the fair child   Briolania to perform against Abiseos and his two sons in   revenge of her father's death_                            36

  CHAPTER 42.

  _How Don Galaor went with the Damsel in quest of the   Knight who had overthrown them, till he did battle with   him_                                                      43

  CHAPTER 43.

  _Showing how Don Florestan was the son of King Perion by   a fair Damsel, daughter to the Count of Salandia_         55

  CHAPTER 44.

  _How Don Galaor and Florestan, going towards the kingdom   of Sobradisa, met three Damsels at the Fountain of the Elm   Trees_                                                    72


  _Here beginneth the Second Book of Amadis of Gaul; and   because the great things which will be related in the   Fourth Book concerning Amadis are all relating to the   Firm Island, it behoves that in this second it should   be related what this Island was, and who left those   enchantments and the great riches which were therein_     84

  CHAPTER 2.

  _How Amadis with his brethren and his cousin Agrayes   went towards King Lisuarte, and how by adventure they went   to the Enchanted Firm Island, and of what befel them   there_                                                    91

  CHAPTER 3.

  _How Durin went with the letter of Oriana to Amadis,   and how when Amadis had seen the letter he abandoned   every thing in despair, and went to hide himself in the   forest_                                                  105

  CHAPTER 4.

  _How Gandalin and Durin followed the track of Amadis,   carrying his arms which he had left, and how they found   him, and how he did battle with a Knight and conquered   him_                                                     113

  CHAPTER 5.

  _Showing who the Knight was whom Amadis conquered, and   what had befallen him before he was conquered_           119

  CHAPTER 6.

  _How Don Galaor and Florestan and Agrayes went in quest   of Amadis, and how Amadis forsaking his arms and changing   his name betook himself to a solitary life with a good man   in a hermitage_                                          126

  CHAPTER 7.

  _How Durin returned to his Lady after having delivered   her bidding to Amadis, and of the grief she made for the   news_                                                    141

  CHAPTER 8.

  _How Guilan the Pensive took the shield and armour of   Amadis, which he found by the Fountain, and carried them   to the Court of King Lisuarte_                           146

  CHAPTER 9.

  _Relating how, Beltenebros being upon a Poor Rock,   Corisanda came there in a ship in search of her lover   Florestan, and of what happened, and what she said   in the Court of King Lisuarte_                           153

  CHAPTER 10.

  _How the Damsel of Denmark went in search of Amadis,   and by adventure after much toil came to the Poor Rock,   where Amadis was, who called himself Beltenebros_        166

  CHAPTER 11.

  _How Don Galaor and Florestan and Agrayes having gone   a long time in search of Amadis and found no trace of   him, came all disconsolate to the Court of King   Lisuarte_                                                173

  CHAPTER 12.

  _How, when King Lisuarte was at table, there came in a   strange Knight armed at all points, and defied the King   and all his Court, and of what passed between him and   Florestan, and how Oriana was comforted and Amadis   found_                                                   183

  CHAPTER 13.

  _How Beltenebros ordered arms to be made, and prepared   to see his Mistress Oriana, and of the adventures which   befel him upon the road_                                 195

  CHAPTER 14.

  _How Beltenebros having finished these adventures went   to the Fountain of the Three Channels, where he concerted   his going to Miraflores, where his Lady Oriana sojourned.   And how a strange Knight brought certain jewels, which   were to try true lovers to the Court of the King, and how   Amadis agreed with his Lady Oriana that they twain should   go in disguise to try them_                              213

  CHAPTER 15.

  _How Beltenebros and Oriana sent the Damsel of Denmark   to know what answer was given to their demand, and how   they went to the proof_                                  223

  CHAPTER 16.

  _How Beltenebros went to Miraflores and abode there with   his Lady Oriana after the conquest of the Sword and   Garland, and how he went from thence to the battle which   had been appointed with King Cildadan, and of what there   befel_                                                   239

  CHAPTER 17.

  _How King Cildadan and Don Galaor were carried away to   be cured, and how they were placed, the one in a strong   tower surrounded by the sea, the other in a garden with   high walls and iron railings, where each thought he was   in prison, not knowing by whom he had been brought there,   and of what befell them_                                 256

  CHAPTER 18.

  _How the King beheld a strange sight of fires upon the   sea, and of what happened_                               271

  CHAPTER 19.

  _How when King Lisuarte was talking with his Knights   how he would go against the Island of the Boiling Lake,   to deliver King Arban of North Wales and Angriote of   Estravaus, there came a Damsel of the race of the Giants   from the sea, and demanded before the Court that Amadis   should do battle with Ardan Canileo, and if he conquered   the prisoners should be released and the Island   surrendered to the King; but if Ardan Canileo won the   battle he desired nothing more than to carry the head of   Amadis to Madasima_                                      283

  CHAPTER 20.

  _How the battle was performed between Don Bruneo of   Bonamar, and Madaman the envious, brother to the   Insolent Damsel, and of the confusion which was   occasioned by envy among the friends of Amadis, for   which Amadis forsook the Court of King Lisuarte_         310

  CHAPTER 21.

  _How Amadis took leave of King Lisuarte and with him   ten Knights, his friends and kinsmen, who were the best   and bravest of the Court, and went their way to the Firm   Island, where Briolania proved the adventures of the Arch   of True Lovers and of the Forbidden Chamber, and how they   determined to deliver Madasima and her Damsels from the   King's power_                                            328

  CHAPTER 22.

  _How Oriana was greatly afflicted for the departure of   Amadis, and moreover to find herself great with child;   and how twelve Knights came from the Firm Island to   defend Madasima and the other Damsels, who were in danger   of death with them, though there was no just cause why   they should be put to death_                             347




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


The following corrections have been made to the original text:

    Page 2: how the party had separated[original has "seperated"]

    Page 5: Arcalaus and the others[original has "other"] ran at him

    Page 9: but dexterously[original has "dextrously"] moved aside

    Page 53: She answered[original has "ansswered"], A curse upon     him

    Page 65: I cannot forbear to pity.[period missing in original]

    Page 69: and turned to Abiseos[original has "Abiseous"]

    Page 94: in a higher niche[original has "nich"] than the other

    Page 106: observing what secrecy[original has "secresy"] Amadis     had chosen

    Page 124: Tell me, said[original has "siad"] he

    Page 127: two lions azure in a field or.[period missing in     original]

    Page 129: Say what you will, quoth Amadis[original has "Amaids"]

    Page 139: he returned, and[original has "aud"] this morning

    Page 159: there are strangers[original has "stangers"] here

    Page 159: serving-men were carrying[original has "carrrying"]     the sick Lady

    Page 170: having no power to[original has "so"] speak

    Page 188: I feel strange thoughts in me rebelling.[original has     a comma]

    Page 188: Queen Brisena, Oriana, Mabilia[original has     "Mabililia"], and Olinda

    Page 207: who always[original has "alway"] took this waggon     with him

    Page 211: then put on Basagante's[original has "Basangante's"]     helmet

    Page 230: but drew back greatly abashed.[original has a comma]     Next was Briolania[original has "Briloania"]

    Page 246: When Beltenebros[original has "Beltrenebros"] beheld     that he exclaimed

    Page 247: galloped after him[original has "him him"] sword in     hand

    Page 248: all rejoicing that[original has "that that"]     Beltenebros was Amadis

    Page 301: Florestan carried[original has "carcarried"] his lance

    Page 301: his helmet he looked at[original has "look-at" split     across a line break] his Lady

    Page 330: Sir, of all your household[original has "houshold"]

    Page 338: nothing more to apprehend to-night[original has "to     night"]

    Page 352: had hidden him in Brocadan's[original has "Brocadan"]     house

    Page 366: leave of the Queen and[original has "nd"] of Oriana

    Page 377: CHAPTER 11.[original has "CAAPTER 11" without a     period]

There is an Errata page at the end of Vol. IV. listing the following corrections:

VOL. II.

  100    18   —_saw_——_seen_.   115    18   —for God's speak——for God's _sake_ speak.   211    12   —_the_ blood——_this_ blood.   229     4   —then blessed——then _he_ blessed.   240     3   —unless miraculously——unless _God_ miraculously.   279    11   —_knew_ that I _know_——_know_ that I _knew_.   291    23   —so dangerous, they esteem it——so dangerous _did_ they esteem it.   324     7   —_King_——_Knight_.   339    12   love each truly——love each _other_ truly.   340     8   _vast_——_sweet_.

The listed corrections have been made to this text.






End of Project Gutenberg's Amadís of Gaul, Vol. II. of IV., by Vasco Lobeira



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMADIS OF GAUL, VOL. 2 ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms     of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online     at www.gutenberg.org. If you     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from         the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in         Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg         Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™         works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of         receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free         distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516, Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


