[CRL-froissart-boys  —  part 4 of 5, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

never return to France until they had engaged Philip von Artaveld and his forces; and it was for this reason they had drawn up their battalions as ready for the combat on the morrow. The Lords d’Albreth, de Coucy, and Sir Hugh de Hanlon were ordered to form the battalions, and place them in array. Sir William de Bannes and the Lord de Champreny were appointed marshals to attend to the quarters of the king and his battalion.

It was also ordered, that on the day of battle no one but the king and eight valiant men appointed to attend his person should be on horseback. The names of these eight men were as follows: the Lord de Raineval, Le Bègue de Villaines, Sir Aymemon de Pommiers, Sir Enguerrant de Haluyn, the Viscount d’Acy, Sir Guy le Baveux, Sir Nicholas de Pennel, and Sir William des Bourdes. The Lord de Raineval and Sir Enguerrant de Haluyn were to take post in front of the king, Le Bègue de Villaines and the Viscount d’Acy (who is called in several places hereafter the Viscount d’Aunoy) were to place themselves on each side; and Sir Aymemon de Pommiers, Sir Nicholas de Pennel, Sir Guy le Baveux, and Sir William des Bourdes were to take post in the rear. It was likewise ordered, that on the day of battle Sir Oliver de Clisson, Constable of France, and Sir William de Poitiers, should advance on horseback, to reconnoitre and observe the appearance of the enemy.




CHAPTER XVII.

     SOME FEW OF THE FRENCH, NOT BEING ABLE TO CROSS THE LIS AT THE      BRIDGE OF COMMINES, FIND MEANS OF DOING SO BY BOATS AND OTHER      CRAFT, UNKNOWN TO THE FLEMINGS.


The orders above mentioned were punctually obeyed; and the vanguard dislodged on the morrow, marching in order of battle toward Commines. They found the roads well made, for the Lord de Fransures and Sir Josse de Haluyn had paid great attention to them: this was on the Monday. When the Constable and Marshals of France, with the vanguard, arrived at the bridge of Commines, they were forced to halt; for it was so completely destroyed, that it was not in the power of man to repair it if any opposition should be made when they were attempting it, as the Flemings were in great force on the opposite side of the river, and ready to defend the pass against all who might wish to attack them: they were upward of nine thousand, under the command of Peter du Bois and others, who showed good inclinations to repulse any attempt. Peter du Bois had placed himself on the causeway, at the end of the bridge, with a battle-axe in his hand; and the Flemings were drawn up on each side.

The Constable of France and the lords with him, having considered the situation, thought it impossible to pass the river at that place unless the bridge were rebuilt; they ordered their servants to follow the course of the river, and examine its banks for about a league up and down. When they returned, they informed their masters, who were waiting for them, they had not been able to find any place where the cavalry could pass. Upon hearing this, the constable was much vexed, and said, “We have been badly advised to take this road: better would it have been for us to have gone to St. Omer than remain in this danger, or to have crossed the Scheld at Tournay, as the Lord de Coucy advised, and to have marched straight to Oudenarde and fought our enemies, since it is both our duty and inclination to combat them; and they are so presumptuous, they would have waited for us at their siege.” The Lord Louis Sancerre then said, “I am of opinion that we fix our quarters here for this day, and lodge our army, should it arrive, as well as we are able; and that we send to Lille to seek for boats and hurdles, that may come down the river, with which to-morrow we can throw a bridge from these fine meads, and cross over; for we have no other alternative.” Upon this Sir Josse de Haluyn said, “My lord, we have been informed that there will be great difficulties between this and Lille; for the river Menyn, on which all boats must pass to come hither, has been obstructed by large beams thrown across it by the Flemings who are in those parts: they have totally destroyed the bridge, and we learn it is impossible for any vessels or boats to pass.”--“I know not, then,” added the constable, “what we can now do. It will be better for us to take the road to Aire, and cross the Lis at that place, since we are unable to do so here.”

During the time the Constable and Marshals of France and Burgundy were in this dilemma at the bridge of Commines, several knights and squires silently withdrew, with the intent to hazard some gallant deeds of arms, and attempt to cross the river, whatever it might cost them. They meant likewise to combat the Flemings in their intrenchments, and open a passage, as I shall now relate. While the vanguard was on its march from Lille to Commines, the Lord de St. Py, and some other knights from Hainault, Flanders, Artois, and even France, had held a council without the knowledge of the constable or marshals. They said, “We will procure two or three boats, which we will launch into the river Lis, at a sheltered place below Commines, and will fix posts on each side of the river where it is not wide, to fasten cords to. We shall by this means soon convey over a large body of men; and by marching on the rear of our enemies we may attack them, and if victorious we shall gain the reputation of valiant men at arms.” After they had thus determined in council, the Lord de St. Py exerted himself so much that he procured from Lille a boat and cords, with every other necessary article. On the other hand, Sir Herbeaux de Belleperche and Sir John de Roye, who were companions in this expedition, had also caused a boat to be brought. Sir Henry de Manny, Sir John de Malatrait, and Sir John Chauderon, Bretons, who had been of this council, had likewise provided one, and followed the preceding companies.

The Lord de St. Py was the first who arrived at the river with his boat, cords, and fastenings. They fixed a strong stake, to which they tied the cord: three varlets then crossed over, and the boat, with the cords, being launched, they fixed on the opposite side another strong post, to which they fastened the other end of the cord; and, this being done, they returned with the boat to their master. It happened that the Constable and Marshals of France were at that time at the bridge of Commines, pondering how they could discover a passage. They were then informed of the intentions of the Lord de St. Py and the other knights; upon which the constable, addressing himself to the Lord Louis de Sancerre, said, “Marshal, go and see what they are doing, and, if it be possible to cross the river in the manner they propose, add some of our men to theirs.”

Just as these knights were preparing to embark, the Marshal of France came thither, attended by a large company of knights and squires. They made way for him, as was right. He stopped on the bank, and with pleasure saw the arrangement of the boats. The Lord de St. Py, addressing him, said, “My lord, is it agreeable to you that we should cross here?”--“I am very well pleased with it,” replied the marshal; “but you are running great risks: for if our enemies, who are at Commines, should know your intentions, they would do you great mischief.”--“My lord,” answered the Lord de St. Py, “nothing venture, nothing win: in the name of God and St. George we will cross over, and before to-morrow evening will fall suddenly on our enemies, and attack them.” The Lord de St. Py then placed his pennon in the boat, and was the first who stepped into it: he was followed by nine others, who were as many as the boat could hold, and instantly, by means of the cord they held, crossed over. When disembarked, in order to prevent themselves from being discovered, they entered a small alder-grove, where they lay hidden. Those on the bank, by means of the cord, drew the boat back. The Count de Conversant, Lord d’Anghien, embarked with his banner, with the Lord de Vertain his brother, and seven others. These nine then passed, and the third time others followed them.

The two other boats now arrived that belonged to Sir Herbaut de Belleperche, Sir John de Roye, and the Bretons; which were launched in the same manner the first had been. These knights then crossed, and none but determined men at arms did the same. It was a pleasure to see with what eagerness they embarked: at times a great crowd was pushing who should cross first, so that if the Marshal of France had not been there, who kept them in proper order, accidents would have happened from their overloading the boats.

News was brought to the constable and the lords of France at the bridge of Commines, how their people were crossing the river, when he said to the Seneschal de Rieux, “Go and examine this passage, I beg of you, and see if our people be passing as they tell us.” The Lord de Rieux was never happier than when he had this commission, and, clapping spurs to his horse, hastened thither with his whole company, to the amount of full forty men at arms. When he arrived at the passage where one hundred and fifty of his countrymen had already crossed, he immediately dismounted, and said he would also pass the river. The Marshal of France would not refuse him; and intelligence was sent to the constable, that his cousin the Lord de Rieux had crossed. The constable mused a little, and then said, “Make the crossbows shoot, and skirmish with the Flemings who are on the other side of the bridge, to occupy their attention, and prevent them from observing our people; for, if they should have any notion what they are about, they will fall upon them, destroy the passage, and kill all those who have crossed; and I would much rather die than that should happen.”

Upon this, the crossbows and infantry advanced. There were among them some who flung hand-grenades, which, bursting, cast out bolts of iron beyond the bridge, even as far as the town of Commines. The skirmish now began to be very sharp; and the vanguard, by their movements, seemed determined to cross the bridge if they could. The Flemings, being shielded up to their noses, made a good appearance, and defended themselves well. Thus passed this day, which was a Monday, in skirmishing; and it was soon dark, for at that season the days are very short. The boats, however, continued to carry over men at arms in great numbers, who on their landing hid themselves in the alder-wood, waiting for more.

You may easily guess what perils they were in; for, had those in Commines gained the least intelligence of them, they must have had them at their mercy, and conquered the greater part, besides taking the boats; but, God favored the other party, and consented that the pride of the Flemings should be humbled.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A SMALL BODY OF FRENCH, HAVING CROSSED THE LIS, DRAW UP IN BATTLE-ARRAY BEFORE THE FLEMINGS.


I maintain that all men of understanding must hold this enterprise of the boats, and passage of men at arms, as a deed of superior valor and enterprise. Toward evening the knights and squires of the vanguard were eager to cross with their companions; so that late in this Monday evening there were, on the Flanders side of the river, about four hundred men at arms, all the flower of knighthood, for no varlet was suffered to cross.

The Lord Louis de Sancerre, seeing so many gallant men (sixty banners and thirty pennons), said he should think himself to blame if he remained behind. He then entered the boats, with his knights and squires; and the Lord de Hangest, &c., crossed at the same time. When they were all assembled, they said, “It is time to march toward Commines, to look at our enemies, and see if we cannot make our quarters good in the town.” Upon this they tightened their arms, buckled their helmets on their heads in a proper manner, and, advancing through the marshes which are contiguous to the river, marched in order of battle, with banners and pennons displayed, as if they were immediately to engage. The Lord de St. Py was the principal conductor and commander-in-chief, because he knew the country better than any of the others.

As they were thus marching in close order, in their way toward the town, Peter du Bois and the Flemings were drawn up on the causeway; when, casting their eyes toward the meads, they saw this body of men at arms approaching. They were exceedingly astonished, and demanded from Peter du Bois, “By what devil of a road have these men at arms come? and how have they crossed the Lis?” He replied, “They must have crossed in boats, and we have known nothing of the matter; for there is neither bridge nor passable ford over the Lis between this and Courtray.”--“What shall we do?” said some of them to Peter du Bois: “shall we offer them battle?”--“By no means,” replied Peter: “let them advance, but we will remain in our strength and in our place: we are on high ground, and they on low, so that we have great advantage over them; and, if we descend to meet them in the plain, we shall lose it. Let us wait until the night become more obscure, and then we will consider how we had best act. They are not of force sufficient to withstand us in battle; and, besides, we are acquainted with all the roads of the country, of which they must be ignorant.” This advice was followed; for the Flemings never budged from their post, but remained steady at the foot of the bridge, drawn up in order of battle on the causeway, in silence, and, by their appearance, seemed as if they had not noticed what was passing. Those who had crossed the river continued advancing slowly through the marshes, following the course of it as they approached Commines.

The Constable of France, on the opposite side of the water, saw his men at arms, with banners and pennons fluttering in the wind, drawn up in a handsome small battalion, and marching toward Commines. On seeing this his blood began to run cold from the great dread he had of their being defeated; for he knew the Flemings were in great force on that side of the water. In the excess of rage he cried out, “Ah, St. Ives! ha, St. George! ha, Our Lady! what do I see there? I see in part the flower of our army, who are most unequally matched. I would rather have died than have witnessed this. Ah! Sir Louis de Sancerre, I thought you more temperate and better taught than I see you now are: how could you have hazarded so many noble knights and squires and men at arms against ten or twelve thousand men, who are proud, presumptuous, and well prepared, and who will show them no mercy, while we are unable, if there should be a necessity, to aid them? Ah, Rohan! ah, Laval! ah, Rieux! ah, Beaumanoir! ah, Longueville! ah, Rochfort! ah, Manny! ah, Malatrait! ah, Conversant! ah, such a one and such a one!--how afflicted am I for you all, when, without consulting me, you have run into such imminent danger! Why am I Constable of France? for if you be conquered I shall incur all the blame, and they will say I ordered you on this mad enterprise.” The constable, before he heard that such numbers of valiant men had crossed, had forbidden any of those near him to pass the river; but, when he saw the appearance of those who had passed, he said aloud, “I give free liberty for all who wish it to cross, if they be able.”

At these words the knights and squires stepped forth, seeking means to cross the bridge; but it was soon night, and they were forced to leave off their attempt, though they had begun to lay planks on the beams, and even some had placed their targets to make a road: so that the Flemings who were in Commines had enough to do to watch them, and were puzzled how to act, for on the one hand they saw below the bridge, in the marshes, a large body of men at arms who had halted with their lances advanced before them, and to whom great re-enforcements were coming, and, on the other, those of the vanguard on the opposite side of the bridge were constantly skirmishing with them, and exerting themselves lustily to repair the bridge.

In this situation were the French who had that evening crossed over in boats. They had halted on the marshes, in mud and filth up to their ankles. Now consider what must have been their courage and difficulties, when in these long winter-nights they thus remained a whole night with their arms and helmets on, with their feet in the mire, and without any sort of refreshments. Certainly, I say, they are worthy of great renown; for they were but a handful of men in comparison with the Flemings in Commines and in that neighborhood. They dared not therefore advance to attack them, and for this reason had halted, saying among themselves, “Let us stop here until it be daylight, when we shall have a sight of these Flemings who quit not the advantage of their intrenchments; but at last they will not fail to come to us, and when near we will shout our war-cries with a loud voice, each his own cry, or the cry of his lord, notwithstanding all our lords may not have joined us. By this means we shall frighten them, when we will fall on them with a thorough good will. It is in the power of God, and within the compass of our own ability, to defeat them; for they are badly armed, while our spears and swords are of well-tempered steel from Bordeaux; and the habergeons they wear will be a poor defence, and cannot prevent our blows from penetrating through them.” With such hopes as these did those who had passed the river comfort themselves, and remain in silence during the night.




CHAPTER XIX.

     THE FRENCH WHO HAD CROSSED THE LIS DEFEAT, WITH GREAT SLAUGHTER,      PETER DU BOIS AND THE FLEMINGS.--THE VANGUARD OF THE FRENCH ARMY      REPAIR AND PASS OVER THE BRIDGE OF COMMINES.


Peter du Bois, knowing these men at arms were in the marshes joining Commines, was not perfectly at his ease, for he was uncertain what might be the event. He had, however, under his command, six or seven thousand men, to whom, during the night, he had thus spoken: “The men at arms who have crossed the river to fight with us are neither of iron nor steel. They have labored hard this whole day, and have been all night standing in these marshes, so that it is possible that toward daybreak they will be overpowered with sleep. While they are in this situation, we will come slyly to attack them. Our numbers are sufficient to surround them, but, when we have so done, let no one dare to rush upon them, but remain silent; for, when it shall be proper time for you to act, I will inform you.” To this command of Peter they all promised obedience. On the other hand, the barons, knights, and squires, who had remained in the marshes so near the enemy, were far from being comfortable: some of them were up to their ankles in mud, and others half way up their legs. But their eagerness and joy, on gaining this pass with so much honor (for very gallant deeds of arms were likely to ensue), made them forget all their pains and difficulties. If it had been in summer-time, instead of the seventh day of November, they would have enjoyed it; but now the ground was cold, muddy, and dirty, and the nights were long. At times also it rained heavily on their heads; but it ran off, as they had their helmets on, and every thing prepared for the combat, and were only waiting for the enemy to come and attack them. The great attention they paid to be in readiness kept up their spirits, and made them almost forget their situation.

The Lord de St. Py full loyally acquitted himself in this expedition, as a scout and observer of what the Flemings were doing, though he was the commander-in-chief. He was continually on the lookout, and went privily to reconnoitre their motions. On his return he said to his companions in a low voice, “Now up: our enemies are very quiet. Perhaps they will advance on us at daybreak: therefore be on your guard, and prepare to act.” He would then return again to see if any thing were going forward, and then come back to tell what he had observed. This he continued to do until the hour which the Flemings had fixed upon to attack them. It was on the point of day when they began their march in close order, without uttering a word. The Lord de St. Py, who was on the watch, no sooner saw this manœuvre than he found they were in earnest, and, hastening to his companions, said to them, “Now, my lords, be alert: we have but to do our utmost, for our enemy is on his march, and will be instantly here. These barons of new date are advancing slowly, and think to catch and surprise us: show yourselves true men at arms, for we shall have a battle.” As the Lord de St. Py uttered these words, the knights and squires, with great courage, seized their long Bordeaux spears, and, having grasped them with a hasty will, placed themselves in as good order as any knights or squires could devise.

When the Flemings advanced to the combat, the knights and squires began to utter their war-cries, insomuch that the constable and vanguard, who had not yet crossed the bridge, heard them, and said, “Our friends are engaged: may God help them! for at this moment we are unable to give them any assistance.” Peter du Bois marched in front, and was followed by his Flemings; but, when they approached the French, they were received on the sharp points of their long Bordeaux spears, to which their coats of mail made not more resistance than if they had been of cloth thrice doubled; so that they passed through their bodies, heads, and stomachs.

When the Flemings felt these sharp spears which impaled them, they fell back, and the French advancing gained ground upon them; for there were none so hardy but that feared their strokes. Peter du Bois was one of the first who was wounded, and run through by a lance. It came quite out at his shoulder: he was also wounded on the head, and would have been instantly slain if it had not been for the body-guard he had formed, of thirty stout varlets, who, taking him in their arms, carried him as quickly as they could out of the crowd. The mud from the causeway to Commines was so deep that all these people sunk in it up to the middle of their legs. The men at arms, who had been long accustomed to their profession, drove down and slew the Flemings without let or hinderance: they shouted, “St. Py forever!” “Laval,” “Sancerre,” “Anghien!” and the war-cries of others who were there. The Flemings were panic-struck, and began to give way, when they saw these knights attack them so vigorously, and pierce them through with their spears. They retreated, and, falling back on each other, were followed by the French, who marched through them or around them, always attacking the thickest bodies. They no more spared killing them than if they had been so many dogs; and they were in the right, for, had the Flemings conquered, they would have served them the same.

The Flemings, finding themselves thus driven back, and that the men at arms had won the causeway and bridge, counselled together to set fire to the town, in hopes it would cause the French to retreat, or enable them to collect their people. This was executed, and fire set to several houses, which were instantly in flames; but they were disappointed in thinking by this to frighten the French, for they pursued them as valiantly as before, fighting and slaying them on the ground, or in the houses whither they had retreated. Upon this the Flemings made for the open plain, where they collected in a body. They sent to Vertain, Poperingue, Bergues, Rollers, Mesieres, Warneton, and the other neighboring towns, to urge them to come to their assistance at Commines. Those who fled, and the inhabitants of the villages near Commines, began to set their bells a-ringing, which clearly showed there was an engagement going forward. Some of them, however, began to slacken, and others to occupy themselves in saving what they could of their goods, and to carry them to Ypres or Courtray. Women and children ran thither, leaving their houses full of furniture, cattle, and grain. Others again marched in haste toward Commines, to help their countrymen who were fighting.

While this was passing, and those valiant knights who had crossed the Lis in boats were so gallantly engaged, the constable and vanguard were busily employed in attempting to repair the bridge and cross it. There was a very great throng, for the constable had given permission for all to pass it who could. There was much danger for those who crossed it first; and the lords who did so were obliged to step on targets thrown on the beams of the bridge. When they had crossed, they began to strengthen the bridge, for they found the planks lying on the ground, which they put in their proper places. During the night two wagon-loads of hurdles were brought, which were of great use to them, so that shortly it was made as strong as ever. On Tuesday the whole vanguard passed, took possession of the place, and, as they crossed, fixed their quarters in the town.

Those of the vanguard who were in Commines drove out the Flemings. There were slain of them in the streets and fields about four thousand, not including those killed in the pursuit, in windmills, and in monasteries, whither they had fled for shelter; for, as soon as the Bretons had crossed, they mounted their horses, and began a chase after the Flemings, and overran the country, which was then rich and plentiful.




CHAPTER XX.

     THE KING OF FRANCE CROSSES THE LIS AT THE BRIDGE OF COMMINES.--THE      TOWN OF YPRES SURRENDERS TO HIM.--THE KING OF FRANCE LODGES IN      YPRES.--PETER DU BOIS PREVENTS BRUGES FROM SURRENDERING TO THE      KING.--PHILIP VON ARTAVELD ASSEMBLES HIS FORCES TO COMBAT THE      FRENCH.


We will now return to the King of France, and say how he went on. When intelligence was brought him of Commines being conquered, that the Flemings were dispersed, and the bridge rebuilt, he set out from the abbey of Marquette where he had lodged, and marched with his whole army in battle-array, as was befitting him to do, toward Commines. The king and his uncles arrived at Commines on Tuesday, and took up their lodgings in the town; from whence the vanguard had marched for the hill of Ypres, where they had fixed their quarters. On the Wednesday morning the king advanced to the hill of Ypres, where he remained until the baggage and the remainder of his army should cross the river at Commines or at Warneton; for there were very numerous trains, and multitudes of horses.

While the king and his whole army were on Mount Ypres, many markets were there held, and plenty of pillage was sold to those of Lille, Douay, and Tournay, indeed, to all who wished to buy. A piece of cloth of Vexin, Malines, Poperingue, or Commines, was sold for one franc. People were clothed there too cheaply. Some Bretons and other pillagers, determined on gain, went in large bodies, and loaded carts and horses with their booty of cloths, linen, knives, money in gold and silver, dishes and plates of silver, wherever they found them, which they sent, well packed up, to a place of safety on the other side of the Lis, or by their servants into France.

The king and all the lords came to Ypres, where they quartered themselves as well as they could, and in as great numbers as the town would hold. They remained there to refresh themselves four or five days.

We will now return to Philip, and say what he was doing. Being eager to combat the King of France, as he plainly showed, he ordered, on his arrival at Ghent, every man capable of bearing arms, after leaving a sufficient garrison in the town, to follow him. All obeyed; for he gave them to understand that by the grace of God they would defeat the French, be lords of Ghent, and rank as sovereigns among other nations. Philip von Artaveld carried with him about ten thousand men as the arriere-ban: he had before sent to Bruges, Damme, Ardembourg, Sluys, to the seacoasts, the Quatre Mestiers, and constable-wicks of Grammont, Dendremonde, and Alost, and had raised from those places about thirty thousand more. He and his whole army were quartered one night before Oudenarde: on the morrow they marched away, and came before Courtray: he had with him about fifty thousand men. The King of France received intelligence that Philip von Artaveld was approaching, and, as it was said, with full sixty thousand men. Upon this the vanguard set off from Ypres, under the command of the Constable and Marshals of France, and encamped a league and a half from Ypres, between Rollers and Rosebecque. On the morrow the king and all the lords, with the main battalion and rear-guard, quartered themselves there also. I must say that these lords, while they were in the field, suffered greatly; for it was in the heart of winter, the beginning of December, and it rained every day. They slept on the roads every night, for they were in daily and hourly expectation of a battle: it was commonly said in the army, “They will come to-morrow;” which they believed, from the news the foragers brought when they returned from their excursions.

The king was quartered in the midst of his army. The lords of France were much vexed at Philip for delaying, for they were very impatient of being out in such bad weather. It should be known, that with the king were all the flower of French knighthood: it was therefore highly presumptuous in Philip von Artaveld and the Flemings to think of fighting with them; for if they had been satisfied with continuing their siege of Oudenarde, and had slightly intrenched themselves, the French, considering the wetness of the season, would never have marched to seek them; and, if they had done so, they would have combated them under the greatest disadvantages. But Philip was so vain of the good fortune he had met with at Bruges, that he thought nothing could withstand him, and he hoped he should be lord of the world. No other thoughts had he, and was nothing afraid of the King of France nor his army; for, if he had entertained any fears, he would not have done that which he did, as you shall hear related.




CHAPTER XXI.

     PHILIP VON ARTAVELD, HAVING ENTERTAINED HIS CAPTAINS AT SUPPER,      GIVES THEM INSTRUCTIONS HOW THEY ARE TO ACT ON THE MORROW AT THE      BATTLE OF ROSEBECQUE.


Philip von Artaveld, with his whole army, on the Wednesday evening preceding the battle, was encamped in a handsome position, tolerably strong, between a ditch and grove, and with so good a hedge in front that they could not easily be attacked. It was between the hill and town of Rosebecque where the king was quartered. That same evening Philip gave a magnificent supper to his captains at his quarters; for he had wherewithal to do so, as his provisions followed him. When the supper was over, he addressed them in these words: “My fair gentlemen, you are my companions in this expedition, and I hope to-morrow we shall have something to do; for the King of France, who is impatient to meet and fight with us, is quartered at Rosebecque. I therefore beg of you to be loyal, and not alarmed at any thing you shall see or hear; for we are combating in a just cause, to preserve the franchises of Flanders, and for our right. Admonish your men to behave well, and draw them up in such manner that, by this means and our courage, we may obtain the victory. To-morrow, through God’s grace, we shall not find any lord to combat with us, or any who will dare take the field, unless he mean to remain there; and we shall gain greater honor than if we could have depended on the support of the English; for, if they had been with us, they alone would have gained all the reputation. The flower of the French nobility is with the king, for he has not left one behind: order, therefore, your men not to grant quarter to any one, but to kill all who fall in their way. By this means we shall remain in peace; for I will and command, under pain of death, that no prisoners be made, except it be the King of France. With regard to the king, I wish to support him, as he is but a child, and ought to be forgiven; for he knows not what he does, and acts according as he is instructed: we will carry him to Ghent, and teach him Flemish: but as for dukes, earls, and other men at arms, kill them all. The common people of France will never be angry with us for so doing; for they wish, as I am well assured, that not one should ever return to France, and it shall be so.”

When these Flemish captains had retired, and all gone to their quarters to repose, the night being far advanced, those upon guard fancied they heard a great noise toward the Mont d’Or. Some of them were sent to see what it could be, and if the French were making any preparations to attack them in the night. On their return they reported that they had been as far as the place whence the noise came, but that they had discovered nothing. This noise, however, was still heard, and it seemed to some of them that their enemies were on the mount about a league distant.

Philip arose, and, wrapping himself in a gown, took a battle-axe, and went out of his tent to listen to this noise. It seemed to him as if there were a great tournament. He directly returned to his tent, and ordered his trumpet to be sounded to awaken the army. As soon as the sound of the trumpet was heard, it was known to be his. Those of the guard in front of the camp armed themselves, and sent some of their companions to Philip to know what he wished to have done, as he was thus early arming himself. On their arrival, he wanted to send them to the part whence the noise had come, to find out what it could be; but they reported that that had already been done, and that there was no cause found for it. Philip was much astonished; and they were greatly blamed, that, having heard a noise toward the enemy’s quarters, they had remained quiet. “Ha,” said they to Philip, “in truth we did hear a noise toward the Mont d’Or, and we sent to know what it could be; but those who had been ordered thither reported that there was nothing to be found or seen. Not having seen any positive appearance of a movement of the enemy, we were unwilling to alarm the army lest we should be blamed for it.” This speech of the guard somewhat appeased Philip; but in his own mind he marvelled much what it could be. Some said it was the devils of hell running and dancing about the place where the battle was to be, for the abundance of prey they expected.

Neither Philip von Artaveld nor the Flemings were quite at their ease after this alarm. They were suspicious of having been betrayed and surprised. They armed themselves leisurely with whatever they had, made large fires in their quarters, and breakfasted comfortably, for they had victuals in abundance. About an hour before day, Philip said, “I think it right that we march into the plain, and draw up our men; because, should the French advance to attack us, we ought not to be unprepared, nor in disorder, but properly drawn up like men, knowing well what we are to do.” All obeyed this order, and, quitting their quarters, marched to the heath beyond the grove. There was in front a wide ditch newly made, and in their rear quantities of brambles, junipers, and shrubs. They drew up at their leisure in this strong position, and formed one large battalion, thick and strong. By the reports from the constables they were about fifty thousand, all chosen men, who valued not their lives. Among them were about sixty English archers, who, having stolen away from their companions at Calais, to gain greater pay from Philip, had left behind them their armor in their quarters.

Every thing being arranged, each man took to his arms. The horses, baggage, women, and varlets were dismissed; but Philip von Artaveld had his page mounted on a superb courser, worth five hundred florins, which he had ordered to attend him, to display his state, and to mount if a pursuit of the French should happen, in order that he might enforce the commands which he had given to kill all. It was with this intention that Philip had posted him by his side. Philip had likewise from the town of Ghent about nine thousand men, well armed, whom he placed near his person; for he had greater confidence in them than any of the others: they therefore, with Philip at their head with banners displayed, were in front; and those from Alost and Grammont were next; then the men from Courtray, Bruges, Damme, Sluys, and the Franconate. They were armed, for the greater part, with bludgeons, iron caps, jerkins, and with gloves of iron-work. Each man had a staff with an iron point, and bound round with iron. The different townsmen wore liveries and arms, to distinguish them from one another. Some had jackets of blue and yellow, others wore a welt of black on a red jacket, others chevroned with white on a blue coat, others green and blue, others lozenged with black and white, others quartered red and white, others all blue. Each carried the banners of their trades. They had also large knives hanging down from their girdles. In this state they remained, quietly waiting for day, which soon came.




CHAPTER XXII.

     PHILIP VON ARTAVELD AND HIS FLEMINGS QUIT THE STRONG POSITION THEY      HAD TAKEN IN THE MORNING, TO ENCAMP ON MONT D’OR, NEAR TO      YPRES.--THE CONSTABLE AND ADMIRAL OF FRANCE, WITH SIR WILLIAM OF      POITIERS, SET OUT TO RECONNOITRE THEIR SITUATION.


On the Thursday morning all the men at arms of the army, the vanguard, the rear-guard, and the king’s battalion, armed themselves completely, except their helmets, as if they were about to engage; for the lords well knew the day could not pass without a battle, from the reports of the foragers on the Wednesday evening, who had seen the Flemings on their march demanding a battle. The King of France heard mass, as did the other lords, who all devoutly prayed to God that the day might turn out to their honor. In the morning there was a thick mist, which continued so long that no one could see the distance of an acre: the lords were much vexed at this, but they could not remedy it.

After the king’s mass, which had been attended by the constable and other great lords, it was ordered that those valiant knights Sir Oliver de Clisson, Constable of France, Sir John de Vienne, Admiral of France, and Sir William de Poitiers, who had been long used to arms, should reconnoitre the position of the Flemings, and report to the king and his uncles the truth of it; during which time the Lord d’Albreth and Sir Hugh de Châtillon were employed in forming the battalions. These three knights, leaving the king, set off on the flower of their steeds, and rode toward that part where they thought they should find the Flemings, and toward the spot where they had encamped the preceding night.

You must know that on the Thursday morning, when the thick mist came on, the Flemings having, as you have before heard, marched before daybreak to this strong position, had there remained until about eight o’clock, when, not seeing nor hearing any thing of the French, their numbers excited in them pride and self-sufficiency, and their captains, as well as others, began thus to talk among themselves: “What are we about, thus standing still, and almost frozen with cold? Why do we not advance with courage, since such is our inclination, and seek our enemies to combat them? We remain here to no purpose, for the French will never come to look for us. Let us at least march to Mont d’Or, and take advantage of the mountain.” Many such speeches were made, and they all consented to march to Mont d’Or, which was between them and the French. In order to avoid the ditch in their front, they turned the grove, and entered the plain. While they were thus on their march round the grove, the three knights came so opportunely that they reconnoitred them at their ease, and rode by the side of their battalions, which were again formed within a bow-shot from them. When they had considered them on the left, they did the same on the right, and thus carefully and fully examined them. The Flemings saw them plainly, but paid not any attention to them; nor did any one quit his ranks. The three knights were well mounted, and so much used to this business that they cared not for them. Philip said to his captains, “Our enemies are near at hand: let us draw up here in battle-array for the combat. I have seen strong appearances of their intentions: for these three horsemen who pass and repass have reconnoitred us, and are still doing so.”

[Illustration: The Three Knights reconnoitring the Flemings in the Mist.]

Upon this the Flemings halted on the Mont d’Or, and formed in one thick and strong battalion; when Philip said aloud, “Gentlemen, when the attack begins, remember our enemies were defeated and broken at the battle of Bruges by our keeping in a compact body. Be careful not to open your ranks, but let every man strengthen himself as much as possible, and bear his staff right before him. You will intermix your arms, so that no one may break you, and march straight forward with a good step, without turning to the right or left; and act together, so that, when the conflict begins, you may throw your bombards and shoot with your crossbows in such manner that our enemies may be thunderstruck with surprise.”

When Philip had formed his men in battle-array, and told them how to act, he went to the wing of his army in which he had the greatest confidence. Near him was his page on the courser, to whom he said, “Go, wait for me at that bush out of bow-shot; and, when thou shalt see the discomfiture of the French and the pursuit begin, bring me my horse, and shout my cry; they will make way for thee to come to me, for I wish to be the first in the pursuit.” The page, on these words, left his master, and did as he had ordered him. Philip placed near him, on the side of this wing, forty English archers whom he had in his pay. Now, if it be considered how well Philip had arranged this business, I am of opinion (and in this I am joined by several others) that he well knew the art of war; but in one instance, which I will relate, he acted wrong. It was in quitting the first strong position he had taken in the morning; for they would never have sought to fight him there, as it would have been too much to their disadvantage; but he wished to show that his people were men of courage, and had little fear of their enemies.




CHAPTER XXIII.

     THE BATTLE OF ROSEBECQUE, BETWEEN THE FRENCH AND FLEMINGS.--PHILIP      VON ARTAVELD IS SLAIN, AND HIS WHOLE ARMY DEFEATED.


The three knights returned to the King of France and to his battalions, which had already been formed and were marching slowly in order of battle; for there were many prudent and brave men, who had been long accustomed to arms, in the vanguard, in the king’s battalion, and in the rear-guard, who knew well what they were to do, for they were the flower of chivalry in Christendom. Way was made for them; and the Lord de Clisson spoke first, bowing to the king from his horse, and taking off the beaver he wore, saying, “Sire, rejoice: these people are our own, and our lusty varlets will fight well with them.”--“Constable,” replied the king, “God assist you! Now advance, in the name of God and St. Denis.” The knights before mentioned as the king’s body-guard now drew up in good order. The king created many new knights, as did different lords in their battalions, so that several new banners were displayed.

It was ordered, that when the engagement was about to commence, the battalion of the king, with the oriflamme of France, should march to the front of the army, that the van and rear guards should form the two wings as speedily as possible, and by this means enclose and straiten the Flemings, who were drawn up in the closest order, and gain a great advantage over them. Notice of this intended movement was sent to the rear-guard, of which the Count d’Eu, the Count de Blois, the Count de St. Pol, the Count de Harcourt, the Count de Châtillon, and the Lord de la Gere were commanders. The young Lord de Haurel displayed his banner this day before the Count de Blois, who also knighted Sir Thomas d’Istre, and Sir James de Hameth. According to the report of the heralds, there were this day created four hundred and sixty-seven knights.

The Lord de Clisson, Sir John de Vienne, and Sir William de Langres, having made their report to the king, left him, and went to their post in the vanguard. Shortly afterwards the oriflamme was displayed by Sir Peter de Villiers, who bore it. Some say (as they find it written) that it was never before displayed against Christians, and that it was a matter of great doubt during the march whether it should be displayed or not. However, the matter having been fully considered, they resolved to display it, because the Flemings followed opinions contrary to that of Pope Clement, and called themselves Urbanists; for which the French said they were rebellious and out of the pale of the Church. This was the principal cause why it had been brought and displayed in Flanders.

The oriflamme was a most excellent banner, and had been sent from heaven with great mystery: it is a sort of gonfalon, and is of much comfort in the day of battle to those who see it. Proof was made of its virtues at this time; for all the morning there was so thick a fog, that with difficulty could they see each other, but the moment the knight had displayed it, and raised his lance in the air, this fog instantly dispersed, and the sky was as clear as it had been during the whole year. The lords of France were much rejoiced when they saw this clear day, and the sun shine, so that they could look about them on all sides.

It was a fine sight to view these banners, helmets, and beautiful emblazoned arms: the army kept a dead silence, not uttering a sound, but eyed a large battalion of Flemings before them, who were marching in a compact body, with their staves advanced in the air, which looked like spears; and so great were their numbers, they had the appearance of a wood. The Lord d’Estonnenort told me that he saw (as well as several others), when the oriflamme was displayed, and the fog had dispersed, a white dove fly many times round the king’s battalion. When it had made several circles, and the engagement was about to begin, it perched on one of the king’s banners: this was considered as a fortunate omen.

The Flemings advanced so near, that they commenced a cannonade with bars of iron, and quarrels headed with brass. Thus was the battle begun by Philip and his men against the king’s battalion, which at the outset was very sharp; for the Flemings, inflamed with pride and courage, came on with vigor, and, pushing with shoulders and breasts like enraged wild boars, they were strongly interlaced, one with the other, that they could not be broken, nor their ranks forced. By this attack of cannons and bombards, the Lord d’Albaruin, banneret, Morlet de Haruin, and James Doré, on the side of the French, were first slain, and the king’s battalion obliged to fall back. But the van and rear guards pushed forward, and, by enclosing the Flemings, straitened them much. Upon the two wings these men at arms made their attack, and, with their well-tempered lances of Bordeaux, pierced through their coats of mail to the flesh. All who were assailed by them drew back to avoid the blows, for never would those that escaped return to the combat. By this means, the Flemings were so straitened that they could not use their staves to defend themselves. They lost both strength and breath, and, falling upon one another, were stifled to death without striking a blow.

Philip von Artaveld was surrounded, wounded by spears, and beaten down, with numbers of the Ghent men, who were his guards. When Philip’s page saw the ill success of his countrymen, being well mounted on his courser, he set off, and left his master, for he could not give him any assistance, and returned toward Courtray, on his way to Ghent. When the Flemings found themselves enclosed on two sides, there was an end to the business, for they could not assist each other. The king’s battalion, which had been somewhat disordered at the beginning, now recovered. The men at arms knocked down the Flemings with all their might. They had well-sharpened battle-axes, with which they cut through helmets, and disbrained heads: others gave such blows with leaden maces, that nothing could withstand them. Scarcely were the Flemings overthrown before the pillagers advanced, who, mixing with the men at arms, made use of the long knives they carried, and finished slaying whoever fell into their hands, without more mercy than if they had been so many dogs. The clattering on the helmets, by the axes and leaden maces, was so loud, that nothing else could be heard for the noise. I was told, that if all the armorers of Paris and Bruxelles had been there working at their trade, they could not have made a greater noise than these combatants did on the helmets of their enemies; for they struck with all their force, and set to their work with the greatest good-will. Some, indeed, pressed too forward into the crowd, and were surrounded and slain: in particular, Sir Louis de Gousalz, a knight from Berry, and Sir Fleton de Reniel. There were several more, which was a great pity; but in such a battle as this, where such numbers are engaged, it is not possible for victory to be obtained without being dearly bought; for young knights and squires, eager to gain renown, willingly run into perils in hopes of honor.

The crowd was now so great, and so dangerous for those enclosed in it, that the men at arms, if not instantly assisted, could not raise themselves when once down. By this were several of the French killed and smothered; but they were not many, for, when in danger, they helped each other. There was a large and high amount of the Flemings who were slain; and never was there seen so little blood spilt at so great a battle, where such numbers were killed. When those in the rear saw the front fail, and that they were defeated, they were greatly astonished, and began to throw away their staves and armor, to disband, and fly toward Courtray and other places, not having any care but to save themselves if possible. The Bretons and French pursued them into ditches, alder-groves, and heaths, where they fought with and slew them. Numbers were killed in the pursuit, between the field of battle and Courtray, whither they were flying in their way to Ghent.

This battle on Mont d’Or took place the twenty-seventh day of November, on the Thursday before Advent, in the year of grace 1382; and at that time the King of France was fourteen years of age.




CHAPTER XXIV.

     THE NUMBER OF SLAIN AT THE BATTLE OF ROSEBECQUE, AND PURSUIT      AFTERWARDS.--PHILIP VON ARTAVELD IS HANGED AFTER HE WAS DEAD.


Thus were the Flemings defeated on Mont d’Or, their pride humbled, and Philip von Artaveld slain; and with him nine thousand men from Ghent and its dependencies (according to the report of the heralds) on the spot, not including those killed in the pursuit, which amounted to twenty-five thousand more. This battle, from the beginning to the defeat, did not last more than half an hour.

When the King of France arrived at his camp, where his magnificent pavilion of red silk had been pitched, and when he had been disarmed, his uncles, and many barons of France, came, as was right, to attend him. Philip von Artaveld then came into his mind, and he said, “If Philip is dead or alive, I should like to see him.” They replied, they would have a search made for him. It was proclaimed through the army, that whoever should discover the body of Philip von Artaveld should receive one hundred francs. Upon this the varlets examined the dead, who were all stripped, or nearly so; and Philip through avarice was so strictly sought after, that he was found by a varlet, who had formerly served him some time, and who knew him perfectly. He was dragged before the king’s pavilion. The king looked at him for some time, as did the other lords. He was turned over and over to see if he had died of wounds, but they found none that could have caused his death. He had been squeezed in the crowd, and, falling into a ditch, numbers of Ghent men fell upon him, who died in his company. When they had sufficiently viewed him, he was taken from thence, and hanged on a tree. Such was the end of Philip von Artaveld.




BOOK III.[31]




CHAPTER I.

FROISSART SETS OUT ON JOURNEY TO BÉARN, TO SEEK ADMISSION TO THE HOUSEHOLD OF THE COUNT DE FOIX.


In order to know the truth of distant transactions, without sending upon the inquiry any other in place of myself, I took an opportunity of visiting that high and redoubted prince Gaston Phœbus, Count de Foix and de Béarn; for I well knew, that if I were so fortunate as to be admitted into his household, and to remain there in quiet, I could not choose a situation more proper to learn the truth of every event, as numbers of foreign knights and squires assembled there from all countries, attracted by his high birth and gentility. It fell out just as I had imagined.

I told this my intention to my very renowned lord the Count de Blois, and also the journey I wished to undertake, who gave me letters of recommendation to the Count de Foix. I began my journey, inquiring on all sides for news; and, through the grace of God, continued it, without peril or hurt, until I arrived at the count’s residence, at Orthès in Béarn, on St. Catherine’s Day in the year of grace 1388. The Count de Foix, as soon as he saw me, gave me a hearty welcome, adding, with a smile and in good French, that he was well acquainted with me, though he had never seen me before, but he had frequently heard me spoken of. He retained me in his household, and, by means of the letters which I had brought, gave me full liberty to act as I pleased as long as I should wish to remain with him. I there learnt the greater part of those events which had happened in the kingdoms of Castile, Portugal, Navarre, Aragon, even in England, in the Bourbonnois, and every thing concerning the whole of Gascony. He himself, when I put any question to him, answered it most readily, saying that the history I was employed on would in times to come be more sought after than any other; “because,” added he, “my fair sir, more gallant deeds of arms have been performed within these last fifty years, and more wonderful things have happened, than for three hundred years before.”

I was thus received by the Count de Foix in his hotel, and entertained according to my pleasure. My wish was to inquire after news relative to my history; and I had at my option barons, knights, and squires, who gave me information, as well as the gallant Count de Foix himself. I will therefore illustrate, in good language, all I there learnt, to add to my materials, and to give examples to those worthies who wish to advance themselves in renown. If I have heretofore dwelt on gallant deeds, attacks, and captures of castles, towns, and forts, on hard-fought battles and skirmishes, many more will now ensue; all of which, by God’s grace, I will truly narrate.




CHAPTER II.

     SIR JOHN FROISSART, IN HIS JOURNEY TOWARD BÉARN, IS ACCOMPANIED BY      A KNIGHT ATTACHED TO THE COUNT DE FOIX, WHO RELATES TO HIM HOW THE      GARRISON OF LOURDE TOOK ORTINGAS AND LE PAILLIER, ON THE RENEWAL OF      THE WAR IN GUYENNE, AFTER THE RUPTURE OF THE PEACE OF BRETIGNY.


At the time I undertook my journey to visit the Count de Foix, reflecting on the diversity of countries I had never seen, I set out from Carcassonne, leaving the road to Toulouse on the right hand, and came to Monteroral, then to Tonges, then to Belle, then to the first town in the county of Foix; from thence to Maisieres, to the castle of Sauredun; then to the handsome city of Pamiers, which belongs to the Count de Foix, where I halted to wait for company that were going to Béarn, where the count resided. I remained in the city of Pamiers three days; it is a very delightful place, seated among fine vineyards, and surrounded by a clear and broad river called the Liege. Accidentally, a knight attached to the Count de Foix, called Sir Espaign du Lyon, came thither on his return from Avignon: he was a prudent and valiant knight, handsome in person, and about fifty years of age. I introduced myself to his company, as he had a great desire to know what was doing in France. We were six days on the road travelling to Orthès. As we journeyed, the knight, after saying his orisons, conversed the greater part of the day with me, asking for news; and when I put any questions to him he very willingly answered them. On our departure from Pamiers we crossed the mountain of Cesse, which is difficult of ascent, and passed near the town and castle of Ortingas, which belongs to the King of France, but did not enter it. We went to dine at a castle of the Count de Foix, half a league farther, called Carlat, seated on a high mountain. After dinner the knight said, “Let us ride gently: we have but two leagues of this country (which are equal to three of France) to our lodging.”--“Willingly,” answered I. “Now,” said the knight, “we have this day passed the castle of Ortingas, the garrison of which did great mischief to all this part of the country. Peter d’Anchin had possession of it; he took it by surprise, and has gained sixty thousand francs from France.”--“How did he get so much?” said I. “I will tell you,” replied the knight. “On the feast of Our Lady, the middle of August, a fair is holden, where all the country assemble, and there is much merchandise brought thither during that time. Peter d’Anchin and his companions of the garrison of Lourde had long wanted to gain this town and castle, but could not devise the means. They had, however, in the beginning of May, sent two of their men, of very simple outward appearance, to seek for service in the town: they soon found masters who were so well satisfied with them, that they went in and out of the town whenever they pleased, without any one having the smallest suspicion of them.

“When mid-August arrived, the town was filled with foreign merchants from Foix, Béarn, and France; and you know, when merchants meet, after any considerable absence, they are accustomed to drink plentifully together to renew their acquaintance, so that the houses of the masters of the two servants were quite filled, where they drank largely, and their landlords with them. At midnight Peter d’Anchin and his company advanced toward Ortingas, and hid themselves and horses in the wood through which we passed. He sent six varlets with two ladders to the town, who, having crossed the ditches where they had been told was the shallowest place, fixed their ladders against the walls; the two pretended servants, who were in waiting, assisted them (while their masters were seated at table) to mount the walls. They were no sooner up, than one of the servants conducted their companions toward the gate where only two men guarded the keys: he then said to them, ‘Do you remain here, and not stir until you shall hear me whistle; then sally forth, and slay the guards. I am well acquainted with the keys, having more than seven times guarded the gate with my master.’

“As he had planned, so did they execute, and hid themselves well. He then advanced to the gate, and, having listened, found the watch drinking: he called them by their names, for he was acquainted with them, and said, ‘Open the door: I bring you the best wine you ever tasted, which my master sends you that you may watch the better.’ Those who knew the varlet imagined he was speaking the truth, and opened the door of the guardroom: upon this he whistled, and his companions sallied forth, and pushed between the door, so that they could not shut it again. The guards were thus caught cunningly, and so quietly slain that no one knew any thing of it. They then took the keys, and went to the gate, which they opened, and let down the drawbridge so gently it was not heard. This done, they sounded a horn with one blast only, which those in ambuscade hearing, they mounted their horses, and came full gallop over the bridge into the town, where they took all its inhabitants, either at table or in their beds. Thus was Ortingas taken by Peter d’Anchin of Bigorre and his companions in Lourde.”

I then asked the knight, “But how did they gain the castle?”--“I will tell you,” said Sir Espaign du Lyon. “At the time the town was taken, by ill-luck the governor was absent, supping with some merchants from Carcassonne, so that he was made prisoner; and on the morrow Peter d’Anchin had him brought before the castle wherein were his wife and children, whom he frightened by declaring he would order the governor’s head to be struck off if they did not enter into a treaty to deliver up the castle. It was concluded, that, if his lady would surrender, the governor should be given up to her, with permission to march unmolested away with every thing that belonged to them. The lady, who found herself in such a critical situation, through love to him who could not now defend her, in order to recover her husband and to avoid greater dangers, surrendered the castle, when the governor, his wife, and children, set out with all that belonged to them, and went to Pamiers. By this means Peter d’Anchin captured the town and castle of Ortingas; and, when they entered the place, he and his companions gained thirty thousand francs, as well in merchandise which they found there, as in good French prisoners. All those who were from the county of Foix or Béarn received their liberty, with their goods untouched.

“Peter d’Anchin held Ortingas for full five years; and he and his garrison made frequent excursions as far as the gates of Carcassonne, which is sixteen long leagues distant, greatly ruining the country, as well by the ransoms of towns which compounded, as by the pillage they made. During the time Peter d’Anchin garrisoned Ortingas, some of his companions made a sally, being desirous of gain, and came to a castle a good league off, called Le Paillier, of which Raymond du Paillier, a French knight, was the lord. They this time accomplished their enterprise, having before attempted it in vain; and, by means of a scalado, they took the castle, the knight and his lady in bed. They kept possession of it, allowing the lady and the children to depart, but detained the knight four months in his own castle, until he had paid four thousand francs for his ransom. In short, after they had sufficiently harassed the country, they sold these two castles, Ortingas and Le Paillier, for eight thousand francs, and then retired to Lourde, their principal garrison. Such feats of arms and adventures were these companions daily practising.




CHAPTER III.

     FROISSART CONTINUES HIS JOURNEY.--IN TRAVELLING FROM TOURNAY TO      TARBES, THE KNIGHT RELATES TO HIM HOW THE GARRISON OF LOURDE HAD A      SHARP RENCOUNTER WITH THE FRENCH FROM THE ADJACENT GARRISONS.


In the morning we mounted our horses, set out from Tournay, passed the river Lesse at a ford, and, riding toward the city of Tarbes, entered Bigorre.

I recollected what he had said some days before respecting the country of Larre and Mengeant de Lourde, and, reminding him of them, said, “My lord, you promised that when we came to the country of Larre, you would tell me more of Mengeant de Lourde, and the manner of his death.”--“It is true,” replied the knight: “come and ride by my side, and I will tell it you.” I then pushed forward to hear him the better, when he began as follows:--

“During the time Peter d’Anchin held the castle and garrison of Ortingas, as I have before related, those of Lourde made frequent excursions at a distance from their fort, when they had not always the advantage.

“It was told to the governor of Tarbes, a squire of Gascony, called Ernauton Biffete, how those of Lourde were overrunning and harassing the country; and he sent information of this to the Lord de Benach and to Enguerros de Lane, son of Sir Raymond, and also to the Lord de Barbasan, adding, he was determined to attack them. These knights and squires of Bigorre, having agreed to join him, assembled their men in the town of Tournay, through which the garrison of Lourde generally returned. When those of Lourde heard that the French garrisons were waiting for them at Tournay, they began to be alarmed, and called a council to determine how to conduct their pillage in safety. It was resolved to divide themselves into two parties: one, consisting of servants and pillagers, was to drive the booty, and take by-roads to Lanebourg, crossing the bridge of Tournay, and the river Lesse between Tournay and Malvoisin; the other division was to march in order of battle on the high grounds, and to make an appearance as if they meant to return by the pass of Larre below Marteras, but to fall back between Barbasan and Montgaillard, in order that the baggage might cross the river in safety. They were to meet all together at Montgaillard, from whence they would soon be at Lourde.

“The French, in like manner as those of Lourde, had called a council respecting their mode of acting. Sir Monant de Barbasan and Ernauton Biscete said, ‘Since we know the men of Lourde are bringing home great plunder and many prisoners, we shall be much vexed if they escape us: let us therefore form two ambuscades, for we are enough for both.’ Upon this it was ordered, that Le Bourg d’Espaign, Sir Raymond de Benach, and Enguerros de Lane, with one hundred spears, should guard the passage at Tournay, for the cattle and prisoners must necessarily cross the river; and the Lord de Barbasan and Ernauton Biscete, with the other hundred lances, should reconnoitre, if perchance they could come up with them. They separated from each other; and the Lord de Benach, and the Bourg d’Espaign, placed themselves in ambuscade at the bridge between Tournay and Malvoisin. The other division rode to the spot where we now are, which is called the Larre, and there the two parties met. They instantly dismounted, and, leaving their horses to pasture, with pointed lances advanced, for a combat was unavoidable, shouting their cries, ‘St. George for Lourde!’ ‘Our Lady for Bigorre!’

“They charged each other, thrusting their spears with all their strength, and, to add greater force, urged them forward with their breasts. The combat was very equal; and for some time none were struck down, as I heard from those present. When they had sufficiently used their spears, they threw them down, and with battle-axes began to deal out terrible blows on both sides. When any were so worsted or out of breath that they could not longer support the fight, they seated themselves near a large ditch full of water in the middle of the plain, when, having taken off their helmets, they refreshed themselves: this done, they replaced their helmets, and returned to the combat. I do not believe there ever was so well-fought or so severe a battle as this of Marteras in Bigorre, since the famous combat of thirty English against thirty French knights in Brittany.

“They fought hand to hand; and Ernauton de Sainte Colombe, an excellent man at arms, was on the point of being killed by a squire of the country called Guillonet de Salenges, who had pushed him so hard that he was quite out of breath, when I will tell you what happened: Ernauton de Sainte Colombe had a servant who was a spectator of the battle, neither attacking nor attacked by any one; but, seeing his master thus distressed, he ran to him, and, wresting the battle-axe from his hands, said, ‘Ernauton, go and sit down: recover yourself: you cannot longer continue the battle.’ With this battle-axe he advanced upon the squire, and gave him such a blow on the helmet as made him stagger and almost fall down. Guillonet, smarting from the blow, was very wroth, and made for the servant to strike him with his axe on the head; but the varlet avoided it, and grappling with the squire, who was much fatigued, turned him round, and flung him to the ground under him, when he said, ‘I will put you to death, if you do not surrender yourself to my master.’--‘And who is thy master?’--‘Ernauton de Sainte Colombe, with whom you have been so long engaged.’ The squire, finding he had not the advantage, being under the servant, who had his dagger ready to strike, surrendered on condition to deliver himself prisoner, within fifteen days, at the castle of Lourde, whether rescued or not. Of such service was this servant to his master; and I must say, Sir John, that there was a superabundance of feats of arms that day performed, and many companions were sworn to surrender themselves at Tarbes and at Lourde. Ernauton Biscete and Le Mengeant de Sainte Basile fought hand to hand, without sparing themselves, and performed many gallant deeds, while all the others were fully employed: however, they fought so vigorously that they exhausted their strength, and both were slain on the spot. Thus fell Ernauton Biscete and Le Mengeant de Sainte Basile.”

“By my faith,” said I to the knight, “I have listened to

[Illustration: How the Bourg d’Espaign fed the Fire in the great Fire-place of the Count of Foix.]

you with pleasure; and in truth it was a very severe affair for so small a number. But what became of those who conducted the pillage?”--“I will tell you,” replied he. “At the bridge of Tournay, below Malvoisin, where they intended to cross, they found the Bourg d’Espaign in ambuscade, who, on their arrival, sallied out upon them, being in sufficient force. Those of Lourde could not retreat, and were obliged to abide the event. I must truly say that the combat was as severe and as long, if not longer than that at Marteras. The Bourg d’Espaign performed wonders: he wielded a battle-axe, and never hit a man with it but he struck him to the ground. He was well formed for this, being of a large size, strongly made, and not too much loaded with flesh. He took with his own hand the two captains, the Bourg de Cornillac and Perot Palatin de Béarn.”

“Holy Mary!” said I to the knight, “this Bourg d’Espaign, is he so strong a man as you tell me?”--“Yes, that he is, by my troth,” said he, “and you will not find his equal in all Gascony for vigor of body: it is for this the Count de Foix esteems him as his brother in arms. Three years ago I saw him play a ridiculous trick, which I will relate to you. On Christmas Day, when the Count de Foix was celebrating the feast with numbers of knights and squires, as is customary, the weather was piercing cold; and the count had dined, with many lords, in the hall. After dinner he rose, and went into a gallery, which has a large staircase of twenty-four steps: in this gallery is a chimney where is a fire kept when the count inhabits it, otherwise not; and the fire is never great, for he does not like it: it is not for want of blocks of wood, for Béarn is covered with wood in plenty to warm him if he had chosen it, but he has accustomed himself to a small fire. When in the gallery he thought the fire too small, for it was freezing, and the weather very sharp; and said to the knights around him, ‘Here is but a small fire for this weather.’ Ernauton d’Espaign instantly ran down stairs (for, from the windows of the gallery which looked into the court, he had seen a number of asses with billets of wood for the use of the house), and seizing the largest of these asses, with his load, threw him over his shoulders, and carried him up stairs, pushing through the crowd of knights and squires who were around the chimney, and flung ass and load, with his feet upward, on the dogs of the hearth; to the delight of the count, and the astonishment of all, at the strength of the squire, who had carried, with such ease, so great a load up so many steps.”

This feat of strength did I hear; and all the histories of Sir Espaign du Lyon gave me such satisfaction and delight, I thought the road was much too short.




CHAPTER IV.

SIR JOHN FROISSART ARRIVES AT ORTHÈS.--AN OLD SQUIRE RELATES TO HIM THE CRUEL DEATH OF THE ONLY SON OF THE COUNT OF FOIX.


On the morrow we set out, and dined at Montgerbal, when having remounted, and drunk a cup at Ercie, we arrived by sunset at Orthès. The knight dismounted at his own house; and I did the same at the Hotel of the Moon, kept by a squire of the count, called Ernauton du Pin, who received me with much pleasure on account of my being a Frenchman. Sir Espaign du Lyon, who had accompanied me, went to the castle to speak with the count on his affairs. He found him in his gallery, for a little before that hour he had dined. It was a custom with the count, which he had followed from his infancy, to rise at noon, and sup at midnight.

The knight informed him of my arrival, and I was instantly sent for; for he is a lord above all others who delights to see strangers, in order to hear news. On my entering, he received me handsomely, and retained me of his household; where I staid upward of twelve weeks well entertained, as were my horses. Our acquaintance was strengthened by my having brought with me a book which I had made at the desire of Winceslaus of Bohemia, Duke of Luxembourg and Brabant. In this book, called “Le Meliador,” are contained all the songs, ballads, roundelays, and virelays, which that gentle duke had composed, and of them I had made this collection. Every night after supper I read out to him parts; during which time neither he nor any one else spoke, for he was desirous I should be well heard, and took much delight in it. When any passages were not perfectly clear, he himself discussed them with me, not in his Gascon language, but in very good French.

I shall relate to you several things respecting him and his household, for I tarried there as long as I could gain any information. Count Gaston Phœbus de Foix, of whom I am now speaking, was at that time fifty-nine years old; and I must say, that although I have seen very many knights, kings, princes, and others, I have never seen any so handsome, either in the form of his limbs and shape, or in countenance, which was fair and ruddy, with gray and tender eyes, that gave delight whenever he chose to express affection. He was so perfectly formed, one could not praise him too much. He loved earnestly the things he ought to love, and hated those which it was becoming him so to hate. He was a prudent knight, full of enterprise and wisdom. He had never any men of abandoned character with him, reigned prudently, and was constant in his devotions. There were regular nocturnals from the Psalter, prayers from the rituals to the Virgin, to the Holy Ghost, and from the burial-service. He had every day distributed as alms, at his gate, five florins in small coin, to all comers. He was liberal and courteous in his gifts; and well knew how to take when it was proper, and to give back where he had confidence. He mightily loved dogs above all other animals, and during the summer and winter amused himself much with hunting. He never liked any foolish works nor ridiculous extravagances; and would know every month the amount of his expenditure. He chose from his own subjects twelve of the most able to receive and administer his finances: two of them had the management for two months, when they were changed for two others; and from them he selected one as comptroller, in whom he placed his greatest confidence, and to whom all others rendered their accounts. This comptroller accounted by rolls or written books, which were laid before the count. He had certain coffers in his apartment, from whence he took money to give to different knights, squires, or gentlemen, when they came to wait on him, for none ever left him without a gift; and these sums he continually increased, in order to be prepared for any event that might happen. He was easy of access to all, and entered very freely into discourse, though laconic in his advice and in his answers. He employed four secretaries to write and copy his letters; and these secretaries were obliged to be in readiness the moment he came out from his closet. He called them neither John, Walter, nor William, but his good-for-nothings, to whom he gave his letters after he had read them, either to copy, or to do any thing else he might command.

In such manner did the Count de Foix live. When he quitted his chamber at midnight for supper, twelve servants bore each a lighted torch before him, which were placed near his table, and gave a brilliant light to the apartment. The hall was full of knights and squires; and there were plenty of tables laid out for any person who chose to sup. No one spoke to him at his table, unless he first began a conversation. He commonly ate heartily of poultry, but only the wings and thighs; for in the daytime he neither ate nor drank much. He had great pleasure in hearing minstrels, as he himself was a proficient in the science, and made his secretaries sing songs, ballads, and roundelays. He remained at table about two hours; and was pleased when fanciful dishes were served up to him, which having seen, he immediately sent them to the tables of his knights and squires.

In short, every thing considered, though I had before been in several courts of kings, dukes, princes, counts, and noble ladies, I was never at one that pleased me more, nor was I ever more delighted with feats of arms, than at this of the Count de Foix.

I was very anxious to know, seeing the hotel of the count so spacious and so amply supplied, what was become of his son Gaston, and by what accident he had died, for Sir Espaign du Lyon would never satisfy my curiosity. I had made so many inquiries, that at last an old and intelligent squire informed me:--

“Gaston, the son of my lord, grew up, and became a fine young gentleman. He was married to the daughter of the Count d’Armagnac, sister to the present count and to Sir Bernard d’Armagnac; and by this union peace was insured between Foix and Armagnac. The youth might be about fifteen or sixteen years old: he was a very handsome figure, and the exact resemblance of his father in his whole form.

“He took it into his head to make a journey into Navarre, to visit his mother[32] and uncle; but it was an unfortunate journey for him and for this country. On his arrival at Navarre, he was splendidly entertained; and he staid some time with his mother. On taking leave, he could not prevail on her, notwithstanding his remonstrances and entreaties, to accompany him back; for, the lady having asked if the Count de Foix, his father, had ordered him to bring her back, he replied that when he set out no such orders had been given; which caused her to fear trusting herself with him. She therefore remained; and the heir of Foix went to Pampeluna to take leave of his uncle. The king entertained him well, and detained him upward of ten days. On his departure, he made him handsome presents, and did the same by his attendants. The last gift the king gave him was the cause of his death, and I will tell you how it happened. As the youth was on the point of setting out, the king took him privately into his chamber, and gave him a bag full of powder, which was of such pernicious quality as would cause the death of any one that ate of it. ‘Gaston, my fair nephew,’ said the king, ‘will you do what I am about to tell you? You see how unjustly the Count de Foix hates your mother, who being my sister, it displeases me as much as it should you. If you wish to reconcile your father to your mother, you must take a small pinch of this powder, and, when you see a proper opportunity, strew it over the meat destined for your father’s table; but take care no one sees you. The instant he shall have tasted it, he will be impatient for his wife, your mother, to return to him; and they will love each other henceforward so strongly, they will never again be separated. You ought to be anxious to see this accomplished. Do not tell it to any one; for, if you do, it will lose its effect.’ The youth, who believed every thing his uncle the King of Navarre had told him, replied, he would cheerfully do as he had said; and on this he departed from Pampeluna, on his return to Orthès. His father the Count de Foix received him with pleasure, and asked what was the news in Navarre, and what presents and jewels had been given him; he replied, ‘Very handsome ones,’ and showed them all, except the bag which contained the powder.

“It was customary, in the hotel de Foix, for Gaston and his bastard brother Evan to sleep in the same chamber. They mutually loved each other, and were dressed alike, for they were nearly of the same size and age. It fell out, that their clothes were once mixed together; and, the coat of Gaston being on the bed, Evan, who was malicious enough, noticing the powder in the bag, said to Gaston, ‘What is this that you wear every day on your breast?’ Gaston was not pleased at the question, and replied, ‘Give me back my coat, Evan: you have nothing to do with it.’ Evan flung him his coat, which Gaston put on, but was very pensive the whole day. Three days after, as if God was desirous of saving the life of the Count de Foix, Gaston quarrelled with Evan at tennis, and gave him a box on the ear. The boy was vexed at this, and ran crying to the apartment of the count, who had just heard mass. The count, an seeing him in tears, asked what was the matter. ‘In God’s name, my lord,’ replied Evan, ‘Gaston has beaten me; but he deserves beating much more than I do.’--‘For what reason?’ said the count, who began to have some suspicions. ‘On my faith,’ said Evan, ‘ever since his return from Navarre, he wears on his breast a bag of powder: I know not what use it can be of, nor what he intends to do with it; except that he has once or twice told me, his mother would soon return hither, and be more in your good graces than ever she was.’--‘Ho!’ said the count, ‘hold thy tongue, and be sure thou do not mention what thou hast just told me to any man breathing.’--‘My lord,’ replied the youth, ‘I will obey you.’ The Count de Foix was very thoughtful on this subject, and remained alone until dinner-time, when he rose up, and seated himself as usual at his table in the hall. His son Gaston always placed the dishes before him, and tasted the meats.[33] As soon as he had served the first dish, and done what was usual, the count cast his eyes on him, having formed his plan, and saw the strings of the bag hanging from his pourpoint. This sight made his blood boil, and he said, ‘Gaston, come hither: I want to whisper you something.’ The youth advanced to the table, when the count, opening his bosom, undid his pourpoint, and with his knife cut away the bag. The young man was thunderstruck, and said not a word, but turned pale with fear, and began to tremble exceedingly, for he was conscious he had done wrong. The count opened the bag, took some of the powder, which he strewed over a slice of bread, and, calling a dog to him, gave it him to eat. The instant the dog had eaten a morsel, his eyes rolled round in his head, and he died. The count on this was very wroth, and indeed had reason. Rising from table, he would have struck his son with a knife; but the knights and squires rushed in between them, saying, ‘For God’s sake, my lord, do not be too hasty, but make further inquiries before you do any ill to your son.’ The first words the count uttered were in Gascon: ‘Ho, Gaston, thou traitor! for thee, and to increase thy inheritance which would have come to thee, have I made war, and incurred the hatred of the kings of France, England, Spain, Navarre, and Aragon, and have borne myself gallantly against them; and thou wishest to murder me! Thy disposition must be infamously bad: know therefore thou shalt die with this blow.’ And leaping over the table, with a knife in his hand, he would have slain him; but the knights and squires again interfered, and on their knees said to him with tears, ‘Ah, ah! my lord, for Heaven’s sake, do not kill Gaston: you have no other child. Let him be confined, and inquire further into the business. Perhaps he was ignorant what was in the bag, and may therefore be blameless.’--‘Well,’ replied the count, ‘let him be confined in the dungeon, but so safely guarded that he may be forthcoming.’ The youth was therefore confined in this tower. I will tell you the cause of his death, since I have said so much on the subject. The Count de Foix had caused him to be confined in a room of the dungeon where was little light: there he remained for ten days. He scarcely ate or drank any thing of the food which was regularly brought to him, but threw it aside. The count would not permit any one to remain in the chamber to advise or comfort him: he therefore never put off the clothes he had on when he entered his prison. This made him melancholy, and vexed him, for he did not expect so much harshness: he therefore cursed the hour he was born, and lamented that he should come to such an end. On the day of his death, those who brought him food said, ‘Gaston, here is meat for you.’ He paid not any attention to it, but said, ‘Put it down.’ The person who served him, looking about, saw all the meat untouched that he had brought thither the last days: then, shutting the door, he went to the count, and said, ‘My lord, for God’s sake, look to your son: he is starving himself in his prison. I do not believe he has eaten any thing since his confinement; for I see all that I have carried to him lying on one side untouched.’ On hearing this, the count was enraged, and, without saying a word, left his apartment, and went to the prison of his son. In an evil hour, he had in his hand a knife, with which he had been paring and cleaning his nails; he held it by the blade so closely that scarcely the thickness of a groat appeared of the point, when, pushing aside the tapestry that covered the entrance of the prison, through ill luck, he hit his son on a vein of his throat, as he uttered, ‘Ha, traitor, why dost thou not eat?’ and instantly left the room, without saying or doing any thing more. The youth was much frightened at his father’s arrival, and withal exceedingly weak from fasting. The point of the knife, small as it was, cut a vein, which as soon as he felt he turned himself on one side, and died. The count had barely got back again to his apartment, when the attendants of his son came, and said, ‘My lord, Gaston is dead.’--‘Dead!’ cried the count. ‘Yes, God help me! indeed he is, my lord.’ The count would not believe it, and sent one of his knights to see. The knight, on his return, confirmed the news. The count was now bitterly affected, and cried out, ‘Ha, ha, Gaston! what a sorry business has this turned out for thee and me! In an evil hour didst thou go to visit thy mother in Navarre. Never shall I again enjoy the happiness I had formerly.’ He then ordered his barber to be sent for, and was shaven quite bare. He clothed himself, as well as his whole household, in black. The body of the youth was borne, with tears and lamentations, to the church of the Augustine Friars at Orthès, where it was buried. Thus have I related to you the death of Gaston de Foix: his father killed him indeed, but the King of Navarre was the cause of this sad event.”




BOOK IV.[34]




CHAPTER I.

     THE DUKE OF BOURBON IS APPOINTED CHIEF OF AN EXPEDITION TO AFRICA,      THAT IS UNDERTAKEN BY SEVERAL KNIGHTS OF FRANCE AND ENGLAND AT THE      SOLICITATION OF THE GENOESE.


I have delayed, for a long time, speaking of a grand and noble enterprise that was undertaken by some knights of France, England, and other countries, against the kingdom of Barbary. The text of the subject I mean to proceed on says, that about this time the Genoese were reported throughout France and other countries, to be desirous of raising a large army to invade Barbary; and that all knights, squires, or men at arms, who would engage in this expedition, should be supplied with such purveyances as biscuit, fresh water, vinegar, and vessels and galleys to transport them thither.

The cause of their forming this armament was, that the Africans had attacked the country of Genoa, plundering the islands belonging to them, and carrying off such from the coasts of Genoa as were not on their guard, by which they were kept under continual alarms. They possessed also a town, situated on the sea-shore of Barbary, which is beyond measure strong, and called Africa, surrounded with high walls, gates, and deep ditches. Like as the strong town of Calais is the key to France and Flanders, and whoever is master of it may at all times enter those countries, and from thence may be sent a powerful force by sea, to do mischief to their neighbors; just so is the town of Africa the stronghold of the inhabitants of Barbary, Bugia, and Tunis, and other infidel countries. The Genoese, who are rich merchants, bore great hatred to this town; for its corsairs frequently watched them at sea, and, when strongest, fell on and plundered their ships, carrying their spoils to this town of Africa, which was, and is now, their place of deposit, and may be called their warren.

The Genoese, to put an end to such conduct, and satisfy the complaints of their subjects, that were daily made to them, determined to make their situation known to the court of France, and to offer to such knights as would undertake an expedition against the infidels, vessels of provision, with a passage thither and back free of all costs, provided that one of the king’s uncles, or his brother the Duke of Touraine (who, being young, ought to labor to gain renown), would take the chief command. They likewise offered the aid of pilgrims, from foreign parts to assist them, twelve thousand select Genoese crossbows, and eight thousand infantry armed with spears and shields, all at their expense. They imagined, that as now there was a truce between France, England, and their allies, their knights would, from having nothing to do, be glad to join in this warfare, and that they should have numbers of them from those kingdoms.

When this intelligence was first brought to the French knights, they were much rejoiced, in hope of gaining honor; and the ambassadors from Genoa were told they should not return without their business being attended to, and succor afforded them, for their anxiety to extend the Christian faith was very praiseworthy. They waited at Paris, while it was under deliberation of the council who should be appointed commander-in-chief. The Duke of Touraine offered his services to the king and council; but they, as well as the Dukes of Berry and Burgundy, remonstrated, that this command was not fit for him. They considered, that as the Genoese insisted on the king’s brother, or one of his uncles, taking the command, the Duke of Bourbon would be the most proper person, and that he should have for his second the Lord de Coucy. The Genoese ambassadors having received a favorable answer from the king, and certain assurances of being assisted with knights and men at arms from France, under the command of the Duke of Bourbon, in the course of the year, were greatly contented. They took leave of the king, and returned to their own country, to relate the good news, and make preparations accordingly.

Reports of an invasion of Barbary were soon spread throughout France. To some knights and squires it was agreeable, to others the contrary. All who were desirous of going thither could not, as it would have been at their own charges, for no lord paid for any but those of his own household. It was also ordered, that no one from France should make part of this expedition but such as had the king’s leave, for the council wished not the realm to be void of defence; and the Genoese were expressly bound not to suffer any servants to embark, but solely such as were gentlemen, and who could be depended upon. It was, besides, meant as a compliment to the knights and squires of other nations who might wish to join in the enterprise. This regulation gave pleasure to all foreign knights who heard of it. The Duke of Bourbon, having accepted the command, sent his servants to Genoa, where they were to embark, to make the necessary preparations for him and his household. The gallant Count d’Auvergne, who was likewise of the expedition, did the same. The Lord de Coucy, Sir Guy de la Tremouille, Sir John de Vienne, and all the great barons and knights of France who had obtained leave to make part of this army, were not behindhand in sending thither purveyances suitable to their state. The Lord Philip d’Artois, Count d’Eu, Sir Philip de Bar, the Lord de Harcourt, Sir Henry d’Antoing, did so likewise. From Brittany and Normandy many great lords made preparations for this expedition to Barbary, as well as from Hainault; among the last were the Lord de Ligne and the Lord de Havreth. Several knights came from Flanders; and the Duke of Lancaster had a bastard son, called Henry de Beaufort, whom, through devotion, he sent thither. He had him well accompanied by many knights and squires of rank in England.

The Count de Foix was unwilling his bastard son, Evan of Foix, should remain behind, and had him properly attended by knights and squires, as he wished him to keep his state grandly. Every one had taken care to send beforehand all he should want; and those at the greatest distance from Genoa left their countries the middle of May, but it was about a month before all were assembled. The Genoese were well pleased on their arrival, and made handsome and rich presents to the chiefs, the better to secure their affections. As the knights arrived, they were posted adjoining each other, and, on being mustered by the marshals, amounted to fourteen hundred knights and squires. They were embarked on board of ships and galleys, that had been properly equipped for the voyage, on St. John Baptist’s Day, in the year of grace 1390.

It was a beautiful sight to view this fleet, with the emblazoned banners of the different lords glittering in the sun and fluttering in the wind: and to hear the minstrels and other musicians sounding their pipes, clarions, and trumpets, whose sounds were re-echoed back by the sea. When all were embarked, they cast anchor, and remained that night at the mouth of the harbor; but the servants and horses were left behind on shore. A horse worth fifty francs was on their embarkation sold for ten, as many of the knights and squires were uncertain when, or if ever, they should return, and the keep of five horses at Genoa was upward of a franc a day: they therefore, on departing, made of them what money they could, but it was little enough.

There were about three hundred galleys to transport the men at arms and archers, and upward of one hundred vessels for the purveyances and other necessaries. On the morrow, at daybreak, they weighed anchor, and rode coastwise that and the succeeding night. The third day they made Port-fino, where they lay that night: at sunrise they rowed to Porto-Venere, and again cast anchor. The ensuing morning they weighed, and took to the deep, putting themselves under the protection of God and St. George. When they had passed the island of Elba, they encountered a violent tempest, which drove them back by Gorgona, Sardinia, and Corsica, into the Gulf of Lyons, a position always dangerous; but they could not avoid it, for the tempest was so violent, that the ablest mariner could not do any thing to prevent their running the utmost risk of destruction: they waited therefore the will of God. This storm lasted a day and night, and dispersed the fleet. When the weather became calm, and the sea tranquil, the pilots, who were acquainted with those seas, steered as directly as they could for the island of Commeres, which is but thirty miles from the town of Africa, whither they bent their course. The masters of the vessels had held a council before they entered the Gulf of Lyons, and determined, that, should they part company, they would rendezvous at the island of Commeres, and wait there until they were all assembled. This plan was adopted; and it was upward of nine days before all were collected, so much had they been scattered.

The island of Commeres, though not large, is very pleasant. The lords there refreshed themselves, and praised God for having all met again without essential loss or damage. When on the eve of departure, the French lords, who took the lead, held a council on their future proceedings, as they were now so near the port of Africa.




CHAPTER II.

     THE CHRISTIAN LORDS WEIGH ANCHOR, AND LEAVE THE ISLAND OF COMINO,      IN ORDER TO LAY SIEGE TO THE TOWN OF AFRICA.--THE MANNER IN WHICH      THEY CONDUCT THEMSELVES.


They addressed the masters of the galleys as follows: “Gentlemen, we are now on the nearest land to the strong town of Africa, whither, if it please God, we will go, and besiege it. We must therefore consult with you how we may enter the harbor and disembark. We propose to send in advance our smaller vessels, called brigandines, to amuse the enemy, while we remain at the mouth of the harbor: on the following day we will at our leisure land, through God’s grace, and encamp ourselves as near the town as possible, out of the reach of their bricolles.[35] The Genoese crossbows shall be drawn up, and ready for defence or attack. We suppose that, on our debarkation, a multitude of your young squires will demand to be knighted, for increase of honor and advancement. Instruct them gently how they ought to act, for you are very capable of doing it; and know, gentlemen, that we are well inclined to acquit ourselves handsomely toward you; and, to show our eagerness to annoy the enemy, we shall take every possible pains that this town of Africa may be won. It has done you too great damage to be longer endured, and is, besides, the key to the empire of Barbary and the surrounding kingdoms of Africa, Morocco, and Bugia. Should God, of his goodness, permit us to conquer it, all the Saracens will tremble, as far as Nubia and Syria, and we shall be everywhere talked of. With the assistance of the princes of Christendom, who are the nearest to us, we may re-enforce it with men, and victual it again; so that, if once we gain possession, it will become a place for all knights and squires to adventure themselves in arms against the enemies of God, and conquer their lands.”--“My lords,” replied the masters of the vessels, “we shall never pretend to teach you how to act, but give our opinions with all modesty and humility; for you are too noble, wise, and valiant, for us to pretend to lay down rules for your conduct.” The Lord de Coucy said, “We should, however, wish to have your opinions, for we have observed nothing but what is praiseworthy in you; and, as it is you who have brought us hither, to accomplish deeds of arms, we shall never act without having your advice.” Such were the conversations held in the presence of the Duke of Bourbon, the Count d’Eu, and some of the great barons of France, with the captains of the Genoese vessels, before they sailed for the coast of Africa.

When all was ready, and the men at arms had re-embarked on board their galleys, with a good will to meet their enemies the Saracens, the admiral gave orders for the trumpets to sound, and the fleet to get under way. The sea was now calm, and the weather fine: it was a pleasure to see the rowers force their vessels through its smooth surface, which seemed to delight in bearing these Christians to the shores of the infidels. Their fleet was numerous and well ordered; and it was a fine sight to view their various banners and pennons, emblazoned with their arms, fluttering with the gentle gales, and glittering in the sun. Late in the evening, the Christians saw the towers of Africa, as pointed out to them by the sailors, which, as they advanced, opened more to their view. Every one was rejoiced at this sight, and not without cause, as they had in part accomplished the object of their voyage. If the Christians, on thus seeing Africa, conversed much concerning the war they were about to commence, the Saracens, who had so plainly observed them from their town, and were on the watch, did the same. They were astonished at the great number of vessels, of all descriptions, and concluded they had a very large army on board to besiege the town. They were not cast down with this, for they knew the place was strong, well fortified with towers, and plentifully stored with artillery and provisions.

On their first noticing the fleet, they sounded, according to custom, a number of bells on the towers, to alarm and inform the country that an enemy was on the coast. There were encamped near the town a large body of barbarians and infidels, whom the kings of Tunis and Bugia had sent thither to defend the coast, and prevent the Christians from making any progress into the interior of the country. The noise of the trumpets and drums announced the arrival of the Christians; and, in consequence, they formed their army according to their manner, and sent some of the ablest captains to the shore to observe the motions of the enemy, and the manner of their debarkation. They also posted their most expert men at arms on the towers and battlements of the town, that they might not be taken by surprise; for it was strong enough to resist every thing but a long siege, if they were on their guard.

As I, John Froissart, the author of these Chronicles, was never in Africa, I sought all the information I could from those knights and squires who had been on this expedition, and made several journeys to Calais to learn the truth of all that passed. [Having inquired as to the size and form of the town of Africa, some who had been there figured it out to me, and said it was in the form of a bow, like to Calais, extending its arms toward the sea. This town of Africa, at the time the lords of France and other nations were before it with an anxious desire to win it, was wonderfully strong, surrounded with high walls at proper distances. The entrance of the harbor was defended by a tower larger than the rest, on which was placed a bricolle to cast large stones and quarrels, with which it was well provided.

When the Christians approached the harbor, the walls of the town seemed to be hung with cloths or tapestry, somewhat similar in appearance to coverlets of beds. They cast anchor about one league distant from the port, where they remained until the morrow. The night was clear and serene, for it was the month of July, about Magdalen-tide; and they made themselves comfortable, rejoicing that, through God’s pleasure, they had so far succeeded as to have the town of Africa now before them.

The Saracens, who were on the opposite shore watching the Christian fleet, held this night a council on their future mode of proceeding, for they knew the town would be besieged. They thus conversed among themselves: “Our enemies are now arrived: they will, if they can, land, and lay siege to Africa, which is the key to the adjoining kingdoms. We must therefore consider well our plans for opposing them: otherwise we shall be greatly blamed, and especially if we should not at first dispute their landing.” It was proposed by a valiant Saracen, called Mandifer, to resist their landing, as being the most honorable; and to oppose them instantly with their whole force, or they would probably have fault found with them. This was strongly supported by many, as it seemed the most courageous plan; when an ancient Saracen began to speak, who had great influence among them, as he showed. This lord came from a town in Africa called Maldages, and his name was Bellius. He gave his opinion quite contrary to that of Mandifer, and supported it with the following reasons: “Gentlemen, we are sent hither to guard the coast, and defend this country; but we have no orders from the kings of Tunis or of Bugia to attack our enemies without having maturely considered the consequences. What I have to propose, I will maintain by such reasons as these: First, you must suppose that this army of Christians has been long in preparation, and is provided with all things necessary. Their captains, you may also believe, are perfect men at arms, as able in council as in the field, with the greatest ardor to perform deeds of arms. If we meet them on the shore, they will advance their Genoese crossbows, for you may be assured they have brought numbers of them. It will be against them who have such excellent crossbows, that we must support the first attack; and we are not armed, nor have we shields to guard us against their arrows. Our men, finding themselves wounded, will draw back, and refuse the combat, so that these Genoese will make good their landing in spite of us. Their men at arms, desirous of displaying their courage, will leap from their boats, and, observing our disorder, will attack us with lances, and gain a victory. Should this happen, the town of Africa is irrecoverably lost, for any thing we can do to prevent it. Those within will be so much discouraged by our defeat, that, before our men can be rallied, the place will be taken by storm or capitulation, and be so well guarded that we shall have the greatest difficulty to regain it. The French, and those with them, are very expert and subtle in arms. I therefore maintain, that it will be more to our advantage that the enemy should be ignorant of our force at the onset; for at this moment we have not a sufficiency to offer them battle, though our strength is daily increasing. I advise, that we suffer them to disembark at their ease; for, as they have no horses to advance into the country, they will remain where they land, suspicious of our intentions.] The town of Africa is not afraid of them, nor of their attacks; for it is tolerably strong, and well provided with every thing. The air is now warm, and will be hotter. They will be exposed to the heat of the sun, while we shall be in the shade. Their provisions will be destroyed, without hopes of having a supply, if they make any long stay, and we shall have abundance from our own country: we will frequently beat up their quarters; and, should they be unfortunate in these skirmishes, they will be worn down. We must avoid all general engagements, otherwise we cannot conquer them; but we shall do it by this plan, and trusting to the climate, which is contrary to the nature of their constitutions. [They will not have any re-enforcements, and we shall have many. The extreme heat of the sun, and the fatigue they will undergo from being always armed in fear of us, will very soon bring on disorders which will carry numbers to the grave; and thus shall we be revenged without striking a blow.] Such is the plan I propose; and, if I knew of any better, I would lay it before you.”

All those in the council, who had been used to arms, adopted the advice the old Saracen lord had given. It was in consequence forbidden, under pain of death, for the army to attack or skirmish with the Christians on the sea-shore; but they were ordered to remain quietly in their quarters, and suffer them to land and encamp themselves without any opposition. None dared infringe these orders. They sent a body of their archers into the town of Africa, to assist in its defence; and never made any movement until the morrow, so that the country seemed uninhabited.

The Christians having lain this night, as I have said, at anchor at the mouth of the harbor, made themselves ready the next day, which was a clear bright morning, for approaching the town, being very desirous to land. Trumpets and clarions began to sound and make a loud noise on board the different galleys and ships. When it was about nine o’clock, and the Christians had drunk a cup, and partaken of soup made of Grecian or Malmsey wines, with which they had abundantly provided themselves, to cheer their hearts and raise their spirits, they began to execute the plan they had laid down while at the island. They sent, as it seems to me, some light vessels called brigandines, armed with bricolles and cannons, first toward the harbor. When they were properly drawn up in array, they entered the haven, and saluted the town with arrows and stones; but the walls were hung with wet carpeting to deaden the blows. These brigandines entered the port without damage, and were followed by the galleys and other vessels in such handsome order as to make a pleasant show. In turning into the harbor, there was a large castle with towers, and on one larger than the rest was placed a bricolle, for the defence of the place, which was not idle, but threw quarrels among the fleet. On each of the towers on the walls was a bricolle which shot well; and, to say the truth, the Saracens had laid in stores for a long time, from the expectation of a siege.

When the Christians entered the port of Africa, to disembark, the weather was so beautiful, and their order so well preserved, that it was delightful to see it. Their trumpets and clarions made the air resound, and were echoed back by the waves. Many knights both from France and from other countries now displayed their banners, and several knights were created; the first of whom was John, Lord de Ligny, in Hainault: he was knighted by his cousin Sir Henry d’Antoing; and the Lord de Ligny there first displayed his banner, which was emblazoned with his arms on a field or, having a bend gules; he was accompanied by his cousin-german the Lord d’Havreth in Hainault. All the knights and squires disembarked in view of the Saracens, on a Wednesday, the vigil of Magdalen Day, in the year of grace 1390, and, as they landed, encamped according to orders from the marshals. Thus they took possession of the land of their enemies, who, noticing their camp, could not avoid highly praising the good order of it. Those in the larger galleys, that could not lie near the shore, were put into boats, and conveyed to land, under the banner of Our Lady. The Saracens, both within and without the town, allowed them to land peaceably, for they were not in numbers sufficient to oppose them; and the French advanced with displayed banners, on which were emblazoned their arms, to places marked out for their lodgings by the marshals.

The Duke of Bourbon, as commander-in-chief, was lodged in the centre of his army, with all honor, and powerfully guarded. The device on his banner, powdered over with flowers-de-luce, was a figure of the Virgin Mary in white, seated in the centre, and an escutcheon of Bourbon at her feet. I will name those lords of rank who were quartered on the right of the duke, looking toward the town: first Sir William de la Tremouille, and his brother, with a pennon; the Lord de Bordenay, with a banner; Sir Helion de Lignac, with a pennon; the Lord de Tours, the same. Then were placed the Hainaulters, whose standard bore the device of the Lord William of Hainault, at that time Count d’Ostrevant, eldest son of Duke Albert of Bavaria, Count of Holland, Hainault, and Zealand, which device was a harrow or, on a field gules. There was the Lord d’Havreth with his banner; the Lord de Ligny, with his; and then the Lord Philip, Count d’Artois, with his banner; the Lord de Mathefelon, with his banner; the Lord de Calan, with a pennon; the seneschal d’Eu, with the same; the Lord de Linieres, with a banner; the Lord de Thim, with the same; the Lord d’Ameval, with the same; Sir Walter de Chastillon, with a pennon; Sir John de Châteaumorant, with a banner; the brother to the Marshal de Sancerre, with a pennon; the Lord de Coucy, with his banner, and better supported than any except the Duke of Bourbon; the Lord de Licques, with a pennon; Sir Stephen de Sancerre, with the same; and then the pennon of the King of France, blazoned with his device. Beside it was Sir John le Barrois, with his pennon ornamented with his arms; Sir William Morles, with his banner; the Lord de Longueval, with a pennon; Sir John de Roye, with a banner; the Lord de Bours, with a pennon; the Viscount d’Ausnay, with a banner; and Sir John de Vienne, Admiral of France, with his banner.

Those on the left hand of the Duke of Bourbon were, the Lord d’Ausemont, with a banner; Sir John Beaufort, bastard to the Duke of Lancaster, a banner; Sir John le Bouteiller, an Englishman, a pennon; Sir John de Crama, a banner; the Souldich de l’Estrade, a pennon; Sir John de Harcourt, a banner; the Lord Berald, Count de Clermont, and Dauphin of Auvergne, a banner, and with good array; Sir Hugh Dauphin, his brother, a pennon; the Lord de Berthencourt, a pennon; the Lord de Pierre Buffiere, a banner; the Lord de St. Semere, a banner; the Lord de Louvart, marshal of the army, a pennon; the Begue de Beausse, a pennon; the Lord de Louvy, a banner; Sir Gerard de Louvy, his brother, a pennon; the Lord de Saint-Germain, a banner; and then the pennon on a standard, with the device of the Duke of Bourbon; the Lord Philip de Bar, a banner; Sir Lewis de Poitiers, a pennon; Sir Robert de Calobre, the same; the Viscount de Les, a banner; the Lord de Nogent, the same; the Lord de Villeneuve, a pennon; Sir William de Moulin, the same; the Lord de Longwy, a pennon; Sir Angorget d’Amboise, the same; Sir Alain de la Champaigne, a pennon.

All these banners and pennons that I have named were placed in front of the camp, facing the town of Africa. But there were many knights and squires, of great courage and ability, who were quartered in the fields, whom I cannot name; and, if I could, it would take up too much space, for they were in the whole fourteen thousand, all gentlemen. This was a handsome army, able to perform many gallant deeds, and support a hard warfare, if the Saracens had ventured an attack, which they did not, contenting themselves this day with throwing large bolts, not meaning to act contrary to their plan. When the Christians were encamped, it was necessary for them to be careful of the provision they had brought; for they could not now venture to forage in this country, nor collect wood nor boughs for huts, as they would have run many risks by foolishly venturing themselves for such objects.

The knights were lodged under tents and pavilions of cloth, which they had procured at Genoa. The Genoese crossbows formed two wings, enclosing within them the principal lords; and, from their numbers, they occupied a great deal of ground, turning toward the sea-shore. All their provision was on board the vessels, and there were boats continually employed in bringing different articles from them, as they were wanted. When the inhabitants of the neighboring islands, such as Sicily and others, as well as those in the kingdom of Naples, la Puglia, and Calabria, heard the Christians were laying siege to Africa, they exerted themselves to supply them with every sort of provision: some from a desire of gain, others from affection to the Genoese. However, these purveyances did not come regularly; for at times the supply was most abundant, at others they were in great distress from want.




CHAPTER III.

     THE CONDUCT OF THE SARACENS DURING THE SIEGE OF THE TOWN OF      AFRICA.--THEY SEND TO DEMAND FROM THE FRENCH THE CAUSE OF THEIR      MAKING WAR AGAINST THEM.


I will say something of the Saracens, for it is but just they should be equally spoken of as the Christians, that the truth may be more apparent. You must know that these infidels had, for a long time, been menaced by the Genoese, and were expecting the town of Africa to be besieged, in which they were not disappointed. They had made preparations for resistance, when they heard of the arrival of the Christian fleet, an event that had been long looked for by the neighboring nations; for they are not prudent nor well advised, who fear not their enemies, however small they may be. The Saracens, however, do not hold the Christians cheap: on the contrary, they consider them as men of courage and enterprise, and much fear them. The better to resist their enemies, they assembled the most experienced warriors from the kingdoms of Bugia, Morocco, and Tunis, in which last the town of Africa is situated, and encamped on the downs near the sea-shore. They took advantage of a large and thick wood in their rear, to avoid any danger from ambuscades or skirmishes on that side. The Saracens showed much ability in thus posting themselves. They amounted, according to the estimate of able men at arms, to thirty thousand archers and ten thousand horse. Others thought they were more; but their exact numbers were unknown, for the Christians supposed many were lodged in the wood. They were very numerous, for they were in their own country, and could come and go from their army at their pleasure without danger. They received continual supplies of fresh provision, which was brought on the backs of camels.

The second day after the Christians had landed, the Saracens, about dawn, came to attack the camp; Sir Henry d’Antoing having the command of the guard of two hundred men at arms and one thousand Genoese crossbows. The skirmish lasted more than two hours, and many gallant deeds were done in shooting and thrusting the lance, for there was not any engagement with the sword hand to hand. The Saracens did not foolhardily risk themselves, but fought with valor and more prudence than the Christians. When they had skirmished some time, the Saracens retreated; for the army began to be in motion, and some of the French barons had come to witness the action, and observe the manner of their enemies’ fighting, that they might be prepared to meet them another time. The Saracens retired to their camp, as did the Christians to theirs; but, during the whole time of this siege of Africa, the Christians were never left quiet, for their camp was every night or morning attacked by the enemy.

Among the Saracens was a young knight, called Agadinquor Oliferne, excellently mounted on a beautiful courser, which he managed as he willed, and which, when he galloped, seemed to fly with him. From his gallantry he showed he was a good man at arms; and when he rode abroad he had with him three javelins, well feathered and pointed, which he dexterously flung, according to the custom of his country. He was completely armed in black, and had a kind of white napkin wrapped round his head. His seat on horseback was graceful; and, from the vigor and gallantry of his actions, the Christians judged he was excited thereto by his affection to a young lady of the country. True it is, he most sincerely loved the daughter of the King of Tunis, who, according to the report of some Genoese merchants who had seen her, was very handsome, and the heiress of his kingdom. This knight called Agadinquor was the son of Duke Oliferne; but I know not if he ever married this lady. I heard that during the siege he performed many handsome feats of arms, to testify his love, which the French knights saw with pleasure, and would willingly have surrounded him; but he rode so good a horse, and had him so well in hand, that all their efforts were vain. The Christian lords were very anxious to make some Saracens prisoners, to learn from them the real state of their army; but they could not succeed, and, having noticed their intent, the Saracen chiefs gave orders accordingly. The Saracens were much afraid of the Genoese crossbows: they shielded themselves as well as they could against their bolts, but they are not armed so strongly as the Christians; for they know not the art to forge armor like theirs, nor have they workmen who could make such. Iron and steel are not common among them; and they wear light targets hanging on their necks, covered with boiled leather from Cappadocia, that no spear can penetrate if the leather has not been overboiled. Their manner of fighting, according to what I heard, was to advance on the Christians, and shoot a volley of arrows at the Genoese the moment they made their appearance, and then to fall down under shelter of their shields, by which they avoided the bolts from the crossbows that went over them: they then rose, and either shot more arrows, or launched their javelins with much dexterity.

Thus, for the space of nine weeks that the siege lasted, were continual skirmishes made; and on both sides many were killed and wounded, more especially such as ventured too rashly. The Christians imitated the Saracens by avoiding a close combat; and the lords from France and other countries took delight in their manner of fighting, for, to say the truth, novelty is always pleasing. The young lords of these infidels were greatly struck with the glittering armor and emblazoned banners and pennons of their enemies; and, when returned to their camp, they conversed much about them. They were, however, astonished at one thing, which I will now relate. The Saracens within the town of Africa were anxious to know on what pretence the Christians had come with so large an army to make war on them; and to learn the reasons they resolved, as I was told, in council, to send a person that could speak Genoese, and gave him the following orders: “Go and take the road to the camp of the Christians [and manage, before thou returnest, to speak with some lords in their army], and demand in our name why they have brought so powerful a force against us, and taken possession of the lands of the King of Africa, who has not done any thing to offend them. True it is, that in former times we were at war with the Genoese, but that should no way concern them; for they come from very distant countries, and the Genoese are our neighbors. Our custom has been, excepting in times of truce, to seize mutually all we can from each other.”

Having received these instructions, the messenger departed, and rode on to the camp. The first person he met was a Genoese, to whom he said that he was sent by the Saracens to speak with some baron from France. The Genoese to whom he had addressed himself was called Antonio Marchi, a centurion of crossbows, who took him under his care, to his great joy, and conducted him instantly to the Duke of Bourbon and the Lord de Coucy. They both listened very attentively, and what they did not understand the centurion interpreted in very good French. When he had finished all he had been ordered to say, he asked for an answer. The French lords told him he should have one as soon as they had considered the purport of his message. Twelve of the greatest barons of the army assembled in the Duke of Bourbon’s tent; and, the messenger and interpreter being called in, the last was ordered to tell him from the lords present, “That in consequence of their ancestors having crucified and put to death the Son of God, called Jesus Christ, a true prophet, without any cause or just reason, they were come to retaliate on them for this infamous and unjust judgment. Secondly, they were unbaptized, and infidels in the faith to the holy Virgin, mother of Jesus Christ, and had no creed of their own. For these and other causes they held the Saracens and their whole sect as enemies, and were come to revenge the injuries they had done to their God and faith, and would to this effect daily exert themselves to the utmost of their power.” When the messenger had received this answer, he departed from the army unmolested, and returned to report to his masters what you have just read. The Saracens laughed heartily at hearing it, and said they made assertions without proofs; for it was the Jews who had crucified Jesus Christ, and not they. Things remained on the former footing: the siege was continued, and each army on its guard.

[Illustration: How a wonderful Apparition terrified the Saracens.]




CHAPTER IV.

     SOME MIRACLES ARE SHOWN TO THE SARACENS AS THEY ATTEMPT TO ATTACK      THE CAMP OF THE CHRISTIANS.--SEVERAL SKIRMISHES DURING THE      SIEGE.--THE CLIMATE BECOMES UNWHOLESOME, AND OTHER ACCIDENTS BEFALL      THE BESIEGERS.


Shortly after this message, the Saracens determined in council to remain quiet for seven or eight days, and during that time neither to skirmish nor any way to annoy the Christians, but, when they should think themselves in perfect security, to fall on their camp like a deluge. This was adopted; and the ninth evening, a little before midnight, they secretly armed their men with their accustomed arms, and marched silently in a compact body toward the Christian camp. They had proposed making a severe attack on the opposite quarter to the main guard, and would have succeeded in their mischievous attempt if God had not watched over and preserved them by miracles, as I will now relate. As the Saracens approached, they saw before them a company of ladies dressed in white; one of whom, their leader, was incomparably more beautiful than the rest, and bore in front a white flag having a vermilion cross in the centre. The Saracens were so greatly terrified at this vision, that they lost all strength and inclination to proceed, and stood still, these ladies keeping steadily before them. The Genoese crossbows had brought with them a dog, as I heard, from beyond sea; but whence, no one could tell, nor did he belong to any particular person. This dog had been very useful to them; for the Saracens never came to skirmish, but by his noise he awakened the army; and as every one now knew that whenever the dog barked, the Saracens were come or on their road, they prepared themselves instantly. In consequence of this the Genoese called him the dog of Our Lady. This night the dog was not idle, but made a louder noise than usual, and ran first to the main guard, which was under the command of the Lord de Torcy, a Norman, and Sir Henry d’Antoing. As during the night all sounds are more easily heard, the whole army was in motion, and properly prepared to receive the Saracens, who they knew were approaching.

This was the fact; but the Virgin Mary and her company, having the Christians under their care, watched over them; and this night they received no harm, for the Saracens were afraid to advance, and returned the way they had come. The Christians were more attentive to their future guards. The Saracen knights and squires within the town were much cast down at the sight they had seen, more especially those who were advanced near this company of ladies; while, on the other hand, the Christians were greatly exerting themselves to win the place, which was courageously defended. At this period the weather was exceedingly hot; for it was the month of August, when the sun is in its greatest force, and that country was warmer than France, from being nearer the sun, and from the heat of the sands. The wines the besiegers were supplied with, from La Puglia and Calabria, were fiery, and hurtful to the constitutions of the French, many of whom suffered severely by fevers from the heating quality of their liquors. I know not how the Christians were enabled to bear the fatigues in such a climate, where sweet water was difficult to be had. They, however, had much resource in the wells they dug, for there were upward of two hundred sunk through the sands along the shore; but at times even this water was muddy and heated. They were frequently distressed for provision, for the supply was irregular from Sicily and the other islands: at times they had abundance, at other times they were in want. The healthy comforted the sick, and those who had provision shared it with such as had none; for in this campaign they were all as brothers. The Lord de Coucy, in particular, was beloved by every gentleman: he was kind to all, and behaved himself by far more graciously in all respects than the Duke of Bourbon, who was proud and haughty, and never conversed with the knights and squires from foreign countries in the same agreeable manner the Lord de Coucy did.

The Duke was accustomed to sit cross-legged the greater part of the day before his pavilion; and those who had any thing to say to him were obliged to make many reverences, and address him through the means of a third person. He was indifferent whether the poorer knights and squires were well or ill at their ease: this the Lord de Coucy always inquired into, and by it gained great popularity. It was told me by some foreign knights who had been there, that, had the Lord de Coucy been commander-in-chief instead of the Duke of Bourbon, the success would have been very different; for many attacks on the town of Africa were frustrated by the pride and fault of the Duke of Bourbon: several thought it would have been taken if it had not been for him.

This siege lasted, by an exact account, sixty-one days, during which many were the skirmishes before the town and at the barriers: they were well defended, for the flower of the infidel chivalry was in the town. The Christians said among themselves, “If we could gain this place by storm or otherwise, and strongly re-enforce and victual it during the winter, a large body of our countrymen might then come hither in the spring, and gain a footing in the kingdoms of Barbary and Tunis, which would encourage the Christians to cross the sea annually, and extend their conquests.”--“Would to God it were so!” others replied; “for the knights now here would then be comfortably lodged, and every day if they pleased they might have deeds of arms.” The besieged were alarmed at the obstinacy of their attacks, and redoubled their guards. The great heat, however, did more for them than all the rest, added to the uncertainty of being attacked; for the policy of the Saracens was to keep them in continual alarms. They were almost burnt up when in armor; and it was wonderful that any escaped death, for during the month of August the air was suffocating. An extraordinary accident happened, which, if it had lasted any time, must have destroyed them all. During one week, from the heat and corruption of the air, there were such wonderful swarms of flies, the army was covered with them. The men knew not how to rid themselves of these troublesome guests, which multiplied daily, to their great astonishment; but through the grace of God, and the Virgin Mary, to whom they were devoted, a remedy was found in a thunder and hail storm, that fell with great violence, and destroyed all the flies. The air, by this storm, was much cooled, and the army got to be in better health than it had been for some time.

Knights who are on such expeditions must cheerfully put up with what weather may happen, for they cannot have it according to their wishes; and, when any one falls sick, he must be nursed to his recovery or to his death.




CHAPTER V.

     A CHALLENGE IS SENT BY THE SARACENS TO OFFER COMBAT OF TEN AGAINST      TEN CHRISTIANS.--THE SARACENS FAIL IN THEIR ENGAGEMENT.--THE TOWN      OF AFRICA IS STORMED, BUT UNSUCCESSFULLY, AND WITH THE LOSS OF MANY      WORTHY MEN.


The besiegers and their enemies studied day and night how they could most effectually annoy each other. Agadinquor Oliferne, Madifer de Tunis, Belins Maldages, and Brahadin de Bugia, and some other Saracens, consulted together, and said, “Here are our enemies the Christians encamped before us, and we cannot defeat them. They are so few in number when compared to us, that they must be well advised by their able captains; for in all our skirmishes we have never been able to make one knight prisoner. If we could capture one or two of their leaders, we should acquire fame, and learn from them the state of their army and what are their intentions. Let us now consider how we may accomplish this.” Agadinquor replied, “Though I am the youngest, I wish to speak first.”--“We agree to it,” said the others. “By my faith,” continued he, “I am very desirous of engaging them; and I think, if I were matched in equal combat with one of my size, I should conquer him. If you will therefore select ten valiant men, I will challenge the Christians to send the same number to fight with us. We have justice on our side in this war, for they have quarrelled with us without reason; and this right, and the courage I feel, induce me to believe that we shall have the victory.” Madifer de Tunis, who was a very valiant man, said, “Agadinquor, what you have proposed is much to your honor. To-morrow, if you please, you shall ride as our chief toward the camp of the Christians, taking an interpreter with you, and make a signal that you have something to say. If you be well received by them, propose your combat of ten against ten. We shall then hear what answer they give; and, though I believe the offer will be accepted, we must take good counsel how we proceed against these Christians, whom we consider as more valiant than ourselves.”

This being determined on, they retired to rest. On the morrow, as usual, they advanced to skirmish; but Agadinquor rode on at some distance in front with his interpreter. The day was bright and clear, and a little after sunrise the Saracens were ready for battle. Sir Guy and Sir William de la Tremouille had commanded the guard of the night, and were on the point of retiring, when the Saracens appeared in sight about three bowshots distant. Agadinquor and his interpreter advanced toward one of the wings, and made signs to give notice that he wanted to parley with some one. By accident he came near the pennon of a good squire at arms called Affrenal, who, noticing his signs, rode forward a pace, and told his men to remain as they were, “for that he would go and see what the Saracen wanted: he has an interpreter with him, and is probably come to make some proposition.” His men remained steady, and he rode toward the Saracen.

When they were near each other, the interpreter said, “Christian, are you a gentleman, of name in arms, and ready to answer what shall be asked of you?”--“Yes,” replied Affrenal, “I am: speak what you please, it shall be answered.”--“Well,” said the interpreter, “here is a noble man of our country who demands to combat with you bodily; and, if you would like to increase the number to ten, he will bring as many of his friends to meet you. The cause for the challenge is this: They maintain, that their faith is more perfect than yours; for it has continued since the beginning of the world, when it was written down, and that your faith has been introduced by a mortal, whom the Jews hung and crucified.”--“Ho!” interrupted Affrenal, “be silent on these matters, for it does not become such as thee to dispute concerning them; but tell the Saracen, who has ordered thee to speak, to swear on his faith that such a combat shall take place, and he shall be gratified within four hours. Let him bring ten gentlemen, and of name in arms, on his side, and I will bring as many to meet him.” The interpreter related to the Saracen the words that had passed, who seemed much rejoiced thereat, and pledged himself for the combat.

This being done, each returned to his friends; but the news had already been carried to Sir Guy and to Sir William de la Tremouille, who, meeting Affrenal, demanded how he had settled matters with the Saracen. Affrenal related what you have heard, and that he had accepted the challenge. The two knights were well pleased, and said, “Affrenal, go and speak to others, for we will be of your number ten.” He replied, “God assist us! I fancy I shall find plenty ready to fight the Saracens.” Shortly after, Affrenal met the Lord de Thim, to whom he told what had passed, and asked if he would make one. The Lord de Thim willingly accepted the offer; and of all those to whom Affrenal related it, he might, if he pleased, have had a hundred instead of ten. Sir Boucicaut the younger accepted it with great courage, as did Sir Helion de Lignac, Sir John Russel, an Englishman, Sir John Harpedone, Alain Boudet, and Bouchet. When the number of ten was completed, they retired to their lodgings, to prepare and arm themselves. When the news of this combat was spread through the army, and the names of the ten were told, the knights and squires said, “They are lucky fellows, thus to have such a gallant feat of arms fall to their lot.”--“Would to Heaven,” added many, “that we were of the ten!” All the knights and squires seemed to rejoice at this event, except the Lord de Coucy. I believe the Lord de Thim was a dependent on, or of the company of, the Lord de Coucy; for, when he repaired to his tent to arm, he found him there, and acknowledged him for his lord. He related to him the challenge of the Saracen, and that he had accepted being one of the ten. All present were loud in praise of it, except the Lord de Coucy, who said, “Hold your tongues, you youngsters, who as yet know nothing of the world, and who never consider consequences, but always applaud folly in preference to good. I see no advantage in this combat, for many reasons: one is, that ten noble and distinguished gentlemen are about to fight with ten Saracens. How do we know if their opponents are gentlemen? They may, if they choose, bring to the combat ten varlets, or knaves; and, if they are defeated, what is the gain? We shall not the sooner win the town of Africa, but by it risk very valuable lives. Perhaps they may form an ambuscade, and, while our friends are on the plain waiting for their opponents, surround them and carry them off, by which we shall be greatly weakened. I therefore say, that Affrenal has not wisely managed this matter; and, when he first met the Saracen, he should have otherwise answered, and said, ‘I am not the commander-in-chief of our army, but one of the least in it; and you Saracen, who address yourself to me, and blame our faith, are not qualified to discuss such matters, nor have you well addressed yourself. I will conduct you to my lords, and assure you, on my life, that no harm befall you in going or in returning, for my lords will cheerfully listen to you.’ He should then have led him to the Duke of Bourbon and the council of war, when his proposal would have been heard and discussed at leisure, his intentions been known, and answers made according as they should think the matter deserved. Such a combat should never be undertaken but after great deliberation, especially with enemies like to those we are engaged with. And when it had been agreed on, and the names and qualities of each combatant should be declared, we would then have selected proper persons to meet them, and proper securities would have been required from the Saracens for the uninterrupted performance of the combat, and a due observance of the articles. If matters had been thus managed, Lord of Thim, I think it would have been better. It would be well if it could be put on this footing; and I will speak to the Duke of Bourbon and the principal barons in the army, and hear what they shall say on the subject.” The Lord de Coucy then departed for the tent of the Duke of Bourbon, where the barons were assembled, as they had heard of this challenge, to consider what might be the probable event of it. Although the Lord de Coucy had intended his speech to the Lord de Thim as advice for his benefit, he did not the less arm himself: when fully equipped, he went with his companions, who were completely armed, and in good array, with Sir Guy de la Tremouille at their head, to meet the Saracens.

During this there was conversation on the subject between the lords in the tent of the Duke of Bourbon: many thought the accepting such a challenge improper, and supported the opinion of the Lord de Coucy, who said it ought to have been ordered otherwise. But some, and in particular the Lord Philip d’Artois, Count d’Eu, and the Lord Philip de Bar, said, “Since the challenge has been accepted by our knights, they would be disgraced were the combat now broken off; and in the name of God and Our Lady let them accomplish it the best manner they can.” This was adopted; for it was now too far advanced to be stopped. It was therefore ordered to draw out the whole army properly arrayed, that, if the Saracens had formed any bad designs, they might be prepared to meet them. Every one, therefore, made himself ready: the whole were drawn up, as if for instant combat, the Genoese crossbows on one side, and the knights and squires on the other; each lord under his own banner or pennon emblazoned with his arms. It was a fine sight to view the army thus displayed; and they showed great eagerness to attack the Saracens.

The ten knights and squires were advanced on the plain waiting for their opponents. But they came not, nor showed any appearance of so doing; for, when they saw the Christian army so handsomely drawn out in battle-array, they were afraid to advance, though they were thrice their numbers. At times they sent horsemen, well mounted, to ride near their army, observe its disposition, and then gallop back; which was solely done through malice, to annoy the Christians.

This was the hottest day they felt, and it was so extremely oppressive that the most active among them were almost stifled in their armor: they had never suffered so much before; and yet they remained expecting the ten Saracens, but in vain, for they never heard a word from them. The army was ordered to attack the town of Africa, since they were prepared, and thus pass the day; and the ten champions, in regard to their honor, were to remain on their ground to the evening.

The knights and squires advanced with great alacrity to the attack of the town. But they were sorely oppressed with the heat, and, had the Saracens known their situation, they might have done them much damage; probably they might even have raised the siege, and obtained a complete victory, for the Christians were exceedingly weakened and worn down. True it is, they gained by storm the wall of the first enclosure, but no one inhabited that part; and the enemy retired within their second line of defence, skirmishing as they retreated, and without any great loss. The Christians paid dear for an inconsiderable advantage: the heat of the sun and its reflection on the sands, added to the fatigue of fighting, which lasted until evening, caused the death of several valiant knights and squires; the more the pity.

Now consider how great was this loss; and, had the advice of the gallant Lord de Coucy been followed, it would not have happened, for the army would have remained quietly in its camp as it had hitherto done. The whole army was dismayed at it, and each bewailed the loss of his friend. They retired late to their camp, and kept a stronger guard than usual during the night, for fear of the Saracens. It passed, however, without further accident, and more prudent arrangements were made. The Saracens were ignorant of what their enemies had suffered: had they known it, they would have had a great advantage over them; but they were in dread of the Christians, and never ventured to attack them but in skirmishes, retreating after one or two charges. The person among them who had shown the most courage was Agadinquor Oliferne. He was enamoured with the daughter of the King of Tunis, and, in compliment to her, was eager to perform brilliant actions.

Thus was the siege of Africa continued; but the relations and friends of the knights and squires who had gone thither, from France and other countries, received no intelligence, nor knew more of them than if they were dead. They were so much alarmed at not having any news of them, that many processions were made in England, France, and Hainault, to the churches, to pray God that he would bring them back in safety to their several homes. The intention of the Christians was to remain before the town of Africa, until they should have conquered it by storm, treaty, or famine.




CHAPTER VI.

THE SIEGE OF AFRICA IS RAISED.--THE CAUSE OF IT.--THE KNIGHTS AND SQUIRES RETURN TO THEIR OWN COUNTRIES.


You have before heard what pains the Christians took to conquer the town of Africa; for they thought if they succeeded they should gain renown, and be able to withstand, during the winter, all the forces the infidels could bring against them, until they should be re-enforced from Europe, especially by the King of France, who was young and fond of arms; and there were still two years to run of the truce with England. The Christians had therefore laid siege to Africa, as being the most convenient entrance into Barbary. The infidels, suspicious of such being their intentions, well victualled the place, and re-enforced it with a new garrison, the better to guard it.

The siege still continued, although, after the beforementioned loss on the part of the Christians, little advantage was gained, and the men at arms were greatly discouraged; for they could not obtain any opportunity of changing the tiresomeness of their situation, and of revenging themselves on the enemy. Many, in consequence, began to murmur, and say, “We remain here in vain, for, if we do nothing more effectual than skirmishing, we shall never gain the town: if by accident we kill one infidel by our arrows, they supply his place with ten more, as they are in their own country, and have provision and stores in abundance, while ours are brought with much difficulty and uncertainty. What will become of us if we stay longer? The cold nights of winter freeze and benumb us to death. We shall be in a most disagreeable state, for many reasons: First, at that time of the year the sea will be so tempestuous, no one will venture on it. We have now but eight days’ provision; and should the stormy weather set in, and prevent any vessels arriving, we must inevitably perish. Secondly, suppose we have provision and stores in plenty, how can the army support for so long a time the fatigue of a regular guard? The danger will be too great; for the enemy is on his own ground, and well acquainted with the country, and may attack us in the night-season, as we have already seen, and do us infinite damage. Thirdly, should we be infected with any disorder, from want of better air and fresh provision, it may be contagious, and we shall drop off one after another, for we have not any remedies to guard against such a misfortune. Besides, should the Genoese, who are a treacherous race, wish to return without us, they might embark in the night-time; and when once on board their vessels we could not prevent them, and they would leave us here to pay the reckoning. It will be right that we remonstrate with our lords, who are enjoying their ease, on these our suspicions; for the Genoese do not conceal their opinions of us. Some of their talkers have said to our men, ‘You Frenchmen are odd men at arms: when we sailed from Genoa, we thought you would have conquered this town of Africa within a week or a fortnight after your landing; but we have been here nearly two months, and nothing has been done: by the assaults and skirmishes you make, the town need not fear you these two years; and, at the rate you go on, you will never conquer the kingdoms of Tunis or Africa.’”

The Genoese had so frequently held this language to the varlets and others of the army, that it reached the ears of their lords, and was repeated to the Lord de Coucy, who was wise and prudent, and to whom the whole army looked up. He considered a while, and then said to himself, “The conversations of these Genoese are but too well founded in truth: to put a stop to them, a full assembly of the principal knights must be held, to consider how we are to proceed, for winter is fast approaching.” At this council, which was held in the Duke of Bourbon’s tent, various plans were proposed; but the conclusion was, that they would, for this season, break up the siege, and every person should return home the way he had come. The chief lords secretly made preparations accordingly, and, calling to them the masters of the galleys and other vessels, acquainted them with their intentions. The captains were much surprised, and said, “My lords, do not harbor any suspicions of us; for we are pledged to you by our honor and oaths, and we will most loyally and honestly acquit ourselves. Had we pleased, we might have accepted the favorable offers that were made us by the Africans; but we refused to enter into any treaty with them, from our attachments and engagements to you.”

“We have no doubts of you, gentlemen,” replied the Lord de Coucy, “for we look on you as loyal and valiant men. But we have considered our situation: winter is at hand, and we have a scarcity of provision. Should it be God’s good pleasure that we return to France, we will inform the king, who is young and fond of war, of the state of this country. At this moment he knows not where to employ his force; for he and the King of England are at peace. He is unhappy when idle; and we shall advise him to undertake an expedition hither, as well to have the pleasure of meeting the King of Sicily as to conquer this country from the Saracens. Prepare and make ready your galleys, for we shall leave this coast in a very few days.” The Genoese were not well pleased with the French lords for thus breaking up the siege of the town of Africa; but, as they could not amend it, they were forced to bear with it as well as they could.

There was a rumor current in the Christian camp, that the Genoese were treating with the Saracens to betray and deliver up to them the remainder of the army. It was firmly believed by many; and they said, “Our principal commanders, the Duke of Bourbon, the Dauphin of Auvergne, the Lord de Coucy, Sir Guy de la Tremouille, Sir Philip de Bar, and Sir John de Vienne, are well acquainted with this plot; and for this reason they have determined suddenly to break up the siege.” When it was proclaimed that every one was to embark on board the galleys or other vessels, in an orderly manner, you would have seen the varlets in the greatest bustle packing up the purveyances of their different lords, and conveying them on board the ships which lay at anchor off the shore. When all things were embarked, the knights entered the galleys that had brought them thither. Many had bargained with the captains to carry them to Naples, others to Sicily, Cyprus, or Rhodes, thence to perform a pilgrimage to Jerusalem.

After having remained sixty-one days before the town of Africa, they broke up the siege, and set sail from that country in sight of the Saracens from the walls. This gave them such joy, that they sounded horns, and beat drums, and made so great a noise by their shoutings, as to be heard in the army of the Saracens. Several young knights mounted their horses, and galloped to the place where the camp had been, to see if they could find any thing left behind. Agadinquor d’Oliferne and Brahadin de Tunis were the first to arrive; but the Christians had so completely cleared the camp, that there was nothing for them to carry away. The Saracens left their station to examine the camp, and remained more than two hours noticing the manner and form of it. They praised much their subtlety in sinking wells for fresh water, and, having for some time viewed the galleys under sail, they returned to visit their friends in the town of Africa. But they did not know the great losses the Christians had suffered until that day, and I will tell you by what accident it happened. In the camp of the Christians was found, lying on the ground, a Genoese varlet, who was too ill with a fever to be removed when the sailors sought for their men to embark on board the barges. The Saracens were delighted on finding this man, and ordered no harm to be done him. They carried him to the principal commanders of their army, and told them where they had found him. An interpreter was sent for, to examine him; but at first he would not make any answers, considering himself as a dead man, and desiring they would put him out of his pain. The chiefs of the army, such as Agadinquor d’Oliferne and Brahadin de Tunis, thought they should gain nothing by his death; and to induce him to answer truly, without any equivocation, what questions should be put to him, they promised to spare his life, and send him safe and well to his own country on board of the first galley that should come thither from Genoa or Marseilles, with a present of a hundred golden besants. The varlet, hearing this, was freed from his fears of death, and made easy, for he knew that these Saracens never break their words; and, as every one dies as late as he can, he said to the interpreter, “Make them all swear on their faith to keep what they have promised, and I will truly answer whatever you may ask.” The interpreter repeated this to the lords, who having consented to his demand, the varlet said, “Now ask what questions you please, and I will answer them.” He was first asked who he was, and his place of residence, and replied, “Portevances [that his name was Simon Mollevin, and son to a captain of a galley at Portevances”], then as to the commanders of the Christian army. He named several; for, having kept company and drank with the heralds, he had often heard their names mentioned, and remembered some of them. He was asked if he knew the reasons why they had so suddenly raised the siege, and departed. To this he made a very prudent reply, by saying he was ignorant of it, as he was not present at the council of war when it was determined on, and could only tell them what was the common report in the army. It was said that the French suspected the Genoese of a design to betray them; but the Genoese declared this was false, and wrongfully imputed to them by the French. They had left the coast because they were afraid to winter in this country, and risk the loss of as many knights as they had once done. “Ask him,” said the lords to the interpreter, “to explain this.” He replied, “So great was the loss on the day the combat was to have taken place between ten of your knights with ten of ours, that upward of sixty knights and squires, men of renown, died that day; and it was solely on this account,” as the Genoese said, “the siege was raised.” The Saracen chiefs seemed very much pleased on hearing this, and made no further inquiries, but punctually kept the promise they had made him.

On his return to Portevances and Genoa, he related all that had passed and what answers he had made, for which he was no way blamed. The Saracens said among themselves, “We have been very negligent in not taking better measures against this union of the French and Genoese; for, though they have been this time unsuccessful against Africa, we must henceforward put our coast in a better state of defence (which we may easily do); and we must, in particular, guard the Straits of Morocco so strongly that neither the Genoese nor Venetians shall carry their merchandise to Flanders through this strait, without paying so great a toll as to make all the world wonder thereat, and even then it shall be considered as a matter of favor.”

What these Africans had proposed, they executed; and all the kingdoms to the south, west, and east, formed an alliance, such as Africa, Tunis, Bugia, Morocco, Benmarin, Tremeçen, and Granada, with a resolution of well guarding their coasts, and equipping such a fleet of galleys as should make them masters of the sea, through hatred to the French and Genoese for their late siege of Africa. They interrupted so much the navigation of the Venetians and Genoese, that merchandise from Alexandria, Cairo, Damascus, Venice, Naples, or Genoa, was difficult to be had in Flanders for money; and, in particular, every sort of spicery was enormously dear.




CHAPTER VII.[36]

DEATH AND BURIAL OF KING RICHARD II.


Now consider, ye kings, lords, dukes, prelates, and earls, how very changeable the fortunes of this world are. This King Richard reigned twenty-two years in great prosperity, and with much splendor; for there never was a king of England who expended such sums, by more than a hundred thousand florins, as King Richard did in keeping up his state, and his household establishments. I, John Froissart, canon and treasurer of Chimay, know it well; for I witnessed and examined it during my residence with him for a quarter of a year. He made me good cheer, because in my youth I had been secretary to King Edward his grandfather, and the Lady Philippa of Hainault, Queen of England. When I took my leave of him at Windsor, he presented me, by one of his knights called Sir John Golofre, a silver gilt goblet, weighing full two marks, filled with a hundred nobles, which were then of service to me, and will be so as long as I live. I am bound to pray to God for him, and sorry am I to write of his death; but, as I have dictated and augmented this history to the utmost of my power, it became necessary to mention it, that what became of him might be known.

When King Richard was born, his father was in Galicia, which Don Pedro had given him to conquer. A curious thing happened on my first going to England, which I have much thought on since. I was in the service of Queen Philippa; and when she accompanied King Edward and the royal family, to take leave of the Prince and Princess of Wales, at Berkhampstead, on their departure for Aquitaine, I heard an ancient knight, in conversation with some ladies, say, “We have a book called Brut, that declares neither the Prince of Wales, Dukes of Clarence, York, nor Gloucester, will be kings of England, but the descendants of the Duke of Lancaster.” Now I, the author of this history, say that, considering all things, these two knights, Sir Richard de Pontchardon, and Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, in what they said, were both in the right; for all the world saw Richard reign for twenty-two years in England, and saw the crown then fall to the house of Lancaster. King Henry would never have been king, on the conditions you have heard, if his cousin Richard had treated him in the friendly manner he ought to have done. The Londoners took his part for the wrongs the king had done him and his children, whom they much compassionated.

When the funeral car of King Richard had remained in Cheapside two hours, it was conducted forward, in the same order as before, out of the town. The four knights then mounted their horses, which were waiting for them, and continued their journey with the body until they came to a village, where there is a royal mansion, called Langley, thirty miles from London. There King Richard was interred. God pardon his sins, and have mercy on his soul!

       *       *       *       *       *

Charles Scribner’s Sons’ New and Standard Books for Young Readers for 1895-96


A NEW BOOK BY MRS. BURNETT

TWO LITTLE PILGRIMS’ PROGRESS

A STORY OF THE CITY BEAUTIFUL. By Mrs. FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT. Illustrated by REGINALD B. BIRCH. Uniform with “Fauntleroy,” etc. Square 8vo, $1.50.

The largest and most notable children’s book that Mrs. Burnett has written since “Fauntleroy.” It is a charming story of a little boy and girl, who, taking their small savings, leave home to visit the World’s Fair. This is their Pilgrims’ Progress; and their interesting adventures and the happy ending of it all Mrs. Burnett tells as no one else can. It is in the author’s best vein and will take place in the hearts of her readers close beside “Fauntleroy.”


MRS. BURNETT’S FIVE FAMOUS JUVENILES

=LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY.= Beautifully illustrated by REGINALD B. BIRCH. Square 8vo, $2.00.

“In ‘Little Lord Fauntleroy’ we gain another charming child to add to our gallery of juvenile heroes and heroines; one who teaches a great lesson with such truth and sweetness that we part from him with real regret.”--LOUISA M. ALCOTT.


=SARA CREWE=; OR, WHAT HAPPENED AT MISS MINCHIN’S. Richly and fully illustrated by REGINALD B. BIRCH. Square 8vo, $1.00.

“It is a story to linger over in the reading, it is so brightly, frankly, sweetly, and tenderly written, and to remember and return to. In creating her little gentlewoman, ‘Sara Crewe,’ so fresh, so simple, so natural, so genuine, and so indomitable, Mrs. Burnett has added another child to English fiction.”--R. H. STODDARD.


=LITTLE SAINT ELIZABETH=, AND OTHER STORIES. With 12 full-page drawings by REGINALD B. BIRCH. Square 8vo, $1.50.

“Four stories different in kind, but alike in grace and spirit.”--SUSAN COOLIDGE.


=GIOVANNI AND THE OTHER=: CHILDREN WHO HAVE MADE STORIES. With 9 full-page illustrations by REGINALD B. BIRCH. Square 8vo, $1.50.

“Stories beautiful in tone, and style, and color.”--KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN.


=PICCINO=, AND OTHER CHILD STORIES. Fully illustrated by REGINALD B. BIRCH. Square 8vo, $1.50.

“The history of Piccino’s ‘two days’ is as delicate as one of the anemones that spring in the rock walls facing Piccino’s Mediterranean.... The other stories in the book have the charm of their predecessor in material and matter....”--Mrs. BURTON HARRISON.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOKS BY HOWARD PYLE

_A NEW BOOK JUST PUBLISHED_

=BEHIND THE GARDEN OF THE MOON.= A REAL STORY OF THE MOON ANGEL. Written and illustrated by HOWARD PYLE. Square 12mo, $2.00.

Underneath the charm of this original and delightful fairy tale of Mr. Pyle’s is a mystical moral significance which gives it the dignity of true literature in addition to its interest of adventure. Out of the truth that great deeds are achieved and high character moulded by entire spiritual consecration, rather than by direct and interested effort, the author has evolved a winning and delightful piece of fanciful fiction, and has illustrated it copiously in his happiest and most characteristically poetical vein.


=THE MERRY ADVENTURES OF ROBIN HOOD= OF GREAT RENOWN IN NOTTINGHAMSHIRE. With many illustrations. Royal 8vo, $3.00.

“This superb book is unquestionably the most original and elaborate ever produced by any American artist. Mr. Pyle has told, with pencil and pen, the complete and consecutive story of Robin Hood and his merry men in their haunts in Sherwood Forest, gathered from the old ballads and legends. Mr. Pyle’s admirable illustrations are strewn profusely through the book.”--_Boston Transcript._


=OTTO OF THE SILVER HAND.= With many illustrations. Royal 8vo, half leather, $2.00.

“The scene of the story is mediæval Germany in the time of the feuds and robber barons and romance. The kidnapping of Otto, his adventures among rough soldiers, and his daring rescue, make up a spirited and thrilling story. The drawings are in keeping with the text, and in mechanical and artistic qualities as well as in literary execution the book must be greeted as one of the very best juveniles of the year, quite worthy to succeed to the remarkable popularity of Mr. Pyle’s ‘Robin Hood.’”--_Christian Union._


THE BUTTERFLY HUNTERS IN THE CARIBBEES

By Dr. EUGENE MURRAY-AARON. With 8 full-page illustrations. Square 12mo, $2.00.

“Our author only reproduces the incidents and scenes of his own life, as an exploring naturalist, in a way to capture the attention of younger readers. The incidents are told entertainingly, and his descriptions of country and the methods of capture of butterflies and bugs of rare varieties are full of interest.”--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._


A NEW MEXICO DAVID

AND OTHER STORIES AND SKETCHES OF THE SOUTH-WEST. By CHARLES F. LUMMIS. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.25.

“Mr. Lummis has lived for years in the land of the Pueblos; has traversed it in every direction, both on foot and on horseback; and it is an enthralling treat set before youthful readers by him in this series of lively chronicles.”--_Boston Beacon._


STORIES FOR BOYS

By RICHARD HARDING DAVIS. With 6 full-page illustrations. 12mo, $1.00.

“It will be astonishing indeed if youths of all ages are not fascinated with these ‘Stories for Boys.’ Mr. Davis knows infallibly what will interest his young readers.”--_Boston Beacon._

       *       *       *       *       *

THE KANTER GIRLS

By MARY L. B. BRANCH. Illustrated by HELEN M. ARMSTRONG. Square 12mo, $1.50.

The adventures of Jane and Prue, two small sisters, among different peoples of the imaginative world--dryads, snow-children, Kobolds, etc.--aided by their invisible rings, their magic boat, and their wonderful birds, are described by the author with great naturalness and a true gift for story-telling. The numerous illustrations are very attractive, and in thorough sympathy with the text.


THE WAGNER STORY BOOK

FIRELIGHT TALES OF THE GREAT MUSIC DRAMAS. By WILLIAM HENRY FROST. Illustrated by SIDNEY R. BURLEIGH. 12mo, $1.50.

“A successful attempt to make the romantic themes of the music dramas intelligible to young readers. The author has full command of his subject, and the style is easy, graceful, and simple.”--_Boston Beacon._


ROBERT GRANT’S TWO BOOKS FOR BOYS

=JACK HALL=; OR, THE SCHOOL DAYS OF AN AMERICAN BOY. Illustrated by F. G. ATTWOOD. 12mo, $1.25.

“A better book for boys has never been written. It is pure, clean, and healthy, and has throughout a vigorous action that holds the reader breathlessly.”--_Boston Herald._

=JACK IN THE BUSH=; OR, A SUMMER ON A SALMON RIVER. Illustrated by F. T. MERRILL. 12mo, $1.25.

“A clever book for boys. It is the story of the camp life of a lot of boys, and is destined to please every boy reader. It is attractively illustrated.”--_Detroit Free Press._


CZAR AND SULTAN

THE ADVENTURES OF A BRITISH LAD IN THE RUSSO-TURKISH WAR OF 1877-78. By ARCHIBALD FORBES. Illustrated. 12mo, $2 00.

“Very fascinating and graphic. Mr. Forbes is a forcible writer, and the present work has the vigor and intensity associated with his name. It is sure to be popular with youthful readers.”--_Boston Beacon._


JOSEPH THE DREAMER

By the author of “Jesus the Carpenter.” 12mo. _In Press._

The story of Joseph, told in the same popular, interesting, and realistic manner as that of Jesus in the author’s former book; not only setting forth truthfully and graphically the life of Joseph, but picturing as well the marvelous state of Egypt in which he lived.


JESUS THE CARPENTER

By A. LAYMAN. 12mo, $1.50.

“I think the idea of this book--the aim and the intention--excellent and the execution beautiful.”--Prof. A. B. BRUCE.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW BOOK BY KIRK MUNROE

AT WAR WITH PONTIAC

OR, THE TOTEM OF THE BEAR. A Tale of Redcoat and Redskin. By KIRK MUNROE. With 8 full-page illustrations by J. FINNEMORE. 12mo, $1.25.

A story of old days in America when Detroit was a frontier town and the shores of Lake Erie were held by hostile Indians under Pontiac. The hero, Donald Hester, goes in search of his sister Edith, who has been captured by the Indians. Strange and terrible are his experiences: for he is wounded, taken prisoner, condemned to be burned, and contrives to escape. In the end there is peace between Pontiac and the English, and all things terminate happily for the hero. One dares not skip a page of this enthralling story.


THE WHITE CONQUEROR

A TALE OF TOLTEC AND AZTEC. By KIRK MUNROE. With 8 full-page illustrations by W. S. STACEY. 12mo, $1.25.

“The story is replete with scenes of vivid power; it is full of action and rapid movement; and he must be deficient in receptive faculty who fails to gain valuable historical instruction, along with the pleasure of reading a tale graphically told.”--_Philadelphia Bulletin._


STORIES OF LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND HISTORY By HENRIETTA CHRISTIAN WRIGHT.

_A NEW VOLUME JUST ISSUED._

=CHILDREN’S STORIES IN AMERICAN LITERATURE=, 1660-1860. 12mo, $1.25.

Miss Wright here continues her attractive presentation of literary history begun in her “Children’s Stories in English Literature.” Elliot, the translator of the Bible into the English language, Irving, Cooper, Prescott, Holmes, Longfellow, Hawthorne, Mrs. Stowe, Whittier, Poe, and Emerson are here considered, bringing the history of the subject down to the period of the Civil War, and treated with constant reference to that side of their works and personalities which most nearly appeals to children.


=CHILDREN’S STORIES IN ENGLISH LITERATURE.= Two volumes: TALIÈSIN TO SHAKESPEARE, SHAKESPEARE TO TENNYSON. 12mo, each, $1.25.

“It is indeed a vivid history of the people as well as a story of their literature: and, brief as it is, the author has so deftly seized on all the salient points, that the child who has read this book will be more thoroughly acquainted than many a student of history with the life and thought of the centuries over which the work reaches.”--_The Evangelist._


=CHILDREN’S STORIES OF THE GREAT SCIENTISTS.= With portraits. 12mo, $1.25.

“The author has succeeded in making her pen-pictures of the great scientists as graphic as the excellent portraits that illustrate the work. Around each name she has picturesquely grouped the essential features of scientific achievement.”--_Brooklyn Times._


=CHILDREN’S STORIES OF AMERICAN PROGRESS.= Illustrated. 12mo, $1.25.

“Miss Wright is favorably known by her volume of well-told ‘Stories in American History’: and her ‘Stories of American Progress’ is equally worthy of commendation. Taken together they present a series of pictures of great graphic interest. The illustrations are excellent.”--_The Nation._


=CHILDREN’S STORIES IN AMERICAN HISTORY.= Illustrated. 12mo, $1.25.

“A most delightful and instructive collection of historical events, told in a simple and pleasant manner. Almost every occurrence in the gradual development of our country is woven into an attractive story for young people.”--_San Francisco Evening Post._

       *       *       *       *       *

G. A. HENTY’S POPULAR STORIES FOR BOYS

New Volumes for 1895-96. Each, crown 8vo, handsomely illustrated, $1.50.

Mr. Henty, the most popular writer of Books of Adventure in England, adds three new volumes to his list this fall--books that will delight thousands of boys on this side who have become his ardent admirers.

“Mr. Henty’s books never fail to interest boy readers. Among writers of stories of adventure he stands in the very first rank.”--_Academy_, London.

“No country nor epoch of history is there which Mr. Henty does not know, and what is really remarkable is that he always writes well and interestingly. Boys like stirring adventures, and Mr. Henty is a master of this method of composition.”--_New York Times._


A KNIGHT OF THE WHITE CROSS

A TALE OF THE SIEGE OF RHODES. With 12 full-page illustrations.

Gervaise Tresham, the hero of this story, joins the Order of the Knights of St. John, and leaving England he proceeds to the stronghold of Rhodes, and becomes a page in the household of the Grand Master. Subsequently, Gervaise is made a Knight of the Grand Cross for valor, while soon after he is appointed commander of a war-galley, and in his first voyage destroys a fleet of Moorish corsairs. During one of his cruises the young knight is attacked on shore, captured after a desperate struggle, and sold into slavery in Tripoli. He succeeds in escaping, however, and returns to Rhodes in time to take part in the splendid defence of that fortress. Altogether a fine chivalrous tale, of varied interest and full noble daring.


THE TIGER OF MYSORE

A STORY OF THE WAR W\WITH TIPPOO SAIB. With 12 full-page illustrations.

Dick Holland, whose father is supposed to be a captive of Tippoo Saib, goes to India to help him to escape. He joins the army under Lord Cornwallis, and takes part in the campaign against Tippoo. Afterwards he assumes a disguise; enters Seringapatum, the capital of Mysore, rescues Tippoo’s harem from a tiger, and is appointed to high office by the tyrant. In this capacity Dick visits the hill fortresses, still in search of his father, and at last he discovers him in the great stronghold of Savandroog. The hazardous rescue which Dick attempts, and the perilous night ride through the enemy’s country are at length accomplished, and the young fellow’s dangerous mission is done.


THROUGH RUSSIAN SNOWS

A STORY OF NAPOLEON’S RETREAT FROM MOSCOW. With 8 full-page illustrations and a map.

The hero, Julian Wyatt, after several adventures with smugglers, by whom he is handed over a prisoner to the French, regains his freedom and joins Napoleon’s army in the Russian campaign, and reaches Moscow with the victorious Emperor. Then, when the terrible retreat begins, Julian finds himself in the rear guard of the French army, fighting desperately, league by league, against famine, snow-storms, wolves, and Russians. Ultimately he escapes out of the general disaster, after rescuing the daughter of a Russian count; makes his way to St. Petersburg, and then returns to England. A story with an excellent plot, exciting adventures, and splendid historical interests.

       *       *       *       *       *

G. A. HENTY’S POPULAR STORIES FOR BOYS

Each, crown 8vo, handsomely illustrated, $1.50.


=IN THE HEART OF THE ROCKIES.= A STORY OF ADVENTURE IN COLORADO.

“One of the most interesting and attractive stories for boys. It is a tale of adventure thrilling enough for the most daring readers.”--_Boston Journal._


=WULF THE SAXON.= A STORY OF THE NORMAN CONQUEST.

“An unusually realistic picture of the times. The scenes and incidents which Mr. Henty introduces are calculated to awaken fresh interest in the influence of the battle of Hastings upon the destiny of mankind.”--_Boston Herald._


=WHEN LONDON BURNED.= A STORY OF RESTORATION TIMES AND THE GREAT FIRE.

“An exciting story of adventure, at the same time dealing with historic truths deftly and interestingly.”--_Detroit Free Press._


=ST. BARTHOLOMEW’S EVE.= A TALE OF THE HUGUENOT WARS.

“Exciting enough to interest even the dullest of readers.”--_Boston Transcript._


=THROUGH THE SIKH WAR.= A TALE OF THE CONQUEST OF THE PUNJAUB.

“Not only interesting but instructive. It is related with great spirit and animation.”--_Boston Herald._


=A JACOBITE EXILE.= BEING THE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG ENGLISHMAN IN THE SERVICE OF CHARLES XII. OF SWEDEN.

“Remarkable for its thrilling adventures and its interesting historical pictures.”--_Herald and Presbyter._


=BERIC THE BRITON.= A STORY OF THE ROMAN INVASION.

“It is a powerful and fascinating romance.”--_Boston Post._


=IN GREEK WATERS.= A STORY OF THE GRECIAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE--1821-1827.

“It is a stirring narrative, wholesome and stimulating.”--_Congregationalist._


=CONDEMNED AS A NIHILIST.= A STORY OF ESCAPE FROM SIBERIA.

“A narrative absorbing and thrilling. The scenes of Siberian prison-life give the book a peculiar value.”--_Christian Advocate._


=REDSKIN AND COWBOY.= A TALE OF THE WESTERN PLAINS.

“Though it is full of hairbreadth escapes, none of the incidents are improbable. It is needless to say that the adventures are well told.”--_San Francisco Chronicle._


=THE DASH FOR KHARTOUM.= A TALE OF THE NILE EXPEDITION.


=HELD FAST FOR ENGLAND.= A TALE OF THE SIEGE OF GIBRALTAR.

⁂ _The above are Mr. Henty’s latest books. A full descriptive list containing all of Mr. Henty’s books--now 47 in number--will be sent to any address on application. They are all attractively illustrated and handsomely bound._

       *       *       *       *       *

SAMUEL ADAMS DRAKE’S HISTORICAL BOOKS

=THE MAKING OF THE OHIO VALLEY STATES.= 1660-1837. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.50.

=THE MAKING OF VIRGINIA AND THE MIDDLE COLONIES.= 1578-1701. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.50.

=THE MAKING OF NEW ENGLAND.= 1580-1643. With 148 illustrations and with maps. 12mo, $1.50.

=THE MAKING OF THE GREAT WEST.= 1812-1853. With 145 illustrations and with maps. 12mo, $1.50.

“The author’s aim in these books is that they shall occupy a place between the larger and lesser histories of the lands and of the periods of which they treat, and that each topic therein shall be treated as a unit and worked out to a clear understanding of its objects and results before passing to another topic. In the furtherance of this method each subject has its own descriptive notes, maps, plans, and illustrations, the whole contributing to a thorough, though condensed, knowledge of the subject in hand.”--_New York Mail and Express._


POEMS OF CHILDHOOD BY EUGENE FIELD

=LOVE SONGS OF CHILDHOOD.= 16mo, $1.00.

=WITH TRUMPET AND DRUM.= By Eugene Field. 16mo, $1.25.

“His poems of childhood have gone home, not only to the hearts of children, but to the heart of the country as well, and he is one of the few contributors to that genuine literature of childhood which expresses ideas from the stand-point of a child.”--_The Outlook._


THE NORSELAND SERIES By H. H. BOYESEN.

=NORSELAND TALES.= Illustrated. 12mo, $1.25.

=BOYHOOD IN NORWAY=: NINE STORIES OF DEEDS OF THE SONS OF THE VIKINGS. With 8 illustrations. 12mo, $1.25.

=AGAINST HEAVY ODDS=, AND A FEARLESS TRIO. With 13 full-page illustrations by W. L. TAYLOR. 12mo, $1.25.

=THE MODERN VIKINGS=: STORIES OF LIFE AND SPORT IN THE NORSELAND. With many full-page illustrations. 12mo, $1.25.

The four above volumes in a box, $5.00.

“Charmingly told stories of boy-life in the Land of the Midnight Sun, illustrated with pictures giving a capital idea of the incidents and scenes described. The tales have a delight all their own, as they tell of scenes and sports and circumstances so different from those of our American life.”--_New York Observer._


TWO BOOKS BY ROSSITER JOHNSON

=THE END OF A RAINBOW.= AN AMERICAN STORY. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.50.

“It will be read with breathless interest. It is interesting and full of boyish experience.”--_The Independent._

=PHAETON ROGERS.= A NOVEL OF BOY LIFE. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.50.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. BURTON HARRISON’S TALES

=BRIC-A-BRAC STORIES.= With 24 illustrations by WALTER CRANE. 12mo, $1.50.

“It is to be wished that every boy and girl might become acquainted with the contents of this book.”--JULIAN HAWTHORNE.


=THE OLD FASHIONED FAIRY BOOK.= Illustrated by ROSINA EMMET. 16mo, $1.25.

“The little ones, who so willingly go back with us to ‘Jack the Giant Killer,’ ‘Bluebeard,’ and the kindred stories of our childhood, will gladly welcome Mrs. Burton Harrison’s ‘Old-Fashioned Fairy Tales.’”--FRANK R. STOCKTON.


BOOKS OF ADVENTURE BY ROBERT LEIGHTON

=OLAF THE GLORIOUS.= A STORY OF OLAF TRIGGVISON, KING OF NORWAY, A.D. 995-1000. Crown 8vo, with numerous full-page illustrations, $1.50.

=THE WRECK OF THE GOLDEN FLEECE.= THE STORY OF A NORTH SEA FISHER BOY. Illustrated. Crown 8vo, $1.50.

=THE THIRSTY SWORD.= A STORY OF THE NORSE INVASION OF SCOTLAND, 1262-65. With 8 illustrations and a map. Crown 8vo, $1.50.

=THE PILOTS OF POMONA.= A STORY OF THE ORKNEY ISLANDS. With 8 illustrations and a map. Crown 8vo, $1.50.

“Mr. Leighton as a writer for boys needs no praise, as his books place him in the front rank.”--_New York Observer._


THINGS WILL TAKE A TURN

By BEATRICE HARRADEN, author of “Ships That Pass in the Night.” Illustrated. 12mo, $1.00.

The charm of this tale is its delicate, wistful sympathy. It is the story of a sunny-hearted child, Rosebud, who assists her grandfather in his dusty, second-hand bookshop. One cannot help being fascinated by the sweet little heroine, she is so engaging, so natural: and to love Rosebud is to love all her friends and enter sympathetically into the good fortune she brought them.


AMONG THE LAWMAKERS

By EDMUND ALTON. Illustrated. Square 8vo, $1.50.

“The book is a diverting as well as an instructive one. Mr. Alton was in his early days a page in the Senate, and he relates the doings of Congress from the point of view he then obtained. His narrative is easy and piquant, and abounds in personal anecdotes about the great men whom the pages waited on.”--_Christian Union._


EVENING TALES

DONE INTO ENGLISH FROM THE FRENCH OF FREDERIC ORTOLI, BY JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS. 12mo, $1.00.

“It is a veritable French ‘Uncle Remus’ that Mr. Harris has discovered in Frederic Ortoli. The book has the genuine piquancy of Gallic wit, and will be sure to charm American children. Mr. Harris’s version is delightfully written.”--_Boston Beacon._


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Froissart’s own cunning little poem of _Le Débat dou Cheval et dou Levrier_, recently printed for the first time by M. Buchon, gives such a picture of himself:--

    “Froissars d’Escoce revenolt      Sus un cheval qui gris estoit;      Un blanc levrier menoit en lasse.”


[2] Froissart’s Chronicles were written in four volumes, or books. The parts I have taken from the first book cover a period of about thirty years, counting from the coronation of the young King Edward the Third of England in the year 1326 to the battle of Poitiers in the year 1356. The times covered by the other three books will be given as we come to them.

I have thought that the young readers of Froissart would care to know exactly how it was that such a wonderful amount of fighting had to be done during the fourteenth century, in England, France, and Flanders, as is described in this book; and I have therefore devoted the first forty or fifty pages to such extracts as would inform them upon the causes of these terrible and long-continued wars.--ED.

[3] The young readers of Froissart will be interested in some particulars of this exploit not given by our author. When Douglas made his first impetuous onset, it seemed as if he would be successful, even alone. The Saracens retreated in confusion, and Douglas and his party were tempted into a hot pursuit. “Taking the casket from his neck” (says Hailes, in the Annals of Scotland), “which contained the heart of Bruce,” Douglas “threw it before him, and cried, ‘Now pass thou onward, as thou wast wont; and Douglas will follow thee, or die.’” Presently the Saracens rallied, and surrounded the Scotch with overwhelming numbers. “Douglas fell while attempting to rescue Sir William Clare of Roslin, who shared his fate. Robert and Walter Logan, both of them knights, were slain with Douglas.... His few surviving companions found his body in the field, together with the casket, and reverently conveyed them to Scotland. The remains of Douglas were interred in the sepulchre of his fathers, in the church of Douglas; and the heart of Bruce was deposited at Melrose.”

[4] Who, although he had been the chief supporter of Philip for the crown, had afterwards become the object of Philip’s violent hatred, and had been banished the kingdom.

[5] But it is to be hoped that every young reader of Froissart will heartily despise such cunning. This act of Sir John Norwich was mean and small beyond all decent words; for he took the basest advantage of the Duke of Normandy’s honorable confidence in his fidelity to the sacred obligations of a truce.--ED.

[6] Boys who accompany King Edward on this expedition will be glad to know, at the outset, that they are not to be fobbed off with a few skirmishes and a retreat of both armies--as on the preceding ones. In fact, we are now on the way to fight the great battle of Crecy.--ED.

[7] French for _a harrow_.

[8] The mark “-“ over a letter denotes an _m_ or an _n_ added: thus “cāe” = _came_, “thē” = _them_.

[9] yᵗ = _that_.

[10] wᵗ = _with_.

[11] = _amonge_.

[12] That is, _had been there dead if_ (and = _an_) _it had not been for his page_.

[13] _almaygnes_ = _Allemands_ = _Germans_.

[14] That is, _makes him ready_.

[15] _Ensigns._

[16] _Two._

[17] _Mild maid_,--the Virgin Mary.

[18] _They._

[19] _Fly._

[20] _’gan_,--began.

[21] _Ay_,--yea.

[22] _Feod_,--one who owes fealty.

[23] The narrative has advanced five years since the last chapter. King John keeps his oath: he “sets out after” the prince, and in a short time brings on the great battle of Poitiers.--ED.

[24] Some say it was composed of sulphur, naphtha, pitch, gum, and bitumen; others, that the ingredients are not now known. It was invented by Callinicus of Heliopolis, in the seventh century, to destroy the ships of the Saracens.--ED.

[25] It was Arnaut (i.e., Arnold) de Cervolle who was surnamed the Archpriest.--ED.

[26] After the battle of Poitiers the wretched land of France was tormented by all the ills of lawlessness. This chapter, and the next three, particularly those describing the Jacquerie, will show every boy the frenzies to which a people may be driven when the law is weak. In this case the arm of the law--King John--was wholly lacking in France.--ED.

[27] Of Normandy.--ED.

[28] That is, Jack Goodman.--ED.

[29] Froissart’s Chronicles having been composed in four volumes, the peculiar nature of his work makes it well to preserve this division, aside from the general advantage of giving in unaltered form, so far as possible, the parts presented.--ED.

[30] This is King Charles the Sixth of France, called “the Maniac.” The narrative has here advanced twenty-four years since we left King John in England, a prisoner, after the battle of Poitiers. John has died, and been succeeded by Charles V.,--“the Wise,”--who has reigned sixteen years, and died. We now go on to see how his successor, young Charles the Sixth, fares in his wars with Philip von Artaveld to recover the rights of the Earl of Flanders. I have chosen these special chapters because they give us lively pictures of manners and customs among a different people from those illustrated by the selections of the first book. The insurrection of Wat Tyler, of which Froissart gives such a lively account in this book, ought really to begin these first chapters, since it occurred in 1378,--two years before the coronation of King Charles,--in the reign of Richard II. of England. The period covered by my extracts from this second book is therefore from 1378 to 1382, when the battle of Rosbecq was fought.--ED.

[31] I devote my selections from this book mainly to showing the manner in which the good canon Froissart picked up matter for his Chronicles from the conversation of chance travellers as he rode on his way; together with a glimpse of the handsome person and brilliant court of the great Béarnese lord Gaston Phœbus, Count de Foix. The time is the year 1388.--ED.

[32] His mother had been sent by her husband to bring home her dowry, in the hands of her brother the King of Navarre. The latter refused to send it; and the lady therefore remained in his country, fearing the anger of her husband if she should return without it.--ED.

[33] The young readers of Froissart may remember this passage when they come to read Chaucer’s account of the young squire who “Carf byforn his fadur at the table” (i.e., _carved before his father at the table_).--ED.

[34] For the sake of further variety I extract from Froissart’s fourth volume a lively picture of a crusade against the Saracens. The time is the last decade of the fourteenth century; more particularly, two months of the year 1390.--ED.

[35] Machines for throwing stones.--ED.

[36] Which I have selected for a concluding chapter because it is the last but one of Froissart’s book, and brings before us several persons who have figured in the history, as _dramatis personæ_ come forth at the last act of the play. Here are King Edward, with whose coronation my abridgment begins; Queen Philippa, whom we saw him marry; and King Richard II., whom we last beheld in front of Wat Tyler and his rebels.--ED.










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOY'S FROISSART ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms     of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online     at www.gutenberg.org. If you     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from         the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in         Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg         Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™         works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of         receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free         distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and