[FRO-volsunga-saga  —  part 2 of 2, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

And for the sight      That then I saw."

     By a pillar she stood      And strained its wood to her;      From the eyes of Brynhild,      Budli's daughter,      Flashed out fire,      And she snorted forth venom,      As the sore wounds she gazed on      Of the dead-slain Sigurd.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  This chapter is the Eddaic poem, called the first Lay of        Gudrun, inserted here by the translators.



CHAPTER XXXII. Of the Ending of Brynhild.

And now none might know for what cause Brynhild must bewail with weeping for what she had prayed for with laughter: but she spake--

"Such a dream I had, Gunnar, as that my bed was acold, and that thou didst ride into the hands of thy foes: lo now, ill shall it go with thee and all thy kin, O ye breakers of oaths; for on the day thou slayedst him, dimly didst thou remember how thou didst blend thy blood with the blood of Sigurd, and with an ill reward hast thou rewarded him for all that he did well to thee; whereas he gave unto thee to be the mightiest of men; and well was it proven how fast he held to his oath sworn, when he came to me and laid betwixt us the sharp-edged sword that in venom had been made hard. All too soon did ye fall to working wrong against him and against me, whenas I abode at home with my father, and had all that I would, and had no will that any one of you should be any of mine, as ye rode into our garth, ye three kings together; but then Atli led me apart privily, and asked me if I would not have him who rode Grani; yea, a man nowise like unto you; but in those days I plighted myself to the son of King Sigmund and no other; and lo, now, no better shall ye fare for the death of me."

Then rose up Gunnar, and laid his arms about her neck, and besought her to live and have wealth from him; and all others in likewise letted her from dying; but she thrust them all from her, and said that it was not the part of any to let her in that which was her will.

Then Gunnar called to Hogni, and prayed him for counsel, and bade him go to her, and see if he might perchance soften her dreadful heart, saying withal, that now they had need enough on their hands in the slaking of her grief, till time might get over.

But Hogni answered, "Nay, let no man hinder her from dying; for no gain will she be to us, nor has she been gainsome since she came hither!

Now she bade bring forth much gold, and bade all those come thither who would have wealth: then she caught up a sword, and thrust it under her armpit, and sank aside upon the pillows, and said, "Come, take gold whoso will!"

But all held their peace, and she said, "Take the gold, and be glad thereof!"

And therewith she spake unto Gunnar, "Now for a little while will I tell of that which shall come to pass hereafter; for speedily shall ye be at one again with Gudrun by the rede of Grimhild the Wise-wife; and the daughter of Gudrun and Sigurd shall be called Swanhild, the fairest of all women born. Gudrun shall be given to Atli, yet not with her good will. Thou shalt be fain to get Oddrun, but that shall Atli forbid thee; but privily shall ye meet, and much shall she love thee. Atli shall bewray thee, and cast thee into a worm-close, and thereafter shall Atli and his sons be slain, and Gudrun shall be their slayer; and afterwards shall the great waves bear her to the burg of King Jonakr, to whom she shall bear sons of great fame: Swanhild shall be sent from the land and given to King Jormunrek; and her shall bite the rede of Bikki, and therewithal is the kin of you clean gone; and more sorrows therewith for Gudrun.

"And now I pray thee, Gunnar, one last boon.--Let make a great bale on the plain meads for all of us; for me, and for Sigurd, and for those who were slain with him, and let that be covered over with cloth dyed red by the folk of the Gauls, (1) and burn me thereon on one side of the King of the Huns, and on the other those men of mine, two at the head and two at the feet, and two hawks withal; and even so is all shared equally; and lay there betwixt us a drawn sword, as in the other days when we twain stepped into one bed together; and then may we have the name of man and wife, nor shall the door swing to at the heel of him as I go behind him. Nor shall that be a niggard company if there follow him those five bond-women and eight bondmen, whom my father gave me, and those burn there withal who were slain with Sigurd.

"Now more yet would I say, but for my wounds, but my life-breath flits; the wounds open,--yet have I said sooth."

Now is the dead corpse of Sigurd arrayed in olden wise, and a mighty bale is raised, and when it was somewhat kindled, there was laid thereon the dead corpse of Sigurd Fafnir's-bane, and his son of three winters whom Brynhild had let slay, and Guttorm withal; and when the bale was all ablaze, thereunto was Brynhild borne out, when she had spoken with her bower-maidens, and bid them take the gold that she would give; and then died Brynhild, and was burned there by the side of Sigurd, and thus their life-days ended.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  The original has "raudu manna blodi", red-dyed in the blood        of men; the Sagaman's original error in dealing with the        word "Valaript" in the corresponding passage of the short        lay of Sigurd.--Tr.



CHAPTER XXXIII. Gudrun wedded to Atli.

Now so it is, that whoso heareth these tidings sayeth, that no such an one as was Sigurd was left behind him in the world, nor ever was such a man brought forth because of all the worth of him, nor may his name ever minish by eld in the Dutch Tongue nor in all the Northern Lands, while the world standeth fast.

The story tells that, on a day, as Gudrun sat in her bower, she fell to saying, "Better was life in those days when I had Sigurd; he who was far above other men as gold is above iron, or the leek over other grass of the field, or the hart over other wild things; until my brethren begrudged me such a man, the first and best of all men; and so they might not sleep or they had slain him. Huge clamour made Grani when he saw his master and lord sore wounded, and then I spoke to him even as with a man, but he fell drooping down to the earth, for he knew that Sigurd was slain."

Thereafter Gudrun gat her gone into the wild woods, and heard on all ways round about her the howling of wolves, and deemed death a merrier thing than life. Then she went till she came to the hall of King Alf, and sat there in Denmark with Thora, the daughter of Hakon, for seven seasons, and abode with good welcome. And she set forth her needlework before her, and did thereinto many deeds and great, and fair plays after the fashion of those days, swords and byrnies, and all the gear of kings, and the ship of King Sigmund sailing along the land; yea, and they wrought there, how they fought, Sigar and Siggeir, south in Fion. Such was their disport; and now Gudrun was somewhat solaced of her grief.

So Grimhild comes to hear where Gudrun has take up her abode, and she calls her sons to talk with her, and asks whether they will make atonement to Gudrun for her son and her husband, and said that it was but meet and right to do so.

Then Gunnar spake, and said that he would atone for her sorrows with gold.

So they send for their friends, and array their horses, their helms, and their shields, and their byrnies, and all their war-gear; and their journey was furnished forth in the noblest wise, and no champion who was of the great men might abide at home; and their horses were clad in mail-coats, and every knight of them had his helm done over with gold or with silver.

Grimhild was of their company, for she said that their errand would never be brought fairly to pass if she sat at home.

There were well five hundred men, and noble men rode with them. There was Waldemar of Denmark, and Eymod and Jarisleif withal. So they went into the hall of King Alf, and there abode them the Longbeards and Franks, and Saxons: they fared with all their war-gear, and had over them red fur-coats. Even as the song says--

     "Byrnies short cut,      Strong helms hammered,      Girt with good swords,      Red hair gleaming."

They were fain to choose good gifts for their sister, and spake softly to her, but in none of them would she trow. Then Gunnar brought unto her a drink mingled with hurtful things, and this she must needs drink, and with the drinking thereof she had no more memory of their guilt against her.

But in that drink was blended the might of the earth and the sea with the blood of her son; and in that horn were all letters cut and reddened with blood, as is said hereunder--

     "On the horn's face were there      All the kin of letters      Cut aright and reddened,      How should I rede them rightly?      The ling-fish long      Of the land of Hadding,      Wheat-ears unshorn,      And wild things' inwards.

     In that beer were mingled      Many ills together,      Blood of all the wood      And brown-burnt acorns,      The black dew of the hearth,      The God-doomed dead beast's inwards,      And the swine's liver sodden      Because all wrongs that deadens.

And so now, when their hearts are brought anigh to each other, great cheer they made: then came Grimhild to Gudrun, and spake:

"All hail to thee, daughter! I give thee gold and all kinds of good things to take to thee after thy father, dear-bought rings and bed-gear of the maids of the Huns, the most courteous and well dight of all women; and thus is thy husband atoned for: and thereafter shalt thou be given to Atli, the mighty king, and be mistress of all his might. Cast not all thy friends aside for one man's sake, but do according to our bidding."

Gudrun answers, "Never will I wed Atli the King: unseemly it is for us to get offspring betwixt us."

Grimhild says, "Nourish not thy wrath; it shall be to thee as if Sigurd and Sigmund were alive when thou hast borne sons."

Gudrun says, "I cannot take my heart from thoughts of him, for he was the first of all men."

Grimhild says, "So it is shapen that thou must have this king and none else."

Says Gudrun, "Give not this man to me, for an evil thing shall come upon thy kin from him, and to his own sons shall he deal evil, and be rewarded with a grim revenge thereafter."

Then waxed Grimhild fell at those words, and spake, "Do even as we bid thee, and take therefore great honour, and our friendship, and the steads withal called Vinbjorg and Valbjorg."

And such might was in the words of her, that even so must it come to pass.

Then Gudrun spake, "Thus then must it needs befall, howsoever against the will of me, and for little joy shall it be and for great grief."

Then men leaped on their horses, and their women were set in wains. So they fared four days a-riding and other four a-shipboard, and yet four more again by land and road, till at the last they came to a certain high-built hall; then came to meet Gudrun many folk thronging; and an exceedingly goodly feast was there made, even as the word had gone between either kin, and it passed forth in most proud and stately wise. And at that feast drinks Atli his bridal with Gudrun; but never did her heart laugh on him, and little sweet and kind was their life together.



CHAPTER XXXIV. Atli bids the Giukings to him.

Now tells the tale that on a night King Atli woke from sleep and spake to Gudrun--

"Medreamed," said he, "that thou didst thrust me through with a sword."

Then Gudrun areded the dream, and said that it betokened fire, whenas folk dreamed of iron. "It befalls of thy pride belike, in that thou deemest thyself the first of men."

Atli said, "Moreover I dreamed that here waxed two sorb-tree (1) saplings, and fain I was that they should have no scathe of me; then these were riven up by the roots and reddened with blood, and borne to the bench, and I was bidden eat thereof.

"Yea, yet again I dreamed that two hawks flew from my hand hungry and unfed, and fared to hell, and meseemed their hearts were mingled with honey, and that I ate thereof.

"And then again I dreamed that two fair whelps lay before me yelling aloud, and that the flesh of them I ate, though my will went not with the eating."

Gudrun says, "Nowise good are these dreams, yet shall they come to pass; surely thy sons are nigh to death, and many heavy things shall fall upon us."

"Yet again I dreamed," said he, "and methought I lay in a bath, and folk took counsel to slay me."

Now these things wear away with time, but in nowise was their life together fond.

Now falls Atli to thinking of where may be gotten that plenteous gold which Sigurd had owned, but King Gunnar and his brethren were lords thereof now.

Atli was a great king and mighty, wise, and a lord of many men; and now he falls to counsel with his folk as to the ways of them. He wotted well that Gunnar and his brethren had more wealth than any others might have, and so he falls to the rede of sending men to them, and bidding them to a great feast, and honouring them in diverse wise, and the chief of those messengers was hight Vingi.

Now the queen wots of their conspiring, and misdoubts her that this would mean some beguiling of her brethren: so she cut runes, and took a gold ring, and knit therein a wolf's hair, and gave it into the hands of the king's messengers.

Thereafter they go their ways according to the king's bidding; and or ever they came aland Vingi beheld the runes, and turned them about in such wise as if Gudrun prayed her brethren in her runes to go meet King Atli.

Thereafter they came to the hall of King Gunnar, and had good welcome at his hands, and great fires were made for them, and in great joyance they drank of the best of drink.

Then spake Vingi, "King Atli sends me hither, and is fain that ye go to his house and home in all glory, and take of him exceeding honours, helms and shields, swords and byrnies, gold and goodly raiment, horses, hosts of war, and great and wide lands, for, saith he, he is fainest of all things to bestow his realm and lordship upon you."

Then Gunnar turned his head aside, and spoke to Hogni--

"In what wise shall we take this bidding? might and wealth he bids us take; but no kings know I who have so much gold as we have, whereas we have all the hoard which lay once on Gnitaheath; and great are our chambers, and full of gold, and weapons for smiting, and all kinds of raiment of war, and well I wot that amidst all men my horse is the best, and my sword the sharpest, and my gold the most glorious."

Hogni answers, "A marvel is it to me of his bidding, for seldom hath he done in such a wise, and ill-counselled will it be to wend to him; lo now, when I saw those dear-bought things the king sends us I wondered to behold a wolf's hair knit to a certain gold ring; belike Gudrun deems him to be minded as a wolf towards us, and will have naught of our faring."

But withal Vingi shows him the runes which he said Gudrun had sent.

Now the most of folk go to bed, but these drank on still with certain others; and Kostbera, the wife of Hogni, the fairest of women, came to them, and looked on the runes.

But the wife of Gunnar was Glaumvor, a great-hearted wife.

So these twain poured out, and the kings drank, and were exceeding drunken, and Vingi notes it, and says--

"Naught may I hide that King Atli is heavy of foot and over-old for the warding of his realm; but his sons are young and of no account: now will he give you rule over his realms while they are yet thus young, and most fain will he be that ye have the joy thereof before all others."

Now so it befell both that Gunnar was drunk, and that great dominion was held out to him, nor might he work against the fate shapen for him; so he gave his word to go, and tells Hogni his brother thereof.

But he answered, "Thy word given must even stand now, nor will I fail to follow thee, but most loth am I to this journey."


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Service-tree; "pyrus sorbus domestica", or "p. s.        tormentalis.



CHAPTER XXXV. The Dreams of the Wives of the Giukings.

So when men had drunk their fill, they fared to sleep; then falls Kostbera to beholding the runes, and spelling over the letters, and sees that beneath were other things cut, and that the runes are guileful; yet because of her wisdom she had skill to read them aright. So then she goes to bed by her husband; but when they awoke, she spake unto Hogni--

"Thou art minded to wend away from home--ill-counselled is that; abide till another time! Scarce a keen reader of runes art thou, if thou deemest thou hast beheld in them the bidding of thy sister to this journey: lo, I read the runes, and had marvel of so wise a woman as Gudrun is, that she should have miscut them; but that which lieth underneath beareth your bane with it,--yea, either she lacked a letter, or others have dealt guilefully with the runes.

"And now hearken to my dream; for therein methought there fell in upon us here a river exceeding strong, and brake up the timbers of the hall."

He answered, "Full oft are ye evil of mind, ye women, but for me, I was not made in such wise as to meet men with evil who deserve no evil; belike he will give us good welcome."

She answered, "Well, the thing must ye yourselves prove, but no friendship follows this bidding:--but yet again I dreamed that another river fell in here with a great and grimly rush, and tore up the dais of the hall, and brake the legs of both you brethren; surely that betokeneth somewhat."

He answers, "Meadows along our way, whereas thou didst dream of the river; for when we go through the meadows, plentifully doth the seeds of the hay hang about our legs."

"Again I dreamed," she says, "that thy cloak was afire, and that the flame blazed up above the hall."

Says he, "Well, I wot what that shall betoken; here lieth my fair-dyed raiment, and it shall burn and blaze, whereas thou dreamedst of the cloak."

"Methought a bear came in," she says, "and brake up the king's high-seat, and shook his paws in such a wise that we were all adrad thereat, and he gat us all together into the mouth of him, so that we might avail us naught, and thereof fell great horror on us."

He answered, "Some great storm will befall, whereas thou hadst a white bear in thy mind."

"An erne methought came in," she says, "and swept adown the hall, and drenched me and all of us with blood, and ill shall that betoken, for methought it was the double of King Atli."

He answered, "Full oft do we slaughter beasts freely, and smite down great neat for our cheer, and the dream of the erne has but to do with oxen; yea, Atli is heart-whole toward us."

And therewithal they cease this talk.



CHAPTER XXXVI. Of the Journey of the Giukings to King Atli.

Now tells the tale of Gunnar, that in the same wise it fared with him; for when they awoke, Glaumvor his wife told him many dreams which seemed to her like to betoken guile coming; but Gunnar areded them all in other wise.

"This was one of them," said she; "methought a bloody sword was borne into the hall here, wherewith thou wert thrust through, and at either end of that sword wolves howled."

The king answered, "Cur dogs shall bite me belike; blood-stained weapons oft betoken dogs' snappings."

She said, "Yet again I dreamed--that women came in, heavy and drooping, and chose thee for their mate; may-happen these would be thy fateful women."

He answered, "Hard to arede is this, and none may set aside the fated measure of his days, nor is it unlike that my time is short." (1)

So in the morning they arose, and were minded for the journey, but some letted them herein.

Then cried Gunnar to the man who is called Fjornir--

"Arise, and give us to drink goodly wine from great tuns, because mayhappen this shall be very last of all our feasts; for belike if we die the old wolf shall come by the gold, and that bear shall nowise spare the bite of his war-tusks."

Then all the folk of his household brought them on their way weeping.

The son of Hogni said--

"Fare ye well with merry tide."

The more part of their folk were left behind; Solar and Snaevar, the sons of Hogni, fared with them, and a certain great champion, named Orkning, who was the brother of Kostbera.

So folk followed them down to the ships, and all letted them of their journey, but attained to naught therein.

Then spake Glaumvor, and said--

"O Vingi, most like that great ill hap will come of thy coming, and mighty and evil things shall betide in thy travelling."

He answered, "Hearken to my answer; that I lie not aught: and may the high gallows and all things of grame have me, if I lie one word!"

Then cried Kostbera, "Fare ye well with merry days."

And Hogni answered, "Be glad of heart, howsoever it may fare with us!"

And therewith they parted, each to their own fate. Then away they rowed, so hard and fast, that well-nigh the half of the keel slipped away from the ship, and so hard they laid on to the oars that thole and gunwale brake.

But when they came aland they made their ship fast, and then they rode awhile on their noble steeds through the murk wild-wood.

And now they behold the king's army, and huge uproar, and the clatter of weapons they hear from thence; and they see there a mighty host of men, and the manifold array of them, even as they wrought there: and all the gates of the burg were full of men.

So they rode up to the burg, and the gates thereof were shut; then Hogni brake open the gates, and therewith they ride into the burg.

Then spake Vingi, "Well might ye have left this deed undone; go to now, bide ye here while I go seek your gallows-tree! Softly and sweetly I bade you hither, but an evil thing abode thereunder; short while to bide ere ye are tied up to that same tree!"

Hogni answered, "None the more shall we waver for that cause; for little methinks have we shrunk aback whenas men fell to fight; and naught shall it avail thee to make us afeard,--and for an ill fate hast thou wrought."

And therewith they cast him down to earth, and smote him with their axe-hammers till he died.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Parallel beliefs to those in the preceding chapters, and        elsewhere in this book, as to spells, dreams, drinks, etc.,        among the English people may be found in "Leechdoms,        Wortcunning, and Starcraft of the Anglo-Saxons; being a        collection of Documents illustrating the History of Science        in this Country before the Norman Conquest".  Ed: Rev. T. O.        Cockayne, M.A. (3 vols.)  Longmans, London, 1864, 8vo.



CHAPTER XXXVII. The Battle in the Burg of King Atli.

Then they rode unto the king's hall, and King Atli arrayed his host for battle, and the ranks were so set forth that a certain wall there was betwixt them and the brethren.

"Welcome hither," said he. "Deliver unto me that plenteous gold which is mine of right; even the wealth which Sigurd once owned, and which is now Gudrun's of right."

Gunnar answered, "Never gettest thou that wealth; and men of might must thou meet here, or ever we lay by life if thou wilt deal with us in battle; ah, belike thou settest forth this feast like a great man, and wouldst not hold thine hand from erne and wolf!"

"Long ago I had it in my mind," said Atli, "to take the lives of you, and be lord of the gold, and reward you for that deed of shame, wherein ye beguiled the best of all your affinity; but now shall I revenge him."

Hogni answered, "Little will it avail to lie long brooding over that rede, leaving the work undone."

And therewith they fell to hard fighting, at the first brunt with shot.

But therewithal came the tidings to Gudrun, and when she heard thereof she grew exceeding wroth, and cast her mantle from her, and ran out and greeted those new-comers, and kissed her brethren, and showed them all love,--and the last of all greetings was that betwixt them.

Then said she, "I thought I had set forth counsels whereby ye should not come hither, but none may deal with his shapen fate." And withal she said, "Will it avail aught to seek for peace?"

But stoutly and grimly they said nay thereto. So she sees that the game goeth sorely against her brethren, and she gathers to her great stoutness of heart, and does on her a mail-coat and takes to her a sword, and fights by her brethren, and goes as far forward as the bravest of man-folk: and all spoke in one wise that never saw any fairer defence than in her.

Now the men fell thick, and far before all others was the fighting of those brethren, and the battle endured a long while unto midday; Gunnar and Hogni went right through the folk of Atli, and so tells the tale that all the mead ran red with blood; the sons of Hogni withal set on stoutly.

Then spake Atli the king, "A fair host and a great have we, and mighty champions withal, and yet have many of us fallen, and but evil am I apaid in that nineteen of my champions are slain, and but left six alive."

And therewithal was there a lull in the battle.

Then spake Atli the king, "Four brethren were we, and now am I left alone; great affinity I gat to me, and deemed my fortune well sped thereby; a wife I had, fair and wise, high of mind, and great of heart; but no joyance may I have of her wisdom, for little peace is betwixt us,--but ye--ye have slain many of my kin, and beguiled me of realm and riches, and for the greatest of all woes have slain my sister withal."

Quoth Hogni, "Why babblest thou thus? thou wert the first to break the peace. Thou didst take my kinswoman and pine her to death by hunger, and didst murder her, and take her wealth; an ugly deed for a king!--meet for mocking and laughter I deem it, that thou must needs make long tale of thy woes; rather will I give thanks to the Gods that thou fallest into ill."



CHAPTER XXXVIII. Of the slaying of the Giukings.

Now King Atli eggs on his folk to set on fiercely, and eagerly they fight; but the Giukings fell on so hard that King Atli gave back into the hall, and within doors was the fight, and fierce beyond all fights.

That battle was the death of many a man, but such was the ending thereof, that there fell all the folk of those brethren, and they twain alone stood up on their feet, and yet many more must fare to hell first before their weapons.

And now they fell on Gunnar the king, and because of the host of men that set on him was hand laid on him, and he was cast into fetters; afterwards fought Hogni, with the stoutest heart and the greatest manlihood; and he felled to earth twenty of the stoutest of the champions of King Atli, and many he thrust into the fire that burnt amidst the hall, and all were of one accord that such a man might scarce be seen; yet in the end was he borne down by many and taken.

Then said King Atli, "A marvellous thing how many men have gone their ways before him! Cut the heart from out of him, and let that be his bane!"

Hogni said, "Do according to thy will; merrily will I abide whatso thou wrlt do against me; and thou shalt see that my heart is not adrad, for hard matters have I made trial of ere now, and all things that may try a man was I fain to bear, whiles yet I was unhurt; but now sorely am I hurt, and thou alone henceforth will bear mastery in our dealings together."

Then spake a counsellor of King Atli, "Better rede I see thereto; take we the thrall Hjalli, and give respite to Hogni; for this thrall is made to die, since the longer he lives the less worth shall he be."

The thrall hearkened, and cried out aloft, and fled away anywhither where he might hope for shelter, crying out that a hard portion was his because of their strife and wild doings, and an ill day for him whereon he must be dragged to death from his sweet life and his swine-keeping. But they caught him, and turned a knife against him, and he yelled and screamed or ever he felt the point thereof.

Then in such wise spake Hogni as a man seldom speaketh who is fallen into hard need, for he prayed for the thrall's life, and said that these shrieks he could not away with, and that it were a lesser matter to him to play out the play to the end; and therewithal the thrall gat his life as for that time: but Gunnar and Hogni are both laid in fetters.

Then spake King Atli with Gunnar the king, and bade him tell out concerning the gold, and where it was, if he would have his life.

But he answered, "Nay, first will I behold the bloody heart of Hogni, my brother."

So now they caught hold of the thrall again, and cut the heart from out of him, and bore it unto King Gunnar, but he said--

"The faint heart of Hjalli may ye here behold, little like the proud heart of Hogni, for as much as it trembleth now, more by the half it trembled whenas it lay in the breast of him."

So now they fell on Hogni even as Atli urged them, and cut the heart from out of him, but such was the might of his manhood, that he laughed while he abode that torment, and all wondered at his worth, and in perpetual memory is it held sithence. (1)

Then they showed it to Gunnar, and he said--

"The mighty heart of Hogni, little like the faint heart of Hjalli, for little as it trembleth now, less it trembled whenas in his breast it lay! But now, O Atli, even as we die so shalt thou die; and lo, I alone wot where the gold is, nor shall Hogni be to tell thereof now; to and fro played the matter in my mind whiles we both lived, but now have I myself determined for myself, and the Rhine river shall rule over the gold, rather than that the Huns shall bear it on the hands of them."

Then said King Atli, "Have away the bondsman;" and so they did.

But Gudrun called to her men, and came to Atli, and said--

"May it fare ill with thee now and from henceforth, even as thou hast ill held to thy word with me!"

So Gunnar was cast into a worm-close, and many worms abode him there, and his hands were fast bound; but Gudrun sent him a harp, and in such wise did he set forth his craft, that wisely he smote the harp, smiting it with his toes, and so excellently well he played, that few deemed they had heard such playing, even when the hand had done it. And with such might and power he played, that all worms fell asleep in the end, save one adder only, great and evil of aspect, that crept unto him and thrust its sting into him until it smote his heart; and in such wise with great hardihood he ended his life days.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Since ("sidh", after, and "dham", that.).



CHAPTER XXXIX. The End of Atli and his Kin and Folk.

Now thought Atli the King that he had gained a mighty victory, and spake to Gudrun even as mocking her greatly, or as making himself great before her. "Gudrun," saith he, "thus hast thou lost thy brethren, and thy very self hast brought it about."

She answers, "In good liking livest thou, whereas thou thrustest these slayings before me, but mayhappen thou wilt rue it, when thou hast tried what is to come hereafter; and of all I have, the longest-lived matter shall be the memory of thy cruel heart, nor shall it go well with thee whiles I live."

He answered and said, "Let there be peace betwixt us; I will atone for thy brethren with gold and dear-bought things, even as thy heart may wish."

She answers, "Hard for a long while have I been in our dealings together, and now I say, that while Hogni was yet alive thou mightest have brought it to pass; but now mayest thou never atone for my brethren in my heart; yet oft must we women be overborne by the might of you men; and now are all my kindred dead and gone, and thou alone art left to rule over me: wherefore now this is my counsel that we make a great feast, wherein I will hold the funeral of my brother and of thy kindred withal."

In such wise did she make herself soft and kind in words, though far other things forsooth lay thereunder, but he hearkened to her gladly, and trusted in her words, whereas she made herself sweet of speech.

So Gudrun held the funeral feast for her brethren, and King Atli for his men, and exceeding proud and great was this feast.

But Gudrun forgat not her woe, but brooded over it, how she might work some mighty shame against the king; and at nightfall she took to her the sons of King Atli and her as they played about the floor; the younglings waxed heavy of cheer, and asked what she would with them.

"Ask me not," she said; "ye shall die, the twain of you!"

Then they answered, "Thou mayest do with thy children even as thou wilt, nor shall any hinder thee, but shame there is to thee in the doing of this deed."

Yet for all that she cut the throats of them.

Then the king asked where his sons were, and Gudrun answered, "I will tell thee, and gladden thine heart by the telling; lo now, thou didst make a great woe spring up for me in the slaying of my brethren; now hearken and hear my rede and my deed; thou hast lost thy sons, and their heads are become beakers on the board here, and thou thyself hast drunken the blood of them blended with wine; and their hearts I took and roasted them on a spit, and thou hast eaten thereof."

King Atli answered, "Grim art thou in that thou hast murdered thy sons, and given me their flesh to eat, and little space passes betwixt ill deed of thine and ill deed."

Gudrun said, "My heart is set on the doing to thee of as great shame as may be; never shall the measure of ill be full to such a king as thou art."

The king said, "Worser deeds hast thou done than men have to tell of, and great unwisdom is there in such fearful redes; most meet art thou to be burned on bale when thou hast first been smitten to death with stones, for in such wise wouldst thou have what thou hast gone a weary way to seek."

She answered, "Thine own death thou foretellest, but another death is fated for me."

And many other words they spake in their wrath.

Now Hogni had a son left alive, hight Niblung, and great wrath of heart he bare against King Atli; and he did Gudrun to wit that he would avenge his father. And she took his words well, and they fell to counsel together thereover, and she said it would be great goodhap if it might be brought about.

So on a night, when the king had drunken, he gat him to bed, and when he was laid asleep, thither to him came Gudrun and the son of Hogni.

Gudrun took a sword and thrust it through the breast of King Atli, and they both of them set their hands to the deed, both she and the son of Hogni.

Then Atli the king awoke with the wound, and cried out; "no need of binding or salving here!--who art thou who hast done the deed?"

Gudrun says, "Somewhat have I, Gudrun, wrought therein, and somewhat withal the son of Hogni."

Atli said, "Ill it beseemed to thee to do this, though somewhat of wrong was between us; for thou wert wedded to me by the rede of thy kin, and dower paid I for thee; yea, thirty goodly knights, and seemly maidens, and many men besides; and yet wert thou not content, but if thou should rule over the lands King Budli owned: and thy mother-in-law full oft thou lettest sit a-weeping."

Gudrun said, "Many false words hast thou spoken, and of naught I account them; oft, indeed, was I fell of mood, but much didst thou add thereto. Full oft in this thy house did frays befall, and kin fought kin, and friend fought friend, and made themselves big one against the other; better days had I whenas I abode with Sigurd, when we slew kings, and took their wealth to us, but gave peace to whomso would, and the great men laid themselves under our hands, and might we gave to him of them who would have it; then I lost him, and a little thing was it that I should bear a widow's name, but the greatest of griefs that I should come to thee--I who had aforetime the noblest of all kings, while for thee, thou never barest out of the battle aught but the worser lot."

King Atli answered, "Naught true are thy words, nor will this our speech better the lot of either of us, for all is fallen now to naught; but now do to me in seemly wise, and array my dead corpse in noble fashion."

"Yea, that will I," she says, "and let make for thee a goodly grave, and build for thee a worthy abiding place of stone, and wrap thee in fair linen, and care for all that needful is."

So therewithal he died, and she did according to her word: and then they cast fire into the hall.

And when the folk and men of estate awoke amid that dread and trouble, naught would they abide the fire, but smote each the other down, and died in such wise; so there Atli the king, and all his folk, ended their life-days. But Gudrun had no will to live longer after this deed so wrought, but nevertheless her ending day was not yet come upon her.

Now the Volsungs and the Giukings, as folk tell in tale, have been the greatest-hearted and the mightiest of all men, as ye may well behold written in the songs of old time.

But now with the tidings just told were these troubles stayed.



CHAPTER XL. How Gudrun cast herself into the Sea, but was brought ashore again.

Gudrun had a daughter by Sigurd hight Swanhild; she was the fairest of all women, eager-eyed as her father, so that few durst look under the brows of her; and as far did she excel other woman-kind as the sun excels the other lights of heaven.

But on a day went Gudrun down to the sea, and caught up stones in her arms, and went out into the sea, for she had will to end her life. But mighty billows drave her forth along the sea, and by means of their upholding was she borne along till she came at the last to the burg of King Jonakr, a mighty king, and lord of many folk. And he took Gudrun to wife, and their children were Hamdir, and Sorli, and Erp; and there was Swanhild nourished withal.



CHAPTER XLI. Of the Wedding and Slaying of Swanhild.

Jormunrek was the name of a mighty king of those days, and his son was called Randver. Now this king called his son to talk with him, and said, "Thou shalt fare on an errand of mine to King Jonakr, with my counsellor Bikki, for with King Jonakr is nourished Swanhild, the daughter of Sigurd Fafnir's-bane; and I know for sure that she is the fairest may dwelling under the sun of this world; her above all others would I have to my wife, and thou shalt go woo her for me."

Randver answered, "Meet and right, fair lord, that I should go on thine errands."

So the king set forth this journey in seemly wise, and they fare till they come to King Jonakr's abode, and behold Swanhild, and have many thoughts concerning the treasure of her goodliness.

But on a day Randver called the king to talk with him, and said, "Jormunrek the King would fain be thy brother-in-law, for he has heard tell of Swanhild, and his desire it is to have her to wife, nor may it be shown that she may be given to any mightier man than he is one."

The King says, "This is an alliance of great honour, for a man of fame he is."

Gudrun says, "A wavering trust, the trust in luck that it change not!"

Yet because of the king's furthering, and all the matters that went herewith, is the wooing accomplished; and Swanhild went to the ship with a goodly company, and sat in the stern beside the king's son.

Then spake Bikki to Randver, "How good and right it were if thou thyself had to wife so lovely a woman rather than the old man there."

Good seemed that word to the heart of the king's son, and he spake to her with sweet words, and she to him in like wise.

So they came aland and go unto the king, and Bikki said unto him, "Meet and right it is, lord, that thou shouldst know what is befallen, though hard it be to tell of, for the tale must be concerning thy beguiling, whereas thy son has gotten to him the full love of Swanhild, nor is she other than his harlot; but thou, let not the deed be unavenged."

Now many an ill rede had he given the king or this, but of all his ill redes did this sting home the most; and still would the king hearken to all his evil redes; wherefore he, who might nowise still the wrath within him, cried out that Randver should be taken and tied up to the gallows-tree.

And as he was led to the gallows he took his hawk and plucked the feathers from off it, and bade show it to his father; and when the king saw it, then he said, "Now may folk behold that he deemeth my honour to be gone away from me, even as the feathers of this hawk;" and therewith he bade deliver him from the gallows.

But in that while had Bikki wrought his will, and Randver was dead-slain.

And, moreover, Bikki spake, "Against none hast thou more wrongs to avenge thee of than against Swanhild; let her die a shameful death."

"Yea," said the king, "we will do after thy counsel."

So she was bound in the gate of the burg, and horses were driven at her to tread her down; but when she opened her eyes wide, then the horses durst not trample her; so when Bikki beheld that, he bade draw a bag over the head of her; and they did so, and therewith she lost her life. (1)


  ENDNOTES   (1)  In the prose Edda the slaying of Swanhild is a spontaneous        and sudden act on the part of the king.  As he came back        from hunting one day, there sat Swanhild washing her linen,        and it came into the king's mind how that she was the cause        of all his woe, so he and his men rode over her and slew        her.--Tr.



CHAPTER XLII. Gudrun sends her Sons to avenge Swanhild.

Now Gudrun heard of the slaying of Swanhild, and spake to her sons, "Why sit ye here in peace amid merry words, whereas Jormunrek hath slain your sister, and trodden her under foot of horses in shameful wise? No heart ye have in you like to Gunnar or Hogni; verily they would have avenged their kinswoman!"

Hamdir answered, "Little didst thou praise Gunnar and Hogni, whereas they slew Sigurd, and thou wert reddened in the blood of him, and ill were thy brethren avenged by the slaying of thine own sons: yet not so ill a deed were it for us to slay King Jormunrek, and so hard thou pushest us on to this that we may naught abide thy hard words."

Gudrun went about laughing now, and gave them to drink from mighty beakers, and thereafter she got for them great byrnies and good, and all other weed (1) of war.

Then spake Hamdir, "Lo now, this is our last parting, for thou shalt hear tidings of us, and drink one grave-ale (2) over us and over Swanhild."

So therewith they went their ways.

But Gudrun went unto her bower, with heart swollen with sorrow, and spake--

"To three men was I wedded, and first to Sigurd Fafnir's-bane, and he was bewrayed and slain, and of all griefs was that the greatest grief. Then was I given to King Atli, and so fell was my heart toward him that I slew in the fury of my grief his children and mine. Then gave I myself to the sea, but the billows thereof cast me out aland, and to this king then was I given; then gave I Swanhild away out of the land with mighty wealth; and lo, my next greatest sorrow after Sigurd, for under horses' feet was she trodden and slain; but the grimmest and ugliest of woes was the casting of Gunnar into the Worm-close, and the hardest was the cutting of Hogni's heart from him.

"Ah, better would it be if Sigurd came to meet me, and I went my ways with him, for here bideth now behind with me neither son nor daughter to comfort me. Oh, mindest thou not, Sigurd, the words we spoke when we went into one bed together, that thou wouldst come and look on me; yea, even from thine abiding place among the dead?"

And thus had the words of her sorrow an end.


  ENDNOTE:   (1)  Weed (A.S. "weodo"), clothing.   (2)  Grave-ale, burial-feast.



CHAPTER XLIII. The Latter End of all the Kin of the Giukings.

Now telleth the tale concerning the sons of Gudrun, that she had arrayed their war-raiment in such wise, that no steel would bite thereon; and she bade them play not with stones or other heavy matters, for that it would be to their scathe if they did so.

And now, as they went on their way, they met Erp, their brother, and asked him in what wise he would help them.

He answered, "Even as hand helps hand, or foot helps foot."

But that they deemed naught at all, and slew him there and then. Then they went their ways, nor was it long or ever Hamdir stumbled, and thrust down his hand to steady himself, and spake therewith--

"Naught but a true thing spake Erp, for now should I have fallen, had not hand been to steady me."

A little after Sorli stumbled, but turned about on his feet, and so stood, and spake--

"Yea now had I fallen, but that I steadied myself with both feet."

And they said they had done evilly with Erp their brother.

But on they fare till they come to the abode of King Jormunrek, and they went up to him and set on him forthwith, and Hamdir cut both hands from him and Sorli both feet. Then spake Hamdir--

"Off were the head if Erp were alive; our brother, whom we slew on the way, and found out our deed too late." Even as the Song says,--

     "Off were the head      If Erp were alive yet,      Our brother the bold,      Whom we slew by the way,      The well-famed in warfare."

Now in this must they turn away from the words of their mother, whereas they had to deal with stones. For now men fell on them, and they defended themselves in good and manly wise, and were the scathe of many a man, nor would iron bite on them.

But there came thereto a certain man, old of aspect and one-eyed, (1) and he spake--

"No wise men are ye, whereas ye cannot bring these men to their end."

Then the king said, "Give us rede thereto, if thou canst."

He said, "Smite them to the death with stones."

In such wise was it done, for the stones flew thick and fast from every side, and that was the end of their life-days.

And now has come to an end the whole root and stem of the Giukings. (2)

     NOW MAY ALL EARLS      BE BETTERED IN MIND,      MAY THE GRIEF OF ALL MAIDENS      EVER BE MINISHED,      FOR THIS TALE OF TROUBLE      SO TOLD TO ITS ENDING.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Odin; he ends the tale as he began it.   (2)  "And now," etc., inserted by translators from the Poetic        Edda, the stanza at the end from the Whetting of Gudrun.



APPENDIX: EXCERPTS FROM THE POETIC EDDA.




PART OF THE SECOND LAY OF HELGI HUNDINGS-BANE (1)

Helgi wedded Sigrun, and they begate sons together, but Helgi lived not to be old; for Dag, (2) the son of Hogni, sacrificed to Odin, praying that he might avenge his father. So Odin lent Dag his spear, and Dag met Helgi, his brother-in-law, at a place called Fetter-grove, and thrust him through with that spear, and there fell Helgi dead; but Dag rode to Sevafell, and told Sigrun of the news.

     DAG:      Loth am I, sister      Of sorrow to tell thee,      For by hard need driven      Have I drawn on the greeting;      This morning fell      In Fetter-grove      The king well deemed      The best in the wide world,      Yea, he who stood      On the necks of the strong."

     SIGRUN:      All oaths once sworn      Shall bite thee sore,      The oaths that to Helgi      Once thou swarest      At the bright white      Water of Lightening, (3)      And at the cold rock      That the sea runneth over.

     May the ship sweep not on      That should sweep at its swiftest,      Though the wind desired      Behind thee driveth!      May the horse never run      That should run at his most might      When from thy foe's face      Thou hast most need to flee!

     May the sword never bite      That thou drawest from scabbard      But and if round thine head      In wrath it singeth!

     Then should meet price be paid      For Helgi's slaying      When a wolf thou wert      Out in the wild-wood,      Empty of good things      Empty of gladness,      With no meat for thy mouth      But dead men's corpses!

     DAG:      With mad words thou ravest,      Thy wits are gone from thee,      When thou for thy brother      Such ill fate biddest;      Odin alone      Let all this bale loose,      Casting the strife-runes      'Twixt friends and kindred.

     Rings of red gold      Will thy brother give thee,      And the stead of Vandil      And the lands of Vigdale;      Have half of the land      For thy sorrow's healing,      O ring-arrayed sweetling      For thee and thy sons!

     SIGRUN:      No more sit I happy      At Sevafell;      At day-dawn, at night      Naught love I my life      Till broad o'er the people      My lord's light breaketh;      Till his war-horse runneth      Beneath him hither,      Well wont to the gold bit--      Till my king I welcome.

     In such wise did Helgi      Deal fear around      To all his foes      And all their friends      As when the goat runneth      Before the wolf's rage      Filled with mad fear      Down from the fell.

     As high above all lords      Did Helgi beat him      As the ash-tree's glory      From the thorn ariseth,      Or as the fawn      With the dew-fell sprinkled      Is far above      All other wild things,      As his horns go gleaming      'Gainst the very heavens.

A barrow was raised above Helgi, but when he came in Valhall, then Odin bade him be lord of all things there, even as he; so Helgi sang--

     HELGI:      Now shalt thou, Hunding      For the help of each man      Get ready the foot-bath,      And kindle the fire;      The hounds shalt thou bind      And give heed to the horses,      Give wash to the swine      Ere to sleep thou goest.

A bondmaid of Sigrun went in the evening-tide by Helgi's mound, and there saw how Helgi rode toward it with a great company; then she sang--

     BONDMAID:      It is vain things' beguilling      That methinks I behold,      Or the ending of all things,      As ye ride, O ye dead men,      Smiting with spurs      Your horses' sides?      Or may dead warriors      Wend their ways homeward?

     THE DEAD:      No vain things' beguiling      Is that thou beholdest,      Nor the ruin of all things;      Though thou lookest upon us,      Though we smite with spurs      Our horses' sides;      Rather dead warriors      May wend their ways homeward.

Then went the bondmaid home, and told Sigrun, and sang--

     BONDMAID:      Go out, Sigrun      From Sevafell,      If thou listest to look on      The lord of thy people!      For the mound is uncovered      Thither is Helgi come,      And his wounds are bleeding,      But the king thee biddeth      To come and stay      That stream of sorrow.

So Sigrun went into the mound to Helgi, and sang--

     SIGRUN:      Now am I as fain      Of this fair meeting,      As are the hungry      Hawks of Odin,      When they wot of the slaying      Of the yet warm quarry,      Or bright with dew      See the day a-dawning.

     Ah, I will kiss      My king laid lifeless,      Ere thou castest by      Thy blood-stained byrny.      O Helgi, thy hair      Is thick with death's rime,      With the dew of the dead      Is my love all dripping;      Dead-cold are the hands      Of the son of Hogni;      How for thee, O my king,      May I win healing?

     HELGI:      Thou alone, Sigrun      Of Sevafell,      Hast so done that Helgi      With grief's dew drippeth;      O clad in gold      Cruel tears thou weepest,      Bright May of the Southlands,      Or ever thou sleepest;      Each tear in blood falleth      On the breast of thy lord,      Cold wet and bitter-sharp      Swollen with sorrow.

     Ah, we shall drink      Dear draughts and lovely,      Though, we have lost      Both life and lands;      Neither shall any      Sing song of sorrow,      Though in my breast      Be wounds wide to behold:      For now are brides      In the mound abiding;      Kings' daughters sit      By us departed.

Bow Sigrun arrayed a bed in the mound, and sang--

     SIGRUN:      Here, Helgi, for thee      A bed have I dight,      Kind without woe,      O kin of the Ylfings!      To thy bosom, O king,      Will I come and sleep soft,      As I was wont      When my lord was living.

     HELGI:      Now will I call      Naught not to be hoped for      Early or late      At Sevafell,      When thou in the arms      Of a dead man art laid,      White maiden of Hogni,      Here in the mound:      And thou yet quick,      O King's daughter!

     Now needs must I ride      On the reddening ways;      My pale horse must tread      The highway aloft;      West must I go      To Windhelm's bridge      Ere the war-winning crowd      Hall-crower (4) waketh.

So Helgi rode his ways: and the others gat them gone home to the house. But the next night Sigrun bade the bondwoman have heed of the mound. So at nightfall, thenas Sigrun came to the mound, she sang:

     SIGRUN:      Here now would he come,      If to come he were minded;      Sigmund's offspring      From the halls of Odin.      O me the hope waneth      Of Helgi's coming;      For high on the ash-boughs      Are the ernes abiding,      And all folk drift      Toward the Thing of the dreamland.

     BONDMAID:      Be not foolish of heart,      And fare all alone      To the house of the dead,      O Hero's daughter!      For more strong and dreadful      In the night season      Are all dead warriors      Than in the daylight.

But a little while lived Sigrun, because of her sorrow and trouble. But in old time folk trowed that men should be born again, though their troth be now deemed but an old wife's dotting. And so, as folk say, Helgi and Sigrun were born again, and at that tide was he called Helgi the Scathe of Hadding, and she Kara the daughter of Halfdan; and she was a Valkyrie, even as is said in the Lay of Kara.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Only that part of the song is given which completes the        episodes of Helgi Hunding's-bane; the earlier part of the        song differs little from the Saga.   (2)  Hogni, the father of Dar and Sigrun, had been slain by Helgi        in battle, and Helgi had given peace to, and taken oaths of        Dag.   (3)  One of the rivers of the under-world.   (4)  Hall-crower, "Salgofnir": lit. Hall-gaper, the cock of        Valhall.




PART OF THE LAY OF SIGRDRIFA (1)

       Now this is my first counsel,        That thou with thy kin      Be guiltless, guileless ever,        Nor hasty of wrath,        Despite of wrong done--      Unto the dead good that doeth.

       Lo the second counsel,        That oath thou swearest never,      But trusty oath and true:        Grim tormenting        Gripes troth-breakers;      Cursed wretch is the wolf of vows.

       This is my third rede,        That thou at the Thing      Deal not with the fools of folk;        For unwise man        From mouth lets fall      Worser word than well he wotteth.

       Yet hard it is        That holding of peace      When men shall deem thee dastard,      Or deem the lie said soothly;      But woeful is home-witness,      Unless right good thou gettest it.        Ah, on another day        Drive the life from out him,      And pay the liar back for his lying.

       Now behold the fourth rede:        If ill witch thee bideth,      Woe-begatting by the way,        Good going further        Rather than guesting,      Though thick night be on thee.

       Far-seeing eyes        Need all sons of men      Who wend in wrath to war;        For baleful women        Bide oft by the highway,      Swords and hearts to soften.

       And now the fifth rede:        As fair as thou seest      Brides on the bench abiding,        Let not love's silver        Rule over thy sleeping;      Draw no woman to kind kissing!

       For the sixth thing, I rede        When men sit a-drinking      Amid ale-words and ill-words,        Dead thou naught        With the drunken fight-staves      For wine stealeth wit from many.

       Brawling and drink        Have brought unto men      Sorrow sore oft enow;        Yea, bane unto some,        And to some weary bale;      Many are the griefs of mankind.

       For the seventh, I rede thee,        If strife thou raisest      With a man right high of heart,        Better fight a-field        Than burn in the fire      Within thine hall fair to behold.

       The eighth rede that I give thee:        Unto all ill look thou,      And hold thine heart from all beguiling;        Draw to thee no maiden,        No man's wife bewray thou,      Urge them not unto unmeet pleasure.

       This is the ninth counsel:        That thou have heed of dead folk      Whereso thou findest them a-field;        Be they sick-dead,        Be they sea-dead,      Or come to ending by war-weapons.

       Let bath be made        For such men fordone,      Wash thou hands and feet thereof,        Comb their hair and dry them        Ere the coffin has them;      Then bid them sleep full sweetly.

       This for the tenth counsel:        That thou give trust never      Unto oaths of foeman's kin,      Be'st thou bane of his brother,      Or hast thou felled his father;      Wolf in young son waxes,      Though he with gold be gladdened.

       For wrong and hatred        Shall rest them never,      Nay, nor sore sorrow.        Both wit and weapons        Well must the king have      Who is fain to be the foremost.

       The last rede and eleventh:        Until all ill look thou.      And watch thy friends' ways ever        Scarce durst I look        For long life for thee, king:      Strong trouble ariseth now already.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  This continues the first part of the lay given in Chapter XX        of the Saga; and is, in fact, the original verse of Chapter        XXI.




THE LAY CALLED THE SHORT LAY OF SIGURD.

     Sigurd of yore,      Sought the dwelling of Giuki,      As he fared, the young Volsung,      After fight won;      Troth he took      From the two brethren;      Oath swore they betwixt them,      Those bold ones of deed.

     A may they gave to him      And wealth manifold,      Gudrun the young,      Giuki's daughter:      They drank and gave doom      Many days together,      Sigurd the young,      And the sons of Giuki.

     Until they wended      For Brynhild's wooing,      Sigurd a-riding      Amidst their rout;      The wise young Volsung      Who knew of all ways--      Ah!  He had wed her,      Had fate so willed it.

     Southlander Sigurd      A naked sword,      Bright, well grinded,      Laid betwixt them;      No kiss he won      From the fair woman,      Nor in arms of his      Did the Hun King hold her,      Since he gat the young maid      For the son of Giuki.

     No lack in her life      She wotted of now,      And at her death-day      No dreadful thing      For a shame indeed      Or a shame in seeming;      But about and betwixt      Went baleful fate.

     Alone, abroad,      She sat of an evening,      Of full many things      She fall a-talking:      "O for my Sigurd!      I shall have death,      Or my fair, my lovely,      Laid in mine arms.

     "For the word once spoken,      I sorrow sorely--      His queen is Gudrun,      I am wed to Gunnar;      The dread Norns wrought for us      A long while of woe."

     Oft with heart deep      In dreadful thoughts,      O'er ice-fields and ice-hills      She fared a-night time,      When he and Gudrun      Were gone to their fair bed,      And Sigurd wrapped      The bed-gear round her.

     "Ah!  Now the Hun King      His queen in arms holdeth,      While love I go lacking,      And all things longed for      With no delight      But in dreadful thought."

     These dreadful things      Thrust her toward murder:      --"Listen, Gunnar,      For thou shalt lose      My wide lands,      Yea, me myself!      Never love I my life,      With thee for my lord--

     "I will fare back thither      From whence I came,      To my nighest kin      And those that know me      There shall I sit      Sleeping my life away,      Unless thou slayest      Sigurd the Hun King,      Making thy might more      E'en than his might was!

     "Yea, let the son fare      After the father,      And no young wolf      A long while nourish!      For on earth man lieth      Vengeance lighter,      And peace shall be surer      If the son live not."

     Adrad was Gunnar,      Heavy-hearted was he,      And in doubtful mood      Day-long he sat.      For naught he wotted,      Nor might see clearly      What was the seemliest      Of deeds to set hand to;      What of all deeds      Was best to be done:      For he minded the vows      Sworn to the Volsung,      And the sore wrong      To be wrought against Sigurd.

     Wavered his mind      A weary while,      No wont it was      Of those days worn by,      That queens should flee      From the realms of their kings.

     "Brynhild to me      Is better than all,      The child of Budli      Is the best of women.      Yea, and my life      Will I lay down,      Ere I am twinned      From that woman's treasure."

     He bade call Hogni      To the place where he bided;      With all the trust that might be,      Trowed he in him.

     "Wilt thou bewray Sigurd      For his wealth's sake?      Good it is to rule      O'er the Rhine's metal;      And well content      Great wealth to wield,      Biding in peace      And blissful days."

     One thing alone Hogni      Had for an answer:      "Such doings for us      Are naught seemly to do;      To rend with sword      Oaths once sworn,      Oaths once sworn,      And troth once plighted.

     "Nor know we on mould,      Men of happier days,      The while we four      Rule over the folk;      While the bold in battle,      The Hun King, bides living.

     "And no nobler kin      Shall be known afield,      If our five sons      We long may foster;      Yea, a goodly stem      Shall surely wax.      --But I clearly see      In what wise it standeth,      Brynhild's sore urging      O'ermuch on thee beareth.

     "Guttorm shall we      Get for the slaying,      Our younger brother      Bare of wisdom;      For he was out of      All the oaths sworn,      All the oaths sworn,      And the plighted troth."

     Easy to rouse him      Who of naught recketh!      --Deep stood the sword      In the heart of Sigurd.

     There, in the hall,      Gat the high-hearted vengeance;      For he can his sword      At the reckless slayer:      Out at Guttorm      Flew Gram the mighty,      The gleaming steel      From Sigurd's hand.

     Down fell the slayer      Smitten asunder;      The heavy head      And the hands fell one way,      But the feet and such like      Aback where they stood.

     Gudrun was sleeping      Soft in the bed,      Empty of sorrow      By the side of Sigurd:      When she awoke      With all pleasure gone,      Swimming in blood      Of Frey's beloved.

     So sore her hands      She smote together,      That the great-hearted      Gat raised in bed;      --"O Gudrun, weep not      So woefully,      Sweet lovely bride,      For thy brethren live for thee!

     "A young child have I      For heritor;      Too young to win forth      From the house of his foes.--      Black deeds and ill      Have they been a-doing,      Evil rede      Have they wrought at last.

     "Late, late, rideth with them      Unto the Thing,      Such sister's son,      Though seven thou bear,--      --But well I wot      Which way all goeth;      Alone wrought Brynhild      This bale against us.

     "That maiden loved me      Far before all men,      Yet wrong to Gunnar      I never wrought;      Brotherhood I heeded      And all bounden oaths,      That none should deem me      His queen's darling."

     Weary sighed Gudrun,      As the king gat ending,      And so sore her hands      She smote together,      That the cups arow      Rang out therewith,      And the geese cried on high      That were in the homefield.

     Then laughed Brynhild      Budli's daughter,      Once, once only,      From out her heart;      When to her bed      Was borne the sound      Of the sore greeting      Of Giuki's daughter.

     Then, quoth Gunnar,      The king, the hawk-bearer,      "Whereas, thou laughest,      O hateful woman,      Glad on thy bed,      No good it betokeneth:      Why lackest thou else      Thy lovely hue?      Feeder of foul deeds,      Fey do I deem thee,

     "Well worthy art thou      Before all women,      That thine eyes should see      Atli slain of us;      That thy brother's wounds      Thou shouldest see a-bleeding,      That his bloody hurts      Thine hands should bind."

     "No man blameth thee, Gunnar,      Thou hast fulfilled death's measure      But naught Atli feareth      All thine ill will;      Life shall he lay down      Later than ye,      And still bear more might      Aloft than thy might.

     "I shall tell thee, Gunnar,      Though well the tale thou knowest,      In what early days      Ye dealt abroad your wrong:      Young was I then,      Worn with no woe,      Good wealth I had      In the house of my brother!

     "No mind had I      That a man should have me,      Or ever ye Giukings,      Rode into our garth;      There ye sat on your steeds      Three kings of the people--      --Ah!  That that faring      Had never befallen!

     "Then spake Atli      To me apart,      And said that no wealth      He would give unto me,      Neither gold nor lands      If I would not be wedded;      Nay, and no part      Of the wealth apportioned,      Which in my first days      He gave me duly;      Which in my first days      He counted down.

     "Wavered the mind      Within me then,      If to fight I should fall      And the felling of folk,      Bold in Byrny      Because of my brother;      A deed of fame      Had that been to all folk,      But to many a man      Sorrow of mind.

     "So I let all sink      Into peace at the last:      More grew I minded      For the mighty treasure,      The red-shining rings      Of Sigmund's son;      For no man's wealth else      Would I take unto me.

     "For myself had I given      To that great king      Who sat amid gold      On the back of Grani;      Nought were his eyes      Like to your eyen,      Nor in any wise      Went his visage with yours;      Though ye might deem you      Due kings of men.

     "One I loved,      One, and none other,      The gold-decked may      Had no doubtful mind;      Thereof shall Atli      Wot full surely,      When he getteth to know      I am gone to the dead.

     "Far be it from me,      Feeble and wavering,      Ever to love      Another's love--      --Yes shall my woe      Be well avenged."

     Up rose Gunnar,      The great men's leader,      And cast his arms      About the queen's neck;      And all went nigh      One after other,      With their whole hearts      Her heart to turn.

     But then all these      From her neck she thrust,      Of her long journey      No man should let her.

     Then called he Hogni      To have talk with him;      "Let all folk go      Forth into the hall,      Thine with mine--      --O need sore and mighty!--      To wot if we yet      My wife's parting may stay.      Till with time's wearing      Some hindrance wax."

     One answer Hogni      Had for all;      "Nay, let hard need      Have rule thereover,      And no man let her      Of her long journey!      Never born again,      May she come back thence!

     "Luckless she came      To the lap of her mother,      Born into the world      For utter woe,      TO many a man      For heart-whole mourning."

     Upraised he turned      From the talk and the trouble,      To where the gem-field      Dealt out goodly treasure;      As she looked and beheld      All the wealth that she had,      And the hungry bondmaids,      And maids of the hall.

     With no good in her heart      She donned her gold byrny,      Ere she thrust the sword point      Through the midst of her body:      On the boister's far side      Sank she adown,      And, smitten with sword,      Still bethought her of redes.

     "Let all come forth      Who are fain the red gold,      Or things less worthy      To win from my hands;      To each one I give      A necklace gilt over,      Wrought hangings and bed=gear,      And bright woven weed."

     All they kept silence,      And thought what to speak,      Then all at once      Answer gave:      "Full enow are death-doomed,      Fain are we to live yet,      Maids of the hall      All meet work winning."

     "From her wise heart at last      The linen-clad damsel,      The one of few years      Gave forth the word:      "I will that none driven      By hand or by word,      For our sake should lose      Well-loved life.

     "Thou on the bones of you      Surely shall burn,      Less dear treasure      At your departing      Nor with Menia's Meal (1)      Shall ye come to see me."

     "Sit thee down, Gunnar,      A word must I say to thee      Of the life's ruin      Of thy lightsome bride--      --Nor shall thy ship      Swim soft and sweetly      For all that I      Lay life adown.

     "Sooner than ye might deem      Shall ye make peace with Gudrun,      For the wise woman      Shall full in the young wife      The hard memory      Of her dead husband.

     "There is a may born      Reared by her mother,      Whiter and brighter      Than is the bright day;      She shall be Swanhild,      She shall be Sunbeam.

     "Thou shalt give Gudrun      Unto a great one,      Noble, well-praised      Of the world's folk;      Not with her goodwill,      Or love shalt thou give her;      Yet will Atli      Come to win her,      My very brother,      Born of Budli.

     --"Ah!  Many a memory      Of how ye dealt with me,      How sorely, how evilly      Ye ever beguiled me,      How all pleasure left me      The while my life lasted--!

     "Fain wilt thou be      Oddrun to win,      But thy good liking      Shall Atli let;      But in secret wise      Shall ye win together,      And she shall love thee      As I had loved thee,      If in such wise      Fare had willed it.

     "But with all ill      Shall Atli sting thee,      Into the strait worm-close      Shall he cast thee.

     "But no long space      Shall slip away      Ere Atli too      All life shall lose,      Yea, all his weal      With the life of his sons,      For a dreadful bed      Dights Gudrun for him,      From a heart sore laden,      With the sword's sharp edge.

     "More seemly for Gudrun,      Your very sister,      In death to wend after      Her love first wed;      Had but good rede      To her been given,      Or if her heart      Had been like to my heart.

     --"Faint my speech groweth--      But for our sake      Ne'er shall she lose      Her life beloved;      The sea shall have her,      High billows bear her      Forth unto Jonakr's      Fair land of his fathers.

     "There shall she bear sons,      Stays of a heritage,      Stays of a heritage,      Jonakr's sons;      And Swanhild shall she      Send from the land,      That may born of her,      The may born of Sigurd.

     "Her shall bite      The rede of Bikki,      Whereas for no good      Wins Jormunrek life;      And so is clean perished      All the kin of Sigurd,      Yea, and more greeting,      And more for Gudrun.

     "And now one prayer      Yet pray I of thee--      That last word of mine      Here in the world--      So broad on the field      Be the burg of the dead      That fair space may be left      For us all to lie down,      All those that died      At Sigurd's death!

     "Hang round that burg      Fair hangings and shields,      Web by Gauls woven,      And folk of the Gauls:      There burn the Hun King      Lying beside me.

     "But on the other side      Burn by the Hun King      Those who served me      Strewn with treasure;      Two at the head,      And two at the feet,      Two hounds therewith,      And two hawks moreover:      Then is all dealt      With even dealing.

     "Lay there amidst us      The right-dight metal,      The sharp-edged steel,      That so lay erst;      When we both together      Into one bed went,      And were called by the name      Of man and wife.

     "Never, then, belike      Shall clash behind him      Valhall's bright door      With rings bedight:      And if my fellowship      Followeth after,      In no wretched wise      Then shall we wend.

     "For him shall follow      My five bondmaids,      My eight bondsmen,      No borel folk:      Yea, and my fosterer,      And my father's dower      That Budli of old days      Gave to his dear child.

     "Much have I spoken,      More would I speak,      If the sword would give me      Space for speech;      But my words are waning,      My wounds are swelling--      Naught but truth have I told--      --And now make I ending."


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  "Menia's Maid"--periphrasis for gold.




THE HELL-RIDE OF BRYNHILD.

After the death of Brynhild were made two bales, one for Sigurd, and that was first burned; but Brynhild was burned on the other, and she was in a chariot hung about with goodly hangings.

And so folk say that Brynhild drave in her chariot down along the way to Hell, and passed by an abode where dwelt a certain giantess, and the giantess spake:--

     THE GIANT-WOMAN      "Nay, with my goodwill      Never goest thou      Through this stone-pillared      Stead of mine!      More seemly for thee      To sit sewing the cloth,      Than to go look on      The love of another.

     "What dost thou, going      From the land of the Gauls,      O restless head,      To this mine house?      Golden girl, hast thou not,      If thou listest to hearken,      In sweet wise from thy hands      The blood of men washen?"

     BRYNHILD      "Nay, blame me naught,      Bride of the rock-hall,      Though I roved a warring      In the days that were;      The higher of us twain      Shall I ever be holden      When of our kind      Men make account."

     THE GIANT-WOMAN      "Thou, O Brynhild,      Budli's daughter,      Wert the worst ever born      Into the world;      For Giuki's children      Death hast thou gotten,      And turned to destruction      Their goodly dwelling."

     BRYNHILD      "I shall tell thee      True tale from my chariot,      O thou who naught wottest,      If thou listest to wot;      How for me they have gotten      Those heirs of Giuki,      A loveless life,      A life of lies.

     "Hild under helm,      The Hlymdale people,      E'en those who knew me,      Ever would call me.

     "The changeful shapes      Of us eight sisters,      The wise king bade      Under oak-tree to bear;      Of twelve winters was I,      If thou listest to wot,      When I sware to the young lord      Oaths of love.

     "Thereafter gat I      Mid the folk of the Goths,      For Helmgunnar the old,      Swift journey to Hell,      And gave to Aud's brother      The young, gain and glory;      Whereof overwrath      Waxed Odin with me.

     "So he shut me in shield-wall      In Skata grove,      Red shields and white      Close set around me;      And bade him alone      My slumber to break      Who in no land      Knew how to fear.

     "He set round my hall,      Toward the south quarter,      The Bane of all trees      Burning aloft;      And ruled that he only      Thereover should ride      Who should bring me the gold      O'er which Fafnir brooded.

     "Then upon Grani rode      The goodly gold-strewer      To where my fosterer      Ruled his fair dwelling.      He who alone there      Was deemed best of all,      The War-lord of the Danes,      Well worthy of men.

     "In peace did we sleep      Soft in one bed,      As though he had been      Naught but my brother:      There as we lay      Through eight nights wearing,      No hand in love      On each other we laid.

     "Yet thence blamed me, Gudrun,      Giuki's daughter,      That I had slept      In the arms of Sigurd;      And then I wotted      As I fain had not wotted,      That they had bewrayed me      In my betrothals.

     "Ah!  For unrest      All too long      Are men and women      Made alive!      Yet we twain together      Shall wear through the ages,      Sigurd and I.--      --Sink adown, O giant-wife!"




FRAGMENTS OF THE LAY OF BRYNHILD

     HOGNI SAID:      "What hath wrought Sigurd      Of any wrong-doing      That the life of the famed one      Thou art fain of taking?"

     GUNNAR SAID:      "To me has Sigurd      Sworn many oaths,      Sworn many oaths,      And sworn them lying,      And he bewrayed me      When it behoved him      Of all folk to his troth      To be the most trusty."

     HOGNI SAID:      "Thee hath Brynhild      Unto all bale,      And all hate whetted,      And a work of sorrow;      For she grudges to Gudrun      All goodly life;      And to thee the bliss      Of her very body."

    ..........

     Some the wolf roasted,      Some minced the worm,      Some unto Guttorm      Gave the wolf-meat,      Or ever they might      In their lust for murder      On the high king      Lay deadly hand.

     Sigurd lay slain      On the south of the Rhine      High from the fair tree      Croaked forth the raven,      "Ah, yet shall Atli      On you redden edges,      The old oaths shall weigh      On your souls, O warriors."

     Without stood Gudrun,      Giuki's daughter,      And the first word she said      Was even this word:      "Where then is Sigurd,      Lord of the Warfolk,      Since my kin      Come riding the foremost?

     One word Hogni      Had for an answer:      "Our swords have smitten      Sigurd asunder,      And the grey horse hangs drooping      O'er his lord lying dead."

     Then quoth Brynhild,      Budli's daughter;      "Good weal shall ye have      Of weapons and lands,      That Sigurd alone      Would surely have ruled      If he had lived      But a little longer.

     "Ah, nothing seemly      For Sigurd to rule      Giuki's house      And the folk of the Goths,      When of him five sons      For the slaying of men,      Eager for battle,      Should have been begotten!"

     Then laughed Brynhild--      Loud rang the whole house--      One laugh only      From out her heart:      "Long shall your bliss be      Of lands and people,      Whereas the famed lord      You have felled to the earth!"

     Then spake Gudrun,      Giuki's daughter;      "Much thou speakest,      Many things fearful,      All grame be on Gunnar      The bane of Sigurd!      From a heart full of hate      Shall come heavy vengeance."

     Forth sped the even      Enow there was drunken,      Full enow was there      Of all soft speech;      And all men got sleep      When to bed they were gotten;      Gunnar only lay waking      Long after all men.

     His feet fell he to moving,      Fell to speak to himself      The waster of men,      Still turned in his mind      What on the bough      Those twain would be saying,      The raven and erne,      As they rode their ways homeward.

     But Brynhild awoke,      Budli's daughter,      May of the shield-folk,      A little ere morning:      "Thrust ye on, hold ye back,      --Now all harm is wrought,--      To tell of my sorrow,      Or to let all slip by me?"

     All kept silence      After her speaking,      None might know      That woman's mind,      Or why she must weep      To tell of the work      That laughing once      Of men she prayed.

     BRYNHILD SPAKE:      "In dreams, O Gunnar,      Grim things fell on me;      Dead-cold the hall was,      And my bed was a-cold,      And thou, lord, wert riding      Reft of all bliss,      Laden with fetters      'Mid the host of thy foemen."

     "So now all ye,      O House of the Niblungs,      Shall be brought to naught,      O ye oath-breakers!

     "Think'st thou not, Gunnar,      How that betid,      When ye let the blood run      Both in one footstep?      With ill reward      Hast thou rewarded      His heart so fain      To be the foremost!

     "As well was seen      When he rode his ways,      That king of all worth,      Unto my wooing;      How the host-destroyer      Held to the vows      Sworn beforetime,      Sworn to the young king.

     "For his wounding-wand      All wrought with gold,      The king beloved      Laid between us;      Without were its edges      Wrought with fire,      But with venom-drops      Deep dyed within."

Thus this song telleth of the death of Sigurd, and setteth forth how that they slew him without doors; but some say that they slew him within doors, sleeping in his bed. But the Dutch Folk say that they slew him out in the wood: and so sayeth the ancient song of Gudrun, that Sigurd and the sons of Giuki were riding to the Thing whenas he was slain. But all with one accord say that they bewrayed him in their troth with him, and fell on him as he lay unarrayed and unawares.




THE SECOND OR ANCIENT LAY OF GUDRUN.

Thiodrek the King was in Atli's house, and had lost there the more part of his men: so there Thiodrek and Gudrun bewailed their troubles one to the other, and she spake and said:--

     A may of all mays      My mother reared me      Bright in bower;      Well loved I my brethren,      Until that Giuki      With gold arrayed me,      With gold arrayed me,      And gave me to Sigurd.

     Such was my Sigurd,      Among the sons of Giuki      As is the green leek      O'er the low grass waxen,      Or a hart high-limbed      Over hurrying deer,      Or glede-red gold      Over grey silver.

     Till me they begrudged,      Those my brethren,      The fate to have him,      Who was first of all men;      Nor might they sleep,      Nor sit a-dooming,      Ere they let slay      My well-loved Sigurd.

     Grani ran to the Thing,      There was clatter to hear,      But never came Sigurd      Himself thereunto;      All the saddle-girt beasts      With blood were besprinkled,      As faint with the way      Neath the slayers they went.

     Then greeting I went      With Grani to talk,      And with tear-furrowed cheeks      I bade him tell all;      But drooping laid Grani,      His head in the grass,      For the steed well wotted      Of his master's slaying.

     A long while I wandered,      Long my mind wavered,      Ere the kings I might ask      Concerning my king.

     Then Gunnar hung head,      But Hogni told      Of the cruel slaying      Of my Sigurd:      "On the water's far side      Lies, smitten to death,      The bane of Guttorm      To the wolves given over.

     "Go, look on Sigurd,      On the ways that go southward,      There shalt thou hear      The ernes high screaming,      The ravens a-croaking      As their meat they crave for;      Thou shalt hear the wolves howling      Over thine husband.

     "How hast thou, Hogni,      The heart to tell me,      Me of joy made empty,      Of such misery?      Thy wretched heart      May the ravens tear      Wide over the world,      With no men mayst thou wend."

     One thing Hogni      Had for answer,      Fallen from his high heart,      Full of all trouble:      "More greeting yet,      O Gudrun, for thee,      If my heart the ravens      Should rend asunder!"

     Thence I turned      From the talk and the trouble      To go a leasing (1)      What the wolves had left me;      No sigh I made      No smote hands together,      Nor did I wail      As other women      When I sat over      My Sigurd slain.

     Night methought it,      And the moonless dark,      When I sat in sorrow      Over Sigurd;      Better than all things      I deemed it would be      If they would let me      Cast my life by,      Or burn me up      As they burn the birch-wood.

     From the fell I wandered      Five days together,      Until the high hall      Of Half lay before me;      Seven seasons there      I sat with Thora,      The daughter of Hacon,      Up in Denmark.

     My heart to gladden      With gold she wrought      Southland halls      And swans of the Dane-folk;      There had we painted      The chiefs a-playing;      Fair our hands wrought      Folk of the kings.

     Red shields we did,      Doughty knights of the Huns,      Hosts spear-dight, hosts helm-dight,      All a high king's fellows;      And the ships of Sigmund      From the land swift sailing;      Heads gilt over      And prows fair graven.

     On the cloth we broidered      That tide of their battling,      Siggeir and Siggar,      South in Fion.

     Then heard Grimhild,      The Queen of Gothland,      How I was abiding,      Weighed down with woe;      And she thrust the cloth from her      And called to her sons,      And oft and eagerly      Asked them thereof,      Who for her son      Would their sister atone,      Who for her lord slain      Would lay down weregild.

     Fain was Gunnar      Gold to lay down      All wrongs to atone for,      And Hogni in likewise;      Then she asked who was fain      Of faring straightly,      The steed to saddle      To set forth the wain,      The horse to back,      And the hawk to fly,      To shoot forth the arrow      From out the yew-bow.

     Valdarr the Dane-king      Came with Jarisleif      Eymod the third went      Then went Jarizskar;      In kingly wise      In they wended,      The host of the Longbeards;      Red cloaks had they,      Byrnies short-cut,      Helms strong hammered,      Girt with glaives,      And hair red-gleaming.

     Each would give me      Gifts desired,      Gifts desired,      Speech dear to my heart,      If they might yet,      Despite my sorrow,      Win back my trust,      But in them nought I trusted.

     Then brought me Grimhild      A beaker to drink of,      Cold and bitter,      Wrong's memory to quench;      Made great was that drink      With the might of the earth,      With the death-cold sea      And the blood that Son (2) holdeth.

     On that horn's face were there      All the kin of letters      Cut aright and reddened,      How should I rede them rightly?

     The ling-fish long      Of the land of Hadding,      Wheat-ears unshorn,      And wild things' inwards.

     In that mead were mingled      Many ills together,      Blood of all the wood,      And brown-burnt acorns;      The black dew of the hearth, (3)      And god-doomed dead beasts' inwards      And the swine's liver sodden,      For wrongs late done that deadens.

     Then waned my memory      When that was within me,      Of my lord 'mid the hall      By the iron laid low.      Three kings came      Before my knees      Ere she herself      Fell to speech with me.

     "I will give to thee, Gudrun,      Gold to be glad with,      All the great wealth      Of thy father gone from us,      Rings of red gold      And the great hall of Lodver,      And all fair hangings left      By the king late fallen.

     "Maids of the Huns      Woven pictures to make,      And work fair in gold      Till thou deem'st thyself glad.      Alone shalt thou rule      O'er the riches of Budli,      Shalt be made great with gold,      And be given to Atli."

     "Never will I      Wend to a husband,      Or wed the brother      Of Queen Brynhild;      Naught it beseems me      With the son of Budli      Kin to bring forth,      Or to live and be merry."

     "Nay, the high chiefs      Reward not with hatred,      For take heed that I      Was the first in this tale!      To thy heart shall it be      As if both these had life,      Sigurd and Sigmund,      When thou hast borne sons."

     "Naught may I, Grimhild,      Seek after gladness,      Nor deem aught hopeful      Of any high warrior,      Since wolf and raven      Were friends together,      The greedy, the cruel,      O'er great Sigurd's heart-blood."

     "Of all men that can be      For the noblest of kin      This king have I found,      And the foremost of all;      Him shalt thou have      Till with eld thou art heavy--      Be thou ever unwed,      If thou wilt naught of him!"

     "Nay, nay, bid me not      With thy words long abiding      To take unto me      That balefullest kin;      This king shall bid Gunnar      Be stung to his bane,      And shall cut the heart      From out of Hogni.

     "Nor shall I leave life      Ere the keen lord,      The eager in sword-play,      My hand shall make end of."

     Grimhild a-weeping      Took up the word then,      When the sore bale she wotted      Awaiting her sons,      And the bane hanging over      Her offspring beloved.

     "I will give thee, moreover,      Great lands, many men,      Wineberg and Valberg,      If thou wilt but have them;      Hold them lifelong,      And live happy, O daughter!"

     "Then him must I take      From among kingly men,      'Gainst my heart's desire,      From the hands of my kinsfolk;      But no joy I look      To have from that lord:      Scarce may my brother's bane      Be a shield to my sons."

     Soon was each warrior      Seen on his horse,      But the Gaulish women      Into wains were gotten;      Then seven days long      O'er a cold land we rode,      And for seven other      Clove we the sea-waves.      But with the third seven      O'er dry land we wended.

     There the gate-wardens      Of the burg, high and wide,      Unlooked the barriers      Ere the burg-garth we rode to--

    ............

     Atli woke me      When meseemed I was      Full evil of heart      For my kin dead slain.

     "In such wise did the Norns      Wake me or now."--      Fain was he to know      Of this ill foreshowing--      "That methought, O Gudrun,      Giuki's daughter,      That thou setst in my heart      A sword wrought for guile."

     "For fires tokening I deem it      That dreaming of iron,      But for pride and for lust      The wrath of fair women      Against some bale      Belike, I shall burn thee      For thy solace and healing      Though hateful thou art."

     "In the fair garth methought      Had saplings fallen      E'en such as I would      Should have waxen ever;      Uprooted were these,      And reddened with blood,      And borne to the bench,      And folk bade me eat of them.

     "Methought from my hand then      Went hawks a-flying      Lacking their meat      To the land of all ill;      Methought that their hearts      Mingled with honey,      Swollen with blood      I ate amid sorrow.

     "Lo, next two whelps      From my hands I loosened,      Joyless were both,      And both a-howling;      And now their flesh      Became naught but corpses,      Whereof must I eat      But sore against my will."

     "O'er the prey of the fishers      Will folk give doom;      From the bright white fish      The heads will they take;      Within a few nights,      Fey as they are,      A little ere day      Of that draught will they eat."

     "Ne'er since lay I down,      Ne'er since would I sleep,      Hard of heart, in my bed:--      That deed have I to do. (4)


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  The original has "a vid lesa".  "Leasing" is the word still        used for gleaning in many country sides in England.   (2)  Son was the vessel into which was poured the blood of        Quasir, the God of Poetry.   (3)  This means soot.   (4)  The whole of this latter part is fragmentary and obscure;        there seems wanting to two of the dreams some trivial        interpretation by Gudrun, like those given by Hogni to        Kostbera in the Saga, of which nature, of course, the        interpretation contained in the last stanza but one is, as        we have rendered it: another rendering, from the different        reading of the earlier edition of "Edda" (Copenhagen, 1818)        would make this refer much more directly to the slaying of        her sons by Gudrun.




THE SONG OF ATLI.

Gudrun, Giuki's daughter, avenger her brethren, as is told far and wide; first she slew the sons of Atli, and then Atli himself; and she burned the hall thereafter, and all the household with it: and about these matters is this song made:--

     In days long gone      Sent Atli to Gunnar      A crafty one riding,      Knefrud men called him;      To Giuki's garth came he,      To the hall of Gunnar,      To the benches gay-dight,      And the gladsome drinking.

     There drank the great folk      'Mid the guileful one's silence,      Drank wine in their fair hall:      The Huns' wrath they feared      When Knefrud cried      In his cold voice,      As he sat on the high seat,      That man of the Southland:

     "Atli has sent me      Riding swift on his errands      On the bit-griping steed      Through dark woodways unbeaten,      To bid thee, King Gunnar,      Come to his fair bench      With helm well-adorned,      To the house of King Atli.

     "Shield shall ye have there      And spears ashen-shafted,      Helms ruddy with gold,      And hosts of the Huns;      Saddle-gear silver gilt,      Shirts red as blood,      The hedge of the warwife,      And horses bit-griping.

     "And he saith he will give you      Gnitaheath widespread,      And whistling spears      And prows well-gilded,      Might wealth      With the stead of Danpi,      And that noble wood      Men name the Murkwood."

     Then Gunnar turned head      And spake unto Hogni:      "What rede from thee, high one,      Since such things we hear?      No gold know I      On Gnitaheath,      That we for our parts      Have not portion as great.

     "Seven halls we have      Fulfilled of swords,      And hilts of gold      Each sword there has;      My horse is the best,      My blade is the keenest;      Fair my bow o'er the bench is,      Gleams my byrny with gold;      Brightest helm, brightest shield,      From Kiar's dwelling ere brought--      Better all things I have      Than all things of the Huns."

     HOGNI SAID:      "What mind has our sister      That a ring she hath sent us      In weed of wolves clad?      Bids she not to be wary?      For a wolf's hair I found      The fair ring wreathed about;      Wolf beset shall the way be      If we wend on this errand."

     No sons whetted Gunnar,      Nor none of his kin,      Nor learned men nor wise men,      Nor such as were mighty.      Then spake Gunnar      E'en as a king should speak,      Glorious in mead-hall      From great heart and high:

     "Rise up now, Fiornir,      Forth down the benches      Let the gold-cups of great ones      Pass in hands of my good-men!      Well shall we drink wine,      Draughts dear to our hearts,      Though the last of all feasts      In our fair house this be!

     "For the wolves shall rule      O'er the wealth of the Niblungs,      With the pine-woods' wardens      In Gunnar perish:      And the black-felled bears      With fierce teeth shall bite      For the glee of the dog kind,      If again comes not Gunnar."

     Then good men never shamed,      Greeting aloud,      Led the great king of men      From the garth of his home;      And cried the fair son      Of Hogni the king:      "Fare happy, O Lords,      Whereso your hearts lead you!"

     Then the bold knights      Let their bit-griping steeds      Wend swift o'er the fells,      Tread the murk-wood unknown,      All the Hunwood was shaking      As the hardy ones fared there;      O'er the green meads they urged      Their steeds shy of the goad.

     Then Atli's land saw they;      Great towers and strong,      And the bold men of Bikki,      Aloft on the burg:      The Southland folks' hall      Set with benches about,      Dight with bucklers well bounden,      And bright white shining shields.

     There drank Atli,      The awful Hun king,      Wine in his fair hall;      Without were the warders,      Gunnar's folk to have heed of,      Lest they had fared thither      With the whistling spear      War to wake 'gainst the king.

     But first came their sister      As they came to the hall,      Both her brethren she met,      With beer little gladdened:      "Bewrayed art thou, Gunnar!      What dost thou great king      To deal war to the Huns?      Go thou swift from the hall!

     Better, brother, hadst thou      Fared here in thy byrny      Than with helm gaily dight      Looked on Atli's great house:      Them hadst sat then in saddle      Through days bright with the sun      Fight to awaken      And fair fields to redden:

     "O'er the folk fate makes pale      Should the Norn's tears have fallen,      The shield mays of the Huns      Should have known of all sorrow;      And King Atli himself      To worm-close should be brought;      But now is the worm-close      Kept but for thee."

     Then spake Gunnar      Great 'mid the people:      "Over-late sister      The Niblungs to summon;      A long way to seek      The helping of warriors,      The high lord unshamed,      From the hills of the Rhine!"

    ..............

     Seven Hogni beat down      With his sword sharp-grinded,      And the eighth man he thrust      Amidst of the fire.      Ever so shall famed warrior      Fight with his foemen,      As Hogni fought      For the hand of Gunnar.

     But on Gunnar they fell,      And set him in fetters,      And bound hard and fast      That friend of Burgundians;      Then the warrior they asked      If he would buy life,      But life with gold      That king of the Goths.

     Nobly spake Gunnar,      Great lord of the Niblungs;      "Hogni's bleeding heart first      Shall lie in mine hand,      Cut from the breast      Of the bold-riding lord,      With bitter-sharp knife      From the son of the king."

     With guile the great one      Would they beguile,      On the wailing thrall      Laid they hand unwares,      And cut the heart      From out of Hjalli,      Laid it bleeding on trencher      And bare it to Gunnar.

     "Here have I the heart      Of Hjalli the trembler,      Little like the heart      Of Hogni the hardy:      As much as it trembleth      Laid on the trencher      By the half more it trembled      In the breast of him hidden."

     Then laughed Hogni      When they cut the heart from him,      From the crest-smith yet quick,      Little thought he to quail.      The hard acorn of thought      From the high king they took,      Laid it bleeding on trencher      And bare it Gunnar.

     "Here have I the heart      Of Hogni the hardy,      Little like to the heart      Of Hjalli the trembler.      Howso little it quaketh      Laid here on the dish,      Yet far less it quaked      In the breast of him laid.

     "So far mayst thou bide      From men's eyen, O Atli,      As from that treasure      Thou shalt abide!

     "Behold in my heart      Is hidden for ever      That hoard of the Niblungs,      Now Hogni is dead.      Doubt threw me two ways      While the twain of us lived,      But all that is gone      Now I live on alone.

     "The great Rhine shall rule      O'er the hate-raising treasure,      That gold of the Niblungs,      The seed of the gods:      In the weltering water      Shall that wealth lie a-gleaming,      Or it shine on the hands      Of the children of Huns!"

     Then cried Atli,      King of the Hun-folk,      "Drive forth your wains now      The slave is fast bounden."      And straightly thence      The bit-shaking steeds      Drew the hoard-warden,      The war-god to his death.

     Atli the great king,      Rode upon Glaum,      With shields set round about,      And sharp thorns of battle:      Gudrun, bound by wedlock      To these, victory made gods of,      Held back her tears      As the hall she ran into.

     "Let it fare with thee, Atli,      E'en after thine oaths sworn      To Gunnar fell often;      Yea, oaths sworn of old time,      By the sun sloping southward,      By the high burg of Sigry,      By the fair bed of rest,      By the red ring of Ull!"

     Now a host of men      Cast the high king alive      Into a close      Crept o'er within      With most foul worms,      Fulfilled of all venom,      Ready grave to dig      In his doughty heart.

     Wrathful-hearted he smote      The harp with his hand,      Gunnar laid there alone;      And loud rang the strings.--      In such wise ever      Should hardy ring-scatterer      Keep gold from all folk      In the garth of his foeman.

     Then Atli would wend      About his wide land,      On his steed brazen shod,      Back from the murder.      Din there was in the garth,      All thronged with the horses;      High the weapon-song rose      From men come from the heath.

     Out then went Gudrun,      'Gainst Atli returning,      With a cup gilded over,      To greet the land's ruler;      "Come, then, and take it,      King glad in thine hall,      From Gudrun's hands,      For the hell-farers groan not!"

     Clashed the beakers of Atli,      Wine-laden on bench,      As in hall there a-gathered,      The Huns fell a-talking,      And the long-bearded eager ones      Entered therein,      From a murk den new-come,      From the murder of Gunnar.

     Then hastened the sweet-faced      Delight of the shield-folk,      Bright in the fair hall,      Wine to bear to them:      The dreadful woman      Gave dainties withal      To the lords pale with fate,      Laid strange word upon Atli:

     "The hearts of thy sons      Hast thou eaten, sword-dealer,      All bloody with death      And drenched with honey:      In most heavy mood      Brood o'er venison of men!      Drink rich draughts therewith,      Down the high benches send it!

     "Never callest thou now      From henceforth to thy knee      Fair Erp or fair Eiril,      Bright-faced with the drink;      Never seest thou them now      Amidmost the seat,      Scattering the gold,      Or shafting of spears;      Manes trimming duly,      Or driving steeds forth!"

     Din arose from the benches,      Dread song of men was there,      Noise 'mid the fair hangings,      As all Hun's children wept;      All saving Gudrun,      Who never gat greeting,      For her brethren bear-hardy      For her sweet sons and bright,      The young ones, the simple      Once gotten with Atli.

    ...............

     The seed of gold      Sowed the swan-bright woman,      Rings of red gold      She gave to the house-carls;      Fate let she wax,      Let the bright gold flow forth,      In naught spared that woman      The store-houses' wealth.

     Atli unaware      Was a-weary with drink;      No weapon had he,      No heeding of Gudrun--      Ah, the pity would be better,      When in soft wise they twain      Would full often embrace      Before the great lords!

     To the bed with sword-point      Blood gave she to drink      With a hand fain of death,      And she let the dogs loose:      Then in from the hall-door--      --Up waked the house-carls--      Hot brands she cast,      Gat revenge for her brethren.

     To the flame gave she all      Who therein might be found;      Fell adown the old timbers,      Reeked all treasure-houses;      There the shield-mays were burnt,      Their lives' span brought to naught;      In the fierce fire sank down      All the stead of the Budlungs.

     Wide told of is this--      Ne'er sithence in the world,      Thus fared bride clad in byrny      For her brothers' avenging;      For behold, this fair woman      To three kings of the people,      Hath brought very death      Or ever she died!




THE WHETTING OF GUDRUN.

Gudrun went down unto the sea whenas she had slain Atli, and she cast herself therein, for she was fain to end her life: but nowise might she drown. She drave over the firths to the land of King Jonakr, and he wedded her, and their sons were Sorli, and Erp, and Hamdir, and there was Swanhild, Sigurd's daughter, nourished: and she was given to Jormunrek the Mighty. Now Bikki was a man of his, and gave such counsel to Randver, the king's son, as that he should take her; and with that counsel were the young folk well content.

Then Bikki told the king, and the king let hang Randver, but bade Swanhild be trodden under horses' feet. But when Gudrun heard thereof, she spake to her sons--

     Words of strife heard I,      Huger than any,      Woeful words spoken,      Sprung from all sorrow,      When Gudrun fierce-hearted      With the grimmest of words      Whetter her sons      Unto the slaying.

     "Why are ye sitting here?      Why sleep ye life away?      Why doth it grieve you nought?      Glad words to speak,      Now when your sister--      Young of years was she--      Has Jormunrek trodden      With the treading of horses?--

     "Black horses and white      In the highway of warriors;      Grey horses that know      The roads of the Goths.--

     "Little like are ye grown      To that Gunnar of old days!      Nought are your hearts      As the heart of Hogni!      Well would ye seek      Vengeance to win      If your mood were in aught      As the mood of my brethren,      Or the hardy hearts      Of the Kings of the Huns!"

     Then spake Hamdir,      The high-hearted--      "Little didst thou      Praise Hogni's doings,      When Sigurd woke      From out of sleep,      And the blue-white bed-gear      Upon thy bed      Grew red with man's blood--      With the blood of thy mate!

     "Too baleful vengeance      Wroughtest thou for thy brethren      Most sore and evil      When thy sons thou slewedst,      Else all we together      On Jormunrek      Had wrought sore vengeance      For that our sister.

     "Come, bring forth quickly      The Hun kings' bright gear,      Since thou has urged us      Unto the sword-Thing!"

     Laughing went Gudrun      To the bower of good gear,      Kings' crested helms      From chests she drew,      And wide-wrought byrnies      Bore to her sons:      Then on their horses      Load laid the heroes.

     Then spake Hamdir,      The high-hearted--      "Never cometh again      His mother to see      The spear-god laid low      In the land of the Goths.      That one arvel mayst thou      For all of us drink,      For sister Swanhild,      And us thy sons."

     Greeted Gudrun      Giuki's daughter;      Sorrowing she went      In the forecourt to sit,      That she might tell,      With cheeks tear-furrowed,      Her weary wail      In many a wise.

     "Three fires I knew,      Three hearths I knew,      To three husbands' houses      Have I been carried;      And better than all      Had been Sigurd alone,      He whom my brethren      Brought to his bane.

     "Such sore grief as that      Methought never should be,      Yet more indeed      Was left for my torment      Then, when the great ones      Gave me to Atli.

     "My fair bright boys      I bade unto speech,      Nor yet might I win      Weregild for my bale,      Ere I had hewn off      Those Niblungs' heads.

     "To the sea-strand I went      With the Norns sorely wroth,      For I would thrust from me      The storm of their torment;      But the high billows      Would not drown, but bore me      Forth, till I stepped a-land      Longer to live.

     "Then I went a-bed--      --Ah, better in the old days,      This was the third time!--      To a king of the people;      Offspring I brought forth,      Props of a fair house,      Props of a fair house,      Jonakr's fair sons.

     "But around Swanhild      Bond-maidens sat,      Her, that of all mine      Most to my heart was;      Such was my Swanhild,      In my hall's midmost,      As is the sunbeam      Fair to beheld.

     "In gold I arrayed her,      And goodly raiment,      Or ever I gave her      To the folk of the Goths.      That was the hardest      Of my heavy woes,      When the bright hair,--      O the bright hair of Swanhild!--      In the mire was trodden      By the treading of horses.

     "This was the sorest,      When my love, my Sigurd,      Reft of glory      In his bed gat ending:      But this the grimmest      When glittering worms      Tore their way      Through the heart of Gunnar.

     "But this the keenest      When they cut to the quick      Of the hardy heart      Of the unfeared Hogni.      Of much of bale I mind me,      Of many griefs I mind me;      Why should I sit abiding      Yet more bale and more?

     "Thy coal-black horse,      O Sigurd, bridle,      The swift on the highway!      O let him speed hither!      Here sitteth no longer      Son or daughter,      More good gifts      To give to Gudrun!

     "Mindst thou not, Sigurd,      Of the speech betwixt us,      When on one bed      We both sat together,      O my great king--      That thou wouldst come to me      E'en from the hall of Hell,      I to thee from the fair earth?

     "Pile high, O earls      The oaken pile,      Let it be the highest      That ever queen had!      Let the fire burn swift,      My breast with woe laden,      And thaw all my heart,      Hard, heavy with sorrow!"

     Now may all earls      Be bettered in mind,      May the grief of all maidens      Ever be minished,      For this tale of sorrow      So told to its ending.




THE LAY OF HAMDIR

     Great deeds of bale      In the garth began,      At the sad dawning      The tide of Elves' sorrow      When day is a-waxing      And man's grief awaketh,      And the sorrow of each one      The early day quickeneth.

     Not now, not now,      Nor yesterday,      But long ago      Has that day worn by,      That ancientest time,      The first time to tell of,      Then, whenas Gudrun,      Born of Giuki,      Whetter her sons      To Swanhild's avenging.

     "Your sister's name      Was naught but Swanhild,      Whom Jormunrek      With horses has trodden!--      White horses and black      On the war-beaten way,      Grey horses that go      On the roads of the Goths.

     "All alone am I now      As in holt is the aspen;      As the fir-tree of boughs,      So of kin am I bare;      As bare of things longed for      As the willow of leaves      When the bough-breaking wind      The warm day endeth.

     "Few, sad, are ye left      O kings of my folk!      Yet alone living      Last shreds of my kin!

     "Ah, naught are ye grown      As that Gunnar of old days;      Naught are your hearts      As the heart of Hogni!      Well would ye seek      Vengeance to win      If your hearts were in aught      As the hearts of my brethren!"

     Then spake Hamdir      The high-hearted:      "Nought hadst thou to praise      The doings of Hogni,      When they woke up Sigurd      From out of slumber,      And in bed thou sat'st up      'Mid the banes-men's laughter.

     "Then when thy bed=gear,      Blue-white, well woven      By art of craftsmen      All swam with thy king's blood;      The Sigurd died,      O'er his dead corpse thou sattest,      Not heeding aught gladsome,      Since Gunnar so willed it.

     "Great grief for Atli      Gatst thou by Erp's murder,      And the end of thine Eitil,      But worse grief for thyself.      Good to use sword      For the slaying of others      In such wise that its edge      Shall not turn on ourselves!"

     Then well spake Sorli      From a heart full of wisdom:      "No words will I      Make with my mother,      Though both ye twain      Need words belike--      What askest thou, Gudrun,      To let thee go greeting?

     "Weep for thy brethren,      Weep for thy sweet sons,      And thy nighest kinsfolk      Laid by the fight-side!      Yea, and thou Gudrun,      May'st greet for us twain      Sitting fey on our steeds      Doomed in far lands to die."

     From the garth forth they went      With hearts full of fury,      Sorli and Hamdir,      The sons of Gudrun,      And they met on the way      The wise in all wiles:      "And thou little Erp,      What helping from thee?"

     He of alien womb      Spake out in such wise:      "Good help for my kin,      Such as foot gives to foot,      Or flesh-covered hand      Gives unto hand!"

     "What helping for foot      That help that foot giveth,      Or for flesh-covered hand      The helping of hand?"

     Then spake Erp      Yet once again      Mock spake the prince      As he sat on his steed:      "Fool's deed to show      The way to a dastard!"      "Bold beyond measure,"      Quoth they, "is the base-born!"

     Out from the sheath      Drew they the sheath-steel,      And the glaives' edges played      For the pleasure of hell;      By the third part they minished      The might that they had,      Their young kin they let lie      A-cold on the earth.

     Then their fur-cloaks they shook      And bound fast their swords,      In webs goodly woven      Those great ones were clad;      Young they went o'er the fells      Where the dew was new-fallen      Swift, on steeds of the Huns,      Heavy vengeance to wreak.

     Forth stretched the ways,      And an ill way they found,      Yea, their sister's son (1)      Hanging slain upon tree--      Wolf-trees by the wind made cold      At the town's westward      Loud with cranes' clatter--      Ill abiding there long!

     Din in the king's hall      Of men merry with drink,      And none might hearken      The horses' tramping      Or ever the warders      Their great horn winded.

     Then men went forth      To Jormunrek      To tell of the heeding      Of men under helm:      "Give ye good counsel!      Great ones are come hither,      For the wrong of men mighty      Was the may to death trodden."

     "Loud Jormunrek laughed,      And laid hand to his beard,      Nor bade bring his byrny,      But with the wine fighting,      Shook his red locks,      On his white shield sat staring,      And in his hand      Swung the gold cup on high.

     "Sweet sight for me      Those twain to set eyes on,      Sorli and Hamdir,      Here in my hall!      Then with bowstrings      Would I bind them,      And hang the good Giukings      Aloft on the gallows!"

    ..............

     Then spake Hrothglod      From off the high steps,      Spake the slim-fingered      Unto her son,--      --For a threat was cast forth      Of what ne'er should fall--      "Shall two men alone      Two hundred Gothfolk      Bind or bear down      In the midst of their burg?"

    ...............

     Strife and din in the hall,      Cups smitten asunder      Men lay low in blood      From the breasts of Goths flowing.

     Then spake Hamdir,      The high-hearted:      "Thou cravedst, O king,      From the coming of us,      The sons of one mother,      Amidmost thine hall--      Look on these hands of thine,      Look on these feet of thine,      Cast by us, Jormunrek,      On to the flame!"

     Then cried aloud      The high Gods' kinsman (2)      Bold under byrny,--      Roared he as bears roar;      "Stones to the stout ones      That the spears bite not,      Nor the edges of steel,      These sons of Jonakr!"

    ..............

     QUOTH SORLI:      "Bale, brother, wroughtst thou      By that bag's (3) opening,      Oft from that bag      Rede of bale cometh!      Heart hast thou, Hamdir,      If thou hadst heart's wisdom      Great lack in a man      Who lacks wisdom and lore!"

     HAMDIR SAID:      "Yes, off were the head      If Erp were alive yet,      Our brother the bold      Whom we slew by the way;      The far-famed through the world--      Ah, the fares drave me on,      And the man war made holy,      There must I slay!"

     SORLI SAID:        "Unmeet we should do        As the doings of wolves are,      Raising wrong each 'gainst other        As the dogs of the Norns,        The greedy ones nourished      In waste steads of the world.

     In strong wise have we fought,      On Goths' corpses we stand,      Beat down by our edges,      E'en as ernes on the bough.      Great fame our might winneth,      Die we now, or to-morrow,--      No man lives till eve      Whom the fates doom at morning."      At the hall's gable-end      Fell Sorli to earth,      But Hamdir lay low      At the back of the houses.

Now this is called the Ancient Lay of Hamdir.


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Randver, the son of their sister's husband.   (2)  Odin, namely.   (3)  "Bag", his mouth.




THE LAMENT OF ODDRUN.

There was a king hight Heidrik, and his daughter was called Borgny, and the name of her lover was Vilmund. Now she might nowise be made lighter of a child she travailed with, before Oddrun, Atil's sister, came to her,--she who had been the love of Gunnar, Giuki's son. But of their speech together has this been sung:

     I have hear tell      In ancient tales      How a may there came      To Morna-land,      Because no man      On mould abiding      For Heidrik's daughter      Might win healing.

     All that heard Oddrun,      Atil's sister,      How that the damsel      Had heavy sickness,      So she led from stall      Her bridled steed,      And on the swart one      Laid the saddle.

     She made her horse wend      O'er smooth ways of earth,      Until to a high-built      Hall she came;      Then the saddle she had      From the hungry horse,      And her ways wended      In along the wide hall,      And this word first      Spake forth therewith:

     "What is most famed,      Afield in Hunland,      Or what may be      Blithest in Hunland?"

     QUOTH THE HANDMAID:      "Here lieth Borgny,      Borne down by trouble,      Thy sweet friend, O Oddrun,      See to her helping!"

     ODDRUN SAID:      "Who of the lords      Hath laid this grief on her,      Why is the anguish      Of Borgny so weary?"

     THE HANDMAID SAID:      "He is hight Vilmund,      Friend of hawk-bearers,      He wrapped the damsel      In the warm bed-gear      Five winters long      Without her father's wotting."

     No more than this      They spake methinks;      Kind sat she down      By the damsel's knee;      Mightily sand Oddrun,      Sharp piercing songs      By Borgny's side:

     Till a maid and a boy      Might tread on the world's ways,      Blithe babes and sweet      Of Hogni's bane:      Then the damsel forewearied      The word took up,      The first word of all      That had won from her:

     "So may help thee      All helpful things,      Fey and Freyia,      And all the fair Gods,      As thou hast thrust      This torment from me!"

     ODDRUN SAID:      "Yet no heart had I      For thy helping,      Since never wert thou      Worthy of helping,      But my word I held to,      That of old was spoken      When the high lords      Dealt out the heritage,      That every soul      I would ever help."

     BORGNY SAID:      "Right mad art thou, Oddrun,      And reft of thy wits,      Whereas thou speakest      Hard words to me      Thy fellow ever      Upon the earth      As of brothers twain,      We had been born."

     ODDRUN SAID:      "Well I mind me yet,      What thou saidst that evening,      Whenas I bore forth      Fair drink for Gunnar;      Such a thing, saidst thou,      Should fall out never,      For any may      Save for me alone."

     Mind had the damsel      Of the weary day      Whenas the high lords      Dealt out the heritage,      And she sat her down,      The sorrowful woman,      To tell of the bale,      And the heavy trouble.

     "Nourished was I      In the hall of kings--      Most folk were glad--      'Mid the council of great ones:      In fair life lived I,      And the wealth of my father      For five winters only,      While yet he had life.

     "Such were the last words      That ever he spake,      The king forewearied,      Ere his ways he went;      For he bade folk give me      The gold red-gleaming,      And give me in Southlands      To the son of Grimhild.

     "But Brynhild he bade      To the helm to betake her,      And said that Death-chooser      She should become;      And that no better      Might ever be born      Into the world,      If fate would not spoil it.

     "Brynhild in bower      Sewed at her broidery,      Folk she had      And fair lands about her;      Earth lay a-sleeping,      Slept the heavens aloft      When Fafnir's-bane      The burg first saw.

     "Then was war waged      With the Welsh-wrought sword      And the burg all broken      That Brynhild owned;      Nor wore long space,      E'en as well might be,      Ere all those wiles      Full well she knew.

     "Hard and dreadful      Was the vengeance she drew down,      So that all we      Have woe enow.      Through all lands of the world      Shall that story fare forth      How she did her to death      For the death of Sigurd.

     "But therewithal Gunnar      The gold-scatterer      Did I fall to loving      And should have loved him.      Rings of red gold      Would they give to Atli,      Would give to my brother      Things goodly and great.

     "Yea, fifteen steads      Would they give for me,      And the load of Grani      To have as a gift;      But then spake Atli,      That such was his will,      Never gift to take      From the sons of Giuki.

     "But we in nowise      Might love withstand,      And mine head must I lay      On my love, the ring-breaker;      And many there were      Among my kin,      Who said that they      Had seen us together.

     "Then Atli said      That I surely never      Would fall to crime      Or shameful folly:      But now let no one      For any other,      That shame deny      Where love has dealing.

     "For Atli sent      His serving-folk      Wide through the murkwood      Proof to win of me,      And thither they came      Where they ne'er should have come,      Where one bed we twain      Had dight betwixt us.

     "To those men had we given      Rings of red gold,      Naught to tell      Thereof to Atli,      But straight they hastened      Home to the house,      And all the tale      To Atli told.

     'Whereas from Gudrun      Well they hid it,      Though better by half      Had she have known it.

    ................

     "Din was there to hear      Of the hoofs gold-shod,      When into the garth      Rode the sons of Giuki.

     "There from Hogni      The heart they cut,      But into the worm-close      Cast the other.      There the king, the wise-hearted,      Swept his harp-strings,      For the might king      Had ever mind      That I to his helping      Soon should come.

     "But now was I gone      Yet once again      Unto Geirmund,      Good feast to make;      Yet had I hearing,      E'en out from Hlesey,      How of sore trouble      The harp-strings sang.

     "So I bade the bondmaids      Be ready swiftly,      For I listed to save      The life of the king,      And we let our ship      Swim over the sound,      Till Atli's dwelling      We saw all clearly.

     Then came the wretch (1)      Crawling out,      E'en Atli's mother,      All sorrow upon her!      A grave gat her sting      In the heart of Gunnar,      So that no helping      Was left for my hero.

     "O gold-clad woman,      Full oft I wonder      How I my life      Still hold thereafter,      For methought I loved      That light in battle,      The swift with the sword,      As my very self.

     "Thou hast sat and hearkened      As I have told thee      Of many an ill-fate,      Mine and theirs--      Each man liveth      E'en as he may live--      Now hath gone forth      The greeting of Oddrun."


  ENDNOTES:   (1)  Atli's mother took the form of the only adder that was not        lulled to sleep by Gunnar's harp-playing, and who slew him.







            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE VOLSUNGS (VOLSUNGA SAGA); WITH EXCERPTS FROM THE POETIC EDDA ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms     of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online     at www.gutenberg.org. If you     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from         the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in         Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg         Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™         works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of         receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free         distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


