[KYA-shah-nameh  —  part 4 of 5, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

beware of treachery or fraud, for falsehood shall certainly be punished with death." To this Kurugsar replied, "I have already sworn a solemn oath to the king, and at thy intercession he has spared my life--why then should I depart from the truth, and betray my benefactor?"

"Then tell me the road to the brazen fortress, and how far it is distant from this place?" said Isfendiyár.

"There are three different routes," replied Kurugsar. "One will occupy three months; it leads through a beautiful country, adorned with cities, and gardens, and pastures, and is pleasant to the traveller. The second is less attractive, the prospects less agreeable, and will only employ two months; the third, however, may be accomplished in seven days, and is thence called the Heft-khan, or seven stages; but at every stage some monster, or terrible difficulty, must be overcome. No monarch, even supported by a large army, has ever yet ventured to proceed by this route; and if it is ever attempted, the whole party will be assuredly lost.

 "Nor strength, nor juggling, nor the sorcerer's art   Can help him safely through that awful path,   Beset with wolves and dragons, wild and fierce,   From whom the fleetest have no power to fly.   There an enchantress, doubly armed with spells,   The most accomplished of that magic brood.   Spreads wide her snares to charm and to destroy,   And ills of every shape, and horrid aspect,   Cross the tired traveller at every step."

At this description of the terrors of the Heft-khan, Isfendiyár became thoughtful for awhile, and then, resigning himself to the providence of God, resolved to take the shortest route. "No man can die before his time," said he; "heaven is my protector, and I will fearlessly encounter every difficulty on the road." "It is full of perils," replied Kurugsar, and endeavored to dissuade him from the enterprise. "But with the blessing of God," rejoined Isfendiyár, "it will be easy." The prince then ordered a sumptuous banquet to be served, at which he gave Kurugsar abundant draughts of wine, and even in a state of intoxication the demon-guide still warned him against his proposed journey. "Go by the route which takes two months," said he, "for that will be convenient and safe;" but Isfendiyár replied:--"I neither fear the difficulties of the route, nor the perils thou hast described."

  And though destruction spoke in every word,   Enough to terrify the stoutest heart,   Still he adhered to what he first resolved.   "Thou wilt attend me," said the dauntless prince;   And thus Kurugsar, without a pause, replied:   "Undoubtedly, if by the two months' way,   And do thee ample service; but if this   Heft-khan be thy election; if thy choice   Be fixed on that which leads to certain death,   My presence must be useless. Can I go   Where bird has never dared to wing its flight?"

Isfendiyár, upon hearing these words, began to suspect the fidelity of Kurugsar, and thought it safe to bind him in chains. The next day as he was going to take leave of his father, Kurugsar called out to him, and said: "After my promises of allegiance, and my solemn oath, why am I thus kept in chains?" "Not out of anger assuredly; but out of compassion and kindness, in order that I may take thee along with me on the enterprise of the Heft-khan; for wert thou not bound, thy faint heart might induce thee to run away.

 "Safe thou art when bound in chains,     Fettered foot can never fly.   Whilst thy body here remains,     We may on thy faith rely.   Terror will in vain assail thee;   For these bonds shall never fail thee.   Guarded by a potent charm,   They will keep thee free from harm."

Isfendiyár having received the parting benediction of Gushtásp, was supplied with a force consisting of twelve thousand chosen horsemen, and abundance of treasure, to enable him to proceed on his enterprise, and conquer the kingdom of Arjásp.

First Stage.--Isfendiyár placed Kurugsar in bonds among his retinue, and took with him his brother Bashútan. But the demon-guide complained that he was unable to walk, and in consequence he was mounted on a horse, still bound, and the bridle given into the hands of one of the warriors. In this manner they proceeded, directed from time to time by Kurugsar, till they arrived at the uttermost limits of the kingdom, and entered a desert wilderness. Isfendiyár now asked what they would meet with, and the guide answered, "Two monstrous wolves are in this quarter, as large as elephants, and whose teeth are of immense length." The prince told his people, that as soon as they saw the wolves, they must at once attack them with arrows. The day passed away, and in the evening they came to a forest and a murmuring stream, when suddenly the two enormous wolves appeared, and rushed towards the legions of Isfendiyár. The people seeing them advance, poured upon them a shower of arrows. Several, however, were wounded, but the wolves were much exhausted by the arrows which had penetrated their bodies. At this moment Bashútan attacked one of them, and Isfendiyár the other; and so vigorous was their charge, that both the monsters were soon laid lifeless in the dust. After this signal overthrow, Isfendiyár turned to Kurugsar, and exclaimed: "Thus, through the favor of Heaven, the first obstacle has been easily extinguished!" The guide regarded him with amazement, and said:--"I am indeed astonished at the intrepidity and valor that has been displayed."

  Seeing the bravery of Isfendiyár,   Amazement filled the soul of Kurugsar.

The warriors and the party now dismounted, and regaled themselves with feasting and wine. They then reposed till the following morning.

Second Stage.--Proceeding on the second journey, Isfendiyár inquired what might now be expected to oppose their progress, and Kurugsar replied: "This stage is infested by lions." "Then," rejoined Isfendiyár, "thou shalt see with what facility I can destroy them." At about the close of the day they met with a lion and a lioness. Bashútan said: "Take one and I will engage the other." But Isfendiyár observed, that the animals seemed very wild and ferocious, and he preferred attacking them both himself, that his brother might not be exposed to any harm. He first sallied forth against the lion, and with one mighty stroke put an end to his life. He then approached the lioness, which pounced upon him with great fury, but was soon compelled to desist, and the prince, rapidly wielding his sword, in a moment cut off her head. Having thus successfully accomplished the second day's task, he alighted from his horse, and refreshments being spread out, the warriors and the troops enjoyed themselves with great satisfaction, exhilarated by plenteous draughts of ruby wine. Again Isfendiyár addressed Kurugsar, and said: "Thou seest with what facility all opposition is removed, when I am assisted by the favor of Heaven!" "But there are other and more terrible difficulties to surmount, and amazing as thy achievements certainly have been, thou wilt have still greater exertions to make before thy enterprise is complete." "What is the next evil I have to subdue?" "An enormous dragon,

 "With power to fascinate, and from the deep   To lure the finny tribe, his daily food.   Fire sparkles round him; his stupendous bulk   Looks like a mountain. When incensed, his roar   Makes the surrounding country shake with fear.   White poison-foam drops from his hideous jaws,   Which yawning wide, display a dismal gulf,   The grave of many a hapless being, lost   Wandering amidst that trackless wilderness."

Kurugsar described or magnified the ferocity of the animal in such a way, that Isfendiyár thought it necessary to be cautious, and with that view he ordered a curious apparatus to be constructed on wheels, something like a carriage, to which he fastened a large quantity of pointed instruments, and harnessed horses to it to drag it on the road. He then tried its motion, and found it admirably calculated for his purpose. The people were astonished at the ingenuity of the invention, and lauded him to the skies.

Third Stage--Away went the prince, and having travelled a considerable distance, Kurugsar suddenly exclaimed: "I now begin to smell the stench of the dragon." Hearing this, Isfendiyár dismounted, ascended the machine, and shutting the door fast, took his seat and drove off. Bashútan and all the warriors upon witnessing this extraordinary act, began to weep and lament, thinking that he was hurrying himself to certain destruction, and begged that for his own sake, as well as theirs, he would come out of the machine. But he replied: "Peace, peace! what know ye of the matter;" and as the warlike apparatus was so excellently contrived, that he could direct the movements of the horses himself, he drove on with increased velocity, till he arrived in the vicinity of the monster.

  The dragon from a distance heard     The rumbling of the wain,   And snuffing every breeze that stirred     Across the neighbouring plain,

  Smelt something human in his power,     A welcome scent to him;   For he was eager to devour     Hot reeking blood, or limb.

  And darkness now is spread around,     No pathway can be traced;   The fiery horses plunge and bound     Amid the dismal waste.

  And now the dragon stretches far     His cavern throat, and soon   Licks in the horses and the car,     And tries to gulp them down.

  But sword and javelin, sharp and keen,     Wound deep each sinewy jaw;   Midway, remains the huge machine,     And chokes the monster's maw.

  In agony he breathes, a dire     Convulsion fires his blood,   And struggling, ready to expire,     Ejects a poison-flood!

  And then disgorges wain and steeds,     And swords and javelins bright;   Then, as the dreadful dragon bleeds,     Up starts the warrior-knight,   And from his place of ambush leaps,     And, brandishing his blade,   The weapon in the brain he steeps,     And splits the monster's head.

  But the foul venom issuing thence,     Is so o'erpowering found,   Isfendiyár, deprived of sense,     Falls staggering to the ground!

Upon seeing this result, and his brother in so deplorable a situation, Bashútan and the troops also were in great alarm, apprehending the most fatal consequences. They sprinkled rose-water over his face, and administered other remedies, so that after some time he recovered; then he bathed, purifying himself from the filth of the monster, and poured out prayers of thankfulness to the merciful Creator for the protection and victory he had given him. But it was matter of great grief to Kurugsar that Isfendiyár had succeeded in his exploit, because under present circumstances, he would have to follow him in the remaining arduous enterprises; whereas, if the prince had been slain, his obligations would have ceased forever.

"What may be expected to-morrow?" inquired Isfendiyár. "To-morrow," replied the demon-guide, "thou wilt meet with an enchantress, who can convert the stormy sea into dry land, and the dry land again into the ocean. She is attended by a gigantic ghoul, or apparition." "Then thou shalt see how easily this enchantress and her mysterious attendant can be vanquished."

Fourth Stage.--On the fourth day Isfendiyár and his companions proceeded on the destined journey, and coming to a pleasant meadow, watered by a transparent rivulet, the party alighted, and they all refreshed themselves heartily with various kinds of food and wine. In a short space of time the enchantress appeared, most beautiful in feature and elegant in attire, and approaching our hero with a sad but fascinating expression of countenance, said to him (the ghoul, her pretended paramour, being at a little distance):--

  "I am a poor unhappy thing,   The daughter of a distant king.   This monster with deceit and fraud,   By a fond parent's power unawed,   Seduced me from my royal home,   Through wood and desert wild to roam;   And surely Heaven has brought thee now   To cheer my heart, and smooth my brow,   And free me from his loathed embrace,   And bear me to a fitter place,   Where, in thy circling arms more softly prest,   I may at last be truly loved, and blest."

Isfendiyár immediately called her to him, and requested her to sit down. The enchantress readily complied, anticipating a successful issue to her artful stratagems; but the intended victim of her sorcery was too cunning to be imposed upon. He soon perceived what she was, and forthwith cast his kamund over her, and in spite of all her entreaties, bound her too fast to escape. In this extremity, she successively assumed the shape of a cat, a wolf, and a decrepit old man: and so perfect were her transformations, that any other person would have been deceived, but Isfendiyár detected her in every variety of appearance; and, vexed by her continual attempts to cheat him, at last took out his sword and cut her in pieces. As soon as this was done, a thick dark cloud of dust and vapor arose, and when it subsided, a black apparition of a demon burst upon his sight, with flames issuing from its mouth. Determined to destroy this fresh antagonist, he rushed forward, sword in hand, and though the flames, in the attack, burnt his cloth-armor and dress, he succeeded in cutting off the threatening monster's head. "Now," said he to Kurugsar, "thou hast seen that with the favor of Heaven, both enchantress and ghoul are exterminated, as well as the wolves, the lions, and the dragon." "Very well," replied Kurugsar, "thou hast achieved this prodigious labor, but to-morrow will be a heavy day, and thou canst hardly escape with life. To-morrow thou wilt be opposed by the Símúrgh, whose nest is situated upon a lofty mountain. She has two young ones, each the size of an elephant, which she conveys in her beak and claws from place to place." "Be under no alarm," said Isfendiyár, "God will make the labor easy."

Fifth Stage.--On the fifth day, Isfendiyár resumed his journey, travelling with his little army over desert, plain, mountain, and wilderness, until he reached the neighborhood of the Símúrgh. He then adopted the same stratagem which he had employed before, and the machine supplied with swords and spears, and drawn by horses, was soon in readiness for the new adventure. The Símúrgh, seeing with surprise an immense vehicle, drawn by two horses, approach at a furious rate, and followed by a large company of horsemen, descended from the mountain, and endeavored to take up the whole apparatus in her claws to carry it away to her own nest; but her claws were lacerated by the sharp weapons, and she was then obliged to try her beak. Both beak and claws were injured in the effort, and the animal became extremely weakened by the loss of blood. Isfendiyár seizing the happy moment, sprang out of the carriage, and with his trenchant sword divided the Símúrgh in two parts; and the young ones, after witnessing the death of their parent, precipitately fled from the fatal scene. When Bashútan, with the army, came to the spot, they were amazed at the prodigious size of the Símúrgh, and the valor by which it had been subdued. Kurugsar turned pale with astonishment and sorrow. "What will be our next adventure?" said Isfendiyár to him. "To-morrow more pressing ills will surround thee. Heavy snow will fall, and there will be a violent tempest of wind, and it will be wonderful if even one man of thy legions remains alive. That will not be like fighting against lions, a dragon, or the Símúrgh, but against the elements, against the Almighty, which never can be successful. Thou hadst better therefore, return unhurt." The people on hearing this warning were alarmed, and proposed to go back; "for if the advice of Kurugsar is not taken, we shall all perish like the companions of Kai-khosráu, and lie buried under drifts of snow.

 "Let us return then, whilst we may;   Why should we throw our lives away?"

But Isfendiyár replied that he had already overcome five of the perils of the road, and had no fear about the remaining two. The people, however, were still discontented, and still murmured aloud; upon which the prince said, "Return then, and I will go alone.

 "I never can require the aid   Of men so easily dismayed."

Finding their leader immovable, the people now changed their tone, and expressed their devotion to his cause; declaring that whilst life remained, they would never forsake him, no never.

Sixth Stage.--On the following morning, the sixth, Isfendiyár continued his labors, and hurried on with great speed. Towards evening he arrived on the skirts of a mountain, where there was a running stream, and upon that spot, he pitched his tents.

  Presently from the mountain there rushed down   A furious storm of wind, then heavy showers   Of snow fell, covering all the earth with whiteness,   And making desolate the prospect round.   Keen blew the blast, and pinching was the cold;   And to escape the elemental wrath,   Leader and soldier, in the caverned rock   Scooped out by mouldering time, took shelter, there   Continuing three long days. Three lingering days   Still fell the snow, and still the tempest raged,   And man and beast grew faint for want of food.

Isfendiyár and his warriors, with heads exposed, now prostrated themselves in solemn prayer to the Almighty, and implored his favor and protection from the calamity which had befallen them. Happily their prayers were heard, Heaven was compassionate, and in a short space the snow and the mighty wind entirely ceased. By this fortunate interference of Providence, the army was enabled to quit the caves of the mountain; and then Isfendiyár again addressed Kurugsar triumphantly: "Thus the sixth labor is accomplished. What have we now to fear?" The demon-guide answered him and said: "From hence to the Brazen Fortress it is forty farsangs. That fortress is the residence of Arjásp; but the road is full of peril. For three farsangs the sand on the ground is as hot as fire, and there is no water to be found during the whole journey." This information made a serious impression upon the mind of Isfendiyár; who said to him sternly: "If I find thee guilty of falsehood, I will assuredly put thee to death." Kurugsar replied: "What! after six trials? Thou hast no reason to question my veracity. I shall never depart from the truth, and my advice is, that thou hadst better return; for the seventh stage is not to be ventured upon by human strength.

 "Along those plains of burning sand     No bird can move, nor ant, nor fly;   No water slakes the fiery land,     Intensely glows the flaming sky.   No tiger fierce, nor lion ever     Could breathe that pestilential air;   Even the unsparing vulture never     Ventures on blood-stained pinions there.

"At the distance of three farsangs beyond this inaccessible belt of scorching country lies the Brazen Fortress, to which there is no visible path; and if an army of a hundred thousand strong were to attempt its reduction, there would not be the least chance of success."

Seventh Stage.--When Isfendiyár heard these things, enough to alarm the bravest heart, he turned towards his people to ascertain their determination; when they unanimously repeated their readiness to sacrifice their lives in his service, and to follow wherever he might be disposed to lead the way. He then put Kurugsar in chains again, and prosecuted his journey, until he reached the place said to be covered with burning sand. Arrived on the spot, he observed to the demon-guide: "Thou hast described the sand as hot, but it is not so." "True; and it is on account of the heavy showers of snow that have fallen and cooled the ground, a proof that thou art under the protection of the Almighty." Isfendiyár smiled, and said: "Thou art all insincerity and deception, thus to play upon my feelings with false or imaginary terrors." Saying this he urged his soldiers to pass rapidly on, so as to leave the sand behind them, and they presently came to a great river. Isfendiyár was now angry with Kurugsar, and said: "Thou hast declared that for the space of forty farsangs there was no water, every drop being everywhere dried up by the burning heat of the sun, and here we find water! Why didst thou also idly fill the minds of my soldiers with groundless fears?" Kurugsar replied: "I will confess the truth. Did I not swear a solemn oath to be faithful, and yet I was still doubted, and still confined in irons, though the experience of six days of trial had proved the correctness of my information and advice. For this reason I was disappointed and displeased; and I must confess that I did, therefore, exaggerate the dangers of the last day, in the hope too of inducing thee to return and release me from my bonds.

 "For what have I received from thee,   But scorn, and chains, and slavery."

Isfendiyár now struck off the irons from the hands and feet of his demon-guide and treated him with favor and kindness, repeating to him his promise to reward him at the close of his victorious career with the government of a kingdom. Kurugsar was grateful for this change of conduct to him, and again acknowledging the deception he had been guilty of, hoped for pardon, engaging at the same time to take the party in safety across the great river which had impeded their progress. This was accordingly done, and the Brazen Fortress was now at no great distance. At the close of the day they were only one farsang from the towers, but Isfendiyár preferred resting till the next morning. "What is thy counsel now?" said he to his guide. "What sort of a fortress is this which fame describes in such dreadful colors?" "It is stronger than imagination can conceive, and impregnable."--"Then how shall I get to Arjásp?

 "How shall I cleave the oppressor's form asunder,   The murderer of my grandsire, Lohurásp?   The bravest heroes of Túrán shall fall   Under my conquering sword; their wives and children   Led captive to Irán; and desolation   Scathe the whole realm beneath the tyrant's sway."

But these words only roused and exasperated the feelings of Kurugsar, who bitterly replied:--

  "Then may calamity be thy reward,   Thy stars malignant, and thy life all sorrow;   And may'st thou perish, weltering in thy blood,   And the bare desert be thy lonely grave   For that inhuman thought, that cruel menace."

Isfendiyár, upon hearing this unexpected language, became furious with indignation, and instantly punished the offender on the spot; with one stroke of his sword he cleft Kurugsar in twain.

When the clouds of night had darkened the sky, Isfendiyár, with a number of his warriors, proceeded towards the Brazen Fortress, and secretly explored it on every side. He found it constructed entirely of iron and brass; and, notwithstanding a strict examination at every point, discovered no accessible part for attack. It was three farsangs high, and forty wide; and such a place as was never before beheld by man.



CAPTURE OF THE BRAZEN FORTRESS

Isfendiyár returned from reconnoitring the fortress with acute feelings of sorrow and despair. He was at last convinced that Kurugsar had spoken the truth; for there seemed to be no chance whatever of taking the place by any stratagem he could invent. Revolving the enterprise seriously in his mind, he now began to repent of his folly, and the overweening confidence which had led him to undertake the journey. Returning thus to his tent in a melancholy mood, he saw a Fakír sitting down on the road, and him he anxiously accosted. "What may be the number of the garrison in this fort?" "There are a hundred thousand veteran warriors in the service of Arjásp in the fort, with abundance of supplies of every kind, and streams of pure water, so that nothing is wanted to foil an enemy." This was very unwelcome intelligence to Isfendiyár, who now assembled his officers to consider what was best to be done. They all agreed that the reduction of the fortress was utterly impracticable, and that the safest course for him would be to return. But he could not bring himself to acquiesce in this measure, saying: "God is almighty, and beneficent, and with him is the victory." He then reflected deeply and long, and finally determined upon entering the fort disguised as a merchant. Having first settled the mode of proceeding, he put Bashútan in temporary charge of the army, saying:--

  "This Brazen Fortress scorns all feats of arms,   Nor sword nor spear, nor battle-axe, can here   Be wielded to advantage; stratagem   Must be employed, or we shall never gain   Possession of its wide-extended walls,   Placing my confidence in God alone   I go with rich and curious wares for sale,   To take the credulous people by surprise,   Under the semblance of a peaceful merchant."

Isfendiyár then directed a hundred dromedaries to be collected, and when they were brought to him he disposed of them in the following manner. He loaded ten with embroidered cloths, five with rubies and sapphires, and five more with pearls and other precious jewels. Upon each of the remaining eighty he placed two chests, and in each chest a warrior was secreted, making in all one hundred and sixty; and one hundred more were disposed as camel-drivers and servants. Thus the whole force, consisting of a hundred dromedaries and two hundred and sixty warriors, set off towards the Brazen Fortress, Isfendiyár having first intimated to his brother Bashútan to march with his army direct to the gates of the fort, as soon as he saw a column of flame and smoke ascend from the interior. On the way they gave out that they were merchants come with valuable goods from Persia, and hoped for custom. The tidings of travellers having arrived with rubies and gold-embroidered garments for sale, soon reached the ears of Arjásp, the king, who immediately gave them permission to enter the fort. When Isfendiyár, the reputed master of the caravan, had got within the walls, he said that he had brought rich presents for the king, and requested to be introduced to him in person. He was accordingly allowed to take the presents himself, was received with distinguished attention, and having stated his name to be Kherád, was invited to go to the royal palace, whenever, and as often as, he might please. At one of the interviews the king asked him, as he had come from Persia, if he knew whether the report was true or not that Kurugsar had been put to death, and what Gushtásp and Isfendiyár were engaged upon. The hero in disguise replied that it was five months since he left Persia; but he had heard on the road from many persons that Isfendiyár intended proceeding by the way of the Heft-khan with a vast army, towards the Brazen Fortress. At these words Arjásp smiled in derision, and said: "Ah! ah! by that way even the winged tribe are afraid to venture; and if Isfendiyár had a thousand lives, he would lose them all in any attempt to accomplish that journey." After this interview Isfendiyár daily continued to attend to the sale of his merchandise, and soon found that his sisters were employed in the degrading office of drawing and carrying water for the kitchen of Arjásp. When they heard that a caravan had arrived from Irán, they went to Isfendiyár (who recognized them at a distance, but hid his face that they might not know him), to inquire what tidings he had brought about their father and brother. Alarmed at the hazard of discovery, he replied that he knew nothing, and desired them to depart; but they remained, and said: "On thy return to Irán, at least, let it be known that here we are, two daughters of Gushtásp, reduced to the basest servitude, and neither father nor brother takes compassion upon our distresses.

 "Whilst with bare head, and naked feet, we toil,   They pass their time in peace and happiness,   Regardless of the misery we endure."

Isfendiyár again, in assumed anger, told them to depart, saying: "Talk not to me of Gushtásp and Isfendiyár--what have I to do with them?" At that moment the sound of his voice was recognized by the elder sister, who, in a transport of joy, instantly communicated her discovery to the younger; but they kept the secret till night, and then they returned to commune with their brother. Isfendiyár finding that he was known, acknowledged himself, and informed them that he had undertaken to restore them to liberty, and that he was now engaged in the enterprise, opposing every obstacle in his way; but it was necessary that they should continue their usual labor at the wells, till a fitting opportunity occurred.

For the purpose of accelerating the moment of release, Isfendiyár represented to the king that at a period of great adversity, he had made a vow that he would give a splendid banquet if ever Heaven again smiled upon him, and as he then was in the way to prosperity, and wished to fulfil his vow, he hoped that his majesty would honor him with his presence on the occasion. The king accepted the invitation with satisfaction, and said: "To-morrow I will be thy guest, at thy own house, and with all my warriors and soldiers." But this did not suit the scheme of the pretended merchant, who apologized on account of his house being too small, and proposed that the feast should be held upon the loftiest part of the fortress, where spacious tents and pavilions might be erected for the purpose, and a large fire lighted to give splendor to the scene. The king assented, and every requisite preparation being made, all the royal and warrior guests assembled in the morning, and eagerly partook of the rich viands set before them. They all drank wine with such relish and delight, that they soon became intoxicated, and Kherád seizing the opportunity, ordered the logs of wood which had been collected, to be set on fire, and rapidly the smoke and flame sprung up, and ascended to the sky. Bashútan saw the looked-for sign, and hastened with two thousand horsemen to the gates of the fortress, where he slew every one that he met, calling himself Isfendiyár. Arjásp had enjoyed the banquet exceedingly; the music gave him infinite pleasure, and the wine had intoxicated him; but in the midst of his hilarity and merriment, he was told that Isfendiyár had reached the gates, and entered the fort, killing immense numbers of his people. This terrible intelligence roused him and quitting the festive board of Kherád, he ordered his son Kahram, with fifty thousand horsemen, to repel the invader. He also ordered forty thousand horsemen to protect different parts of the walls, and ten thousand to remain as his own personal guard. Kahram accordingly issued forth without delay, and soon engaged in battle with the force under Bashútan.

When night came, Isfendiyár opened the lids of the chests, and let out the hundred and sixty warriors, whom he supplied with swords and spears, and armor, and also the hundred who were disguised as camel-drivers and servants.

  With this bold band he sped,   Whither Arjásp had fled;   And all who fought around,   To keep untouched that sacred ground;   (Resistance weak and vain,)   By him were quickly slain.

The sisters of Isfendiyár now arrived, and pointed out to him the chamber of Arjásp, to which place he immediately repaired, and roused up the king, who was almost insensible with the fumes of wine. Arjásp, however, sprang upon his feet,

  And grappled stoutly with Isfendiyár,   And desperate was the conflict: head and loins   Alternately received deep gaping wounds   From sword and dagger. Wearied out at length,   Arjásp shrunk back, when with one mighty blow,   Isfendiyár, exulting in his power,   Cleft him asunder.

Two of the wives, two daughters, and one sister of Arjásp fell immediately into the hands of the conqueror, who delivered them into the custody of his son, to be conveyed home. He then quitted the palace, and turning his steps towards the gates of the fortress, slew a great number of the enemy.

Kahram, in the meantime, had been fiercely engaged with Bashútan, and was extremely reduced. At the very moment too of his discomfiture, he heard the watchmen call out aloud that Arjásp had been slain by Kherád. Confounded and alarmed by these tidings, he approached the fort, where he heard the confirmation of his misfortune from every mouth, and also that the garrison had been put to the sword. Leading on the remainder of his troops he now came in contact with Isfendiyár and his two hundred and sixty warriors, and a sharp engagement ensued; but the coming up of Bashútan's force on his rear, placed him in such a predicament on every side, that defeat and destruction were almost inevitable. In short, Kahram was left with only a few of his soldiers near him, when Isfendiyár, observing his situation, challenged him to personal combat, and the challenge was accepted.

  So closely did the eager warriors close,   They seemed together joined, and but one man.   At last Isfendiyár seized Kahram's girth,   And flung him to the ground, and bound his hands;   And as a leaf is severed from its stalk,   So he the head cleft from its quivering trunk;   Thus one blow wins, and takes away a throne,   In battle heads are trodden under hoofs,   Crowns under heads.

After the death of Kahram, Isfendiyár issued a proclamation, offering full pardon to all who would unite under his banners. They had no king.

  The country had no throne, no crown. Alas!   What is the world without a governor,   What, but a headless trunk? A thing more worthless   Than the vile dust upon the common road.   What could the people do in their despair?   They were obedient, and Isfendiyár   Encouraged them with kind and gentle words,   Fitting a generous and a prudent master.

Having first written to his father an account of the great victory which he had gained, he occupied himself in reducing all the surrounding provinces and their inhabitants to subjection. Those people who continued hostile to him he deemed it necessary to put to death. He took all the women of Arjásp into his own service, and their daughters he presented to his own sons.

  Not a warrior of Chín remained;     The king of Túrán was swept away;   And the realm where in pomp he had reigned,     Where he basked in prosperity's ray,   Was spoiled by the conqueror's brand,     Desolation marked every scene,   And a stranger now governed the mountainous land,     Where the splendour of Poshang had been.   Not a dirhem of treasure was left;     For nothing eluded the conqueror's grasp;   Of all was the royal pavilion bereft;     All followed the fate of Arjásp!

When Gushtásp received information of this mighty conquest, he sent orders to Isfendiyár to continue in the government of the new empire; but the prince replied that he had settled the country, and was anxious to see his father. This request being permitted, he was desired to bring away all the immense booty, and return by the road of the Heft-khan. Arriving at the place where he was overtaken by the dreadful winter-storm, he again found all the property he had lost under the drifts of snow; and when he had accomplished his journey, he was received with the warmest welcome and congratulations, on account of his extraordinary successes. A royal feast was prepared, and the king filled his son's goblet with wine so repeatedly, and drank himself so frequently, and with such zest, that both of them at length became intoxicated. Gushtásp then asked Isfendiyár to describe to him the particulars of his expedition by the road of the Heft-khan; for though he had heard the story from others, he wished to have it from his own mouth. But Isfendiyár replied: "We have both drank too much wine, and nothing good can proceed from a drunken man; I will recite my adventures to-morrow, when my head is clear." The next day Gushtásp, seated upon his throne, and Isfendiyár placed before him on a golden chair, again asked for the prince's description of his triumphant progress by the Heft-khan, and according to his wish every incident that merited notice was faithfully detailed to him. The king expressed great pleasure at the conclusion; but envy and suspicion lurked in his breast, and writhing internally like a serpent, he still delayed fulfilling his promise to invest Isfendiyár, upon the overthrow of Arjásp, with the sovereignty of Irán.

The prince could not fail to observe the changed disposition of his father, and privately went to Kitabún, his mother, to whom he related the solemn promise and engagement of Gushtásp, and requested her to go to him, and say: "Thou hast given thy royal word to Isfendiyár, that when he had conquered and slain Arjásp, and restored his own sisters to liberty, thou wouldst place upon his head the crown of Irán; faith and honor are indispensable in princes, they are inculcated by religion, and yet thou hast failed to make good thy word." But the mother had more prudence, and said: "Let me give thee timely counsel, and breathe not a syllable to any one on the subject. God forbid that thou shouldst again be thrown into prison, and confined in chains. Recollect thine is the succession; the army is in thy favor; thy father is old and infirm. Have a little patience and in the end thou wilt undoubtedly be the King of Persia.

 "The gold and jewels, the imperial sway,   The crown, the throne, the army, all he owns,   Will presently be thine; then wait in patience,   And reign, in time, the monarch of the world."

Isfendiyár, however, was not contented with his mother's counsel, and suspecting that she would communicate to the king what he had said, he one day, as if under the influence of wine, thus addressed his father: "In what way have I failed to accomplish thy wishes? Have I not performed such actions as never were heard of, and never will be performed again, in furtherance of thy glory? I have overthrown thy greatest enemy, and supported thy honor with ceaseless toil and exertion. Is it not then incumbent on thee to fulfil thy promise?" Gushtásp replied: "Do not be impatient--the throne is thine;" but he was deeply irritated at heart on being thus reproached by his own son. When he retired he consulted with Jamásp, and was anxious to know what the stars foretold. The answer was: "He is of exalted fortune, of high destiny; he will overcome all his enemies, and finally obtain the sovereignty of the heft-aklím, or seven climes." This favorable prophecy aggravated the spleen of the father against the son, and he inquired with bitter and unnatural curiosity: "What will be his death? Look to that."

  "A deadly dart from Rustem's bow,   Will lay the glorious warrior low."

These tidings gladdened the heart of Gushtásp, and he said: "If this miscreant had been slain in his expedition to the Brazen Fortress I should not now have been insulted with his claim to my throne." The king then having resolved upon a scheme of deep dissimulation, ordered a gorgeous banquet, and invited to it all his relations and warriors; and when the guests were assembled he said to Isfendiyár: "The crown and the throne are thine; indeed, who is there so well qualified for imperial sway?" and turning to his warriors, he spoke of him with praise and admiration, and added: "When I was entering upon the war against Arjásp, before I quitted Sístán, I said to Rustem: 'Lohurásp, my father, is dead, my wife and children made prisoners, wilt thou assist me in punishing the murderer and oppressor?' but he excused himself, and remained at home, and although I have since been involved in numberless perils, he has not once by inquiry shown himself interested in my behalf; in short, he boasts that Kai-khosráu gave him the principalities of Zábul and Kábul, and Ním-rúz, and that he owes no allegiance to me! It behooves me, therefore, to depute Isfendiyár to go and put him to death, or bring him before me in bonds alive. After that I shall have no enemy to be revenged upon, and I shall retire from the world, and leave to Isfendiyár the crown and the throne of Persia, with confidence and satisfaction." All the nobles and heroes present approved of the measure, and the king, gratified by their approbation, then turned to Isfendiyár, and said: "I have sworn on the Zendavesta, to relinquish my power, and place it in thy hands, as soon as Rustem is subdued. Take whatever force the important occasion may require, for the whole resources of the empire shall be at thy command," But Isfendiyár thus replied: "Remember the first time I defeated Arjásp--what was my reward? Through the machinations of Gurzam I was thrown into prison and chained. And what is my reward now that I have slain both Arjásp and his son in battle? Thy solemn promise to me is forgotten, or disregarded. The prince who forgets one promise will forget another, if it be convenient for his purpose.

  "Whenever the Heft-khan is brought to mind,   I feel a sense of horror. But why should I   Repeat the story of those great exploits!   God is my witness, how I slew the wolf,   The lion, and the dragon; how I punished   That fell enchantress with her thousand wiles;   And how I suffered, midst the storm of snow,   Which almost froze the blood within my veins;   And how that vast unfathomable deep   We crossed securely. These are deeds which awaken   Wonder and praise in others, not in thee!   The treasure which I captured now is thine;   And what is my reward?--the interest, sorrow.   Thus am I cheated of my recompense.   It is the custom for great kings to keep   Religiously their pledged, affianced word;   But thou hast broken thine, despite of honour.

  "I do remember in my early youth,   It was in Rúm, thou didst perform a feat   Of gallant daring; for thou didst destroy   A dragon and a wolf, but thou didst bear   Thyself most proudly, thinking human arm   Never before had done a deed so mighty;   Yes, thou wert proud and vain, and seemed exalted   Up to the Heavens; and for that noble act   What did thy father do? The king for that   Gave thee with joyous heart his crown and throne.   Now mark the difference; think what I have done,   What perils I sustained, and for thy sake!   Thy foes I vanquished, clearing from thy mind   The gnawing rust of trouble and affliction.   Monsters I slew, reduced the Brazen Fortress,   And laid Arjásp's whole empire at thy feet,   And what was my reward? Neglect and scorn.   Did I deserve this at a father's hands?"

Gushtásp remained unmoved by this sharp rebuke, though he readily acknowledged its justice. "The crown shall be thine," said he, "but consider my position. Think, too, what services Zál and Rustem performed for Kai-khosráu, and shall I expect less from my own son, gifted as he is with a form of brass, and the most prodigious valor? Forbid it, Heaven! that any rumor of our difference should get abroad in the world, which would redound to the dishonor of both! Nearly half of Irán is in the possession of Rustem." "Give me the crown," said Isfendiyár, "and I will immediately proceed against the Zabúl champion." "I have given thee both the crown and the throne, take with thee my whole army, and all my treasure.--What wouldst thou have more? He who has conquered the terrific obstacles of the Heft-khan, and has slain Arjásp and subdued his entire kingdom, can have no cause to fear the prowess of Rustem, or any other chief." Isfendiyár replied that he had no fear of Rustem's prowess; he was now old, and therefore not equal to himself in strength; still he had no wish to oppose him:--

  "For he has been the monitor and friend   Of our Kaiánian ancestors; his care   Enriched their minds, and taught them to be brave;   And he was ever faithful to their cause.   Besides," said he, "thou wert the honoured guest   Of Rustem two long years; and at Sístán   Enjoyed his hospitality and friendship,   His festive, social board; and canst thou now,   Forgetting that delightful intercourse,   Become his bitterest foe?"

Gushtásp replied:--

  "Tis true he may have served my ancestors;   But what is that to me? His spirit is proud,   And he refused to yield me needful aid   When danger pressed; that is enough, and thou   Canst not divert me from my settled purpose.   Therefore, if thy aim be still   To rule, thy father's wish fulfil;   Quickly trace the distant road;   Quick invade the chiefs abode;   Bind his feet, and bind his hands   In a captive's galling bands;   Bring him here, that all may know   Thou hast quelled the mighty foe."

But Isfendiyár was still reluctant, and implored him to relinquish his design.

  "For if resolved, a gloomy cloud   Will quickly all thy glories shroud,     And dim thy brilliant throne;   I would not thus aspire to reign,   But rather, free from crime, remain     Sequestered and alone."

Again Gushtásp spoke, and said: "There is no necessity for any further delay. Thou art appointed my successor, and the crown and the throne are thine; thou hast therefore only to march to the scene of action, and accomplish the object of the war." Hearing this, Isfendiyár sullenly retired to his own house, and Gushtásp, perceiving that he was in an angry mood, requested Jamásp (his minister) to ascertain the state of his mind, and whether he intended to proceed to Sístán or not. Jamásp immediately went, and Isfendiyár asked him, as his friend, what he would advise. "The commands of a father," he replied, "must be obeyed." There was now no remedy, and the king being informed that the prince consented to undertake the expedition, no further discussion took place.

But Kitabún was deeply affected when she heard of these proceedings, and repaired instantly to her son, to represent to him the hopelessness of the enterprise he had engaged to conduct.

  "A mother's counsel is a golden treasure,   Consider well, and listen not to folly.   Rustem, the champion of the world, will never   Suffer himself to be confined in bonds.   Did he not conquer the White Demon, fill   The world with blood, in terrible revenge,   When Saiáwush was by Afrásiyáb   Cruelly slain? O, curses on the throne,   And ruin seize the country, which returns   Evil for good, and spurns its benefactor.   Restrain thy steps, engage not in this war;   It cannot do thee honour. Hear my voice!   For Rustem still can conquer all the world."   Hear the safe counsel of thy anxious mother!   Thus spoke Kitabún, shedding ceaseless tears;   And thus Isfendiyár: "I fear not Rustem;   I fear not his prodigious power and skill;   But never can I on so great a hero   Place ignominious bonds; it must not be.   Yet, mother dear, my faithful word is pledged;   My word Jamásp has taken to the king,   And I must follow where my fortune leads."

The next morning Isfendiyár took leave of the king, and with a vast army, and immense treasure, commenced his march towards Sístán. It happened that one of the camels in advance laid down, and though beaten severely, could not be made to get up on its legs. Isfendiyár, seeing the obstinacy of the animal, ordered it to be killed, and passed on. The people, however, interpreted the accident as a bad omen, and wished him not to proceed; but he could not attend to their suggestions, as he thought the king would look upon it as a mere pretence, and therefore continued his journey.

When he approached Sístán, he sent Bahman, his eldest son, to Rustem, with a flattering message, to induce the champion to honor him with an istakbál, or deputation to receive him. Upon Bahman's arrival, however, he hesitated and delayed, being reluctant to give a direct answer; but Zál interposed, saying: "Why not immediately wait upon the prince?--have we not always been devoted to the Kaiánian dynasty?--Go and bring him hither, that we may tender him our allegiance, and entertain him at our mansion as becomes his illustrious birth," Accordingly Rustem went out to welcome Isfendiyár, and alighting from Rakush, proceeded respectfully on foot to embrace him. He then invited him to his house, but Isfendiyár said: "So strict are my father's commands, that after having seen thee, I am not permitted to delay my departure." Rustem, however, pressed him to remain with him, but all in vain. On the contrary the prince artfully conducted him to his own quarters, where he addressed him thus: "If thou wilt allow me to bind thee, hand and foot, in chains, I will convey thee to the king my father, whose humor it is to see thee once in fetters, and then to release thee!" Rustem was silent. Again Isfendiyár said: "If thou art not disposed to comply with this demand, go thy ways," Rustem replied: "First be my guest, as thy father once was, and after that I will conform to thy will." Again the prince said: "My father visited thee under other circumstances; I have come for a different purpose. If I eat thy bread and salt, and after that thou shouldst refuse thy acquiescence, I must have recourse to force. But if I become thy guest, how can I in honor fight with thee? and if I do not take thee bound into my father's presence, according to his command, what answer shall I give to him?" "For the same reason," said Rustem; "how can I eat thy bread and salt?" Isfendiyár then replied: "Thou needest not eat my bread and salt, but only drink wine.--Bring thy own pure ruby." To this Rustem agreed, and they drank, each his own wine, together.

In a short space Rustem observed that he wished to consult his father Zál; and being allowed to depart, he, on his return home, described in strong terms of admiration the personal appearance and mental qualities of Isfendiyár.

  "In wisdom ripe, and with a form   Of brass to meet the battle-storm,   Thou wouldst confess his every boon,   Had been derived from Feridún."

Bashútan in the meanwhile observed to his brother, with some degree of dissatisfaction, that his enemy had come into his power, on his own feet too, but had been strangely permitted to go away again. To this gentle reproof Isfendiyár confidently replied, "If he does fail to return, I will go and secure him in bonds, even in his own house,"--"Ah!" said Bashútan, "that might be done by gentleness, but not by force, for the descendant of Sám, the champion of the world, is not to be subdued so easily." These words had a powerful effect upon the mind of Isfendiyár, and he became apprehensive that Rustem would not return; but whilst he was still murmuring at his own want of vigilance, the champion appeared, and at this second interview repeated his desire that the prince would become his guest. "I am sent here by my father, who relies upon thy accepting his proffered hospitality."--"That may be," said Isfendiyár, "but I am at my utmost limit, I cannot go farther. From this place, therefore, thou hadst better prepare to accompany me to Irán." Here Rustem paused, and at length artfully began to enumerate his various achievements, and to blazon his own name.

  "I fettered fast the emperor of Chin,   And broke the enchantment of the Seven Khans;   I stood the guardian of the Persian kings,   Their shield in danger. I have cleared the world   Of all their foes, enduring pain and toil   Incalculable. Such exploits for thee   Will I achieve, such sufferings will I bear,   And hence we offer thee a social welcome.   But let not dark suspicion cloud thy mind,   Nor think thyself exalted as the heavens,   Because I thus invite thee to our home."

Isfendiyár felt so indignant and irritated by this apparent boasting and self-sufficiency of Rustem, that his first impulse was to cast a dagger at him; but he kept down his wrath, and satisfied himself with giving him a scornful glance, and telling him to take a seat on his left hand. But Rustem resented this affront, saying that he never yet had sat down on the left of any king, and placed himself, without permission, on the right hand of Isfendiyár. The unfavorable impression on the prince's mind was increased by this independent conduct, and he was provoked to say to him, "Rustem! I have heard that Zál, thy father, was of demon extraction, and that Sám cast him into the desert because of his disgusting and abominable appearance; that even the hungry Símúrgh, on the same account, forebore to feed upon him, but conveyed him to her nest among her own young ones, who, pitying his wretched condition, supplied him with part of the carrion they were accustomed to devour. Naked and filthy, he is thus said to have subsisted on garbage, till Sám was induced to commiserate his wretchedness, and take him to Sástán, where, by the indulgence of his family and royal bounty, he was instructed in human manners and human science." This was a reproach and an insult too biting for Rustem to bear with any degree of patience, and frowning with strong indignation, he said, "Thy father knows, and thy grandfather well knew that Zál was the son of Sám, and Sám of Narímán, and that Narímán was descended from Húsheng. Thou and I, therefore, have the same origin. Besides, on my mother's side, I am descended from Zohák, so that by both parents I am of a race of princes. Knowest thou not that the Iránian empire was for some time in my hands, and that I refused to retain it, though urged by the nobles and the army to exercise the functions of royalty? It was my sense of justice, and attachment to the Kais and to thy family, which have enabled thee to possess thy present dignity and command. It is through my fidelity and zeal that thou art now in a situation to reproach me. Thou hast slain one king, Arjásp, how many kings have I slain? Did I not conquer Afrásiyáb, the greatest and bravest king that ever ruled over Túrán? And did I not also subdue the king of Hámáverán, and the Khakán of Chín? Káús, thy own ancestor, I released from the demons of Mázinderán. I slew the White Demon, and the tremendous giant, Akwán Díw. Can thy insignificant exploits be compared with mine? Never!" Rustem's vehemence, and the disdainful tone of his voice, exasperated still more the feelings of Isfendiyár, who however recollected that he was under his roof, otherwise he would have avenged himself instantly on the spot. Restraining his anger, he then said softly to him, "Wherefore dost thou raise thy voice so high? For though thy head be exalted to the skies, thou wert, and still art, but a dependent on the Kais. And was thy Heft-khan equal in terrible danger to mine? Was the capture of Mázinderán equal in valorous exertion to the capture of the Brazen Fortress? And did I not, by the power of my sword, diffuse throughout the world the blessings of my own religion, the faith of the fire-worshipper, which was derived from Heaven itself? Thou hast performed the duties of a warrior and a servant, whilst I have performed the holy functions of a sovereign and a prophet!" Rustem, in reply, said:--

  "In thy Heft-khan thou hadst twelve thousand men   Completely armed, with ample stores and treasure,   Whilst Rakush and my sword, my conquering sword,   Were all the aid I had, and all I sought,   In that prodigious enterprise of mine.   Two sisters thou released--no arduous task,   Whilst I recovered from the demon's grasp   The mighty Káús, and the monsters slew,   Roaring like thunder in their dismal caves.

  "This great exploit my single arm achieved;   And when Kai-khosráu gave the regal crown   To Lohurásp, the warriors were incensed,   And deemed Fríburz, Káús's valiant son,   Fittest by birth to rule. My sire and I   Espoused the cause of Lohurásp; else he   Had never sat upon the throne, nor thou   Been here to treat with scorn thy benefactor.   And now Gushtásp, with foul ingratitude,   Would bind me hand and foot! But who on earth   Can do that office? I am not accustomed   To hear harsh terms, and cannot brook their sting,   Therefore desist. Once in Káús's court,   When I was moved to anger, I poured out   Upon him words of bitterest scorn and rage,   And though surrounded by a thousand chiefs,   Not one attempted to repress my fury,   Not one, but all stood silent and amazed."

  "Smooth that indignant brow," the prince replied   "And measure not my courage nor my strength   With that of Káús; had he nerve like mine?   Thou might'st have kept the timorous king in awe,   But I am come myself to fetter thee!"   So saying, he the hand of Rustem grasped,   And wrung it so intensely, that the champion   Felt inwardly surprised, but careless said,   "The time is not yet come for us to try   Our power in battle." Then Isfendiyár   Dropped Rustem's hand, and spoke, "To-day let wine   Inspire our hearts, and on the field to-morrow   Be ours the strife, with battle-axe and sword,   And my first aim shall be to bind thee fast,   And show thee to my troops, Rustem in fetters!"

  At this the champion smiled, and thus exclaimed,   "Where hast thou seen the deeds of warriors brave?   Where hast thou heard the clash of mace and sword   Wielded by men of valour? I to-morrow   Will take thee in my arms, and straight convey thee   To Zál, and place thee on the ivory throne,   And on thy head a crown of gold shall glitter.   The treasury I will open, and our troops   Shall fight for thee, and I will gird my loins   As they were girt for thy bold ancestors;   And when thou art the chosen king, and I   Thy warrior-chief, the world will be thy own;   No other sovereign need attempt to reign."

"So much time has been spent in vain boasting, and extravagant self-praise," rejoined Isfendiyár, "that the day is nearly done, and I am hungry; let us therefore take some refreshment together." Rustem's appetite being equally keen, the board was spread, and every dish that was brought to him he emptied at once, as if at one swallow; then he threw aside the goblets, and called for the large flagon that he might drink his fill without stint. When he had finished several dishes and as many flagons of wine, he paused, and Isfendiyár and the assembled chiefs were astonished at the quantity he had devoured. He now prepared to depart, and the prince said to him, "Go and consult with thy father: if thou art contented to be bound, well; if not, thou wilt have cause to repent, for I will assuredly attend to the commands of Gushtásp."--"Do thou also consult with thy brethren and friends," replied Rustem, "whether thou wilt be our guest to-morrow, or not; if not, come to this place before sunrise, that we may decide our differences in battle." Isfendiyár said, "My most anxious desire, my wish to heaven, is to meet thee, for I shall have no difficulty in binding thee hand and foot. I would indeed willingly convey thee without fetters to my father, but if I did so, he would say that I was unable to put thee in bonds, and that would disgrace my name." Rustem observed that the immense number of men and demons he had contended against was as nothing in the balance of his mind compared with the painful subject of his present thoughts and fears. He was ready to engage, but afraid of meriting a bad name.

  "If in the battle thou art slain by me,   Will not my cheek turn pale among the princes   Of the Kaiánian race, having cut off   A lovely branch of that illustrious tree?   Will not reproaches hang upon my name   When I am dead, and shall I not be cursed   For perpetrating such a horrid deed?   Thy father, too, is old, and near his end,   And thou upon the eve of being crowned;   And in thy heart thou knowest that I proffered,   And proffer my allegiance and devotion,   And would avoid the conflict. Sure, thy father   Is practising some trick, some foul deception,   To urge thee on to an untimely death,   To rid himself of some unnatural fear,   He stoops to an unnatural, treacherous act,   For I have ever been the firm support   Of crown and throne, and perfectly he knows   No mortal ever conquered me in battle,   None ever from my sword escaped his life."

  Then spoke Isfendiyár: "Thou wouldst be generous   And bear a spotless name, and tarnish mine;   But I am not to be deceived by thee:   In fetters thou must go!" Rustem replied:   "Banish that idle fancy from thy brain;   Dream not of things impossible, for death   Is busy with thee; pause, or thou wilt die."   "No more!" exclaimed the prince, "no more of this.   Nor seek to frighten me with threatening words;   Go, and to-morrow bring with thee thy friends,   Thy father and thy brother, to behold   With their own eyes thy downfall, and lament   In sorrow over thy impending fate."   "So let it be," said Rustem, and at once   Mounted his noble horse, and hastened home.

The champion immediately requested his father's permission to go and fight Isfendiyár the following day, but the old man recommended reconciliation and peace. "That cannot be," said Rustem, "for he has reviled thee so severely, and heaped upon me so many indignities, that my patience is exhausted, and the contest unavoidable." In the morning Zál, weeping bitterly, tied on Rustem's armor himself, and in an agony of grief, said: "If thou shouldst kill Isfendiyár, thy name will be rendered infamous throughout the world; and if thou shouldst be killed, Sístán will be prostrate in the dust, and extinguished forever! My heart shudders at the thoughts of this battle, but there is no remedy." Rustem said to him:--"Put thy trust in God, and be not sorrowful, for when I grasp my sword the head of the enemy is lost; but my desire is to take Isfendiyár alive, and not to kill him. I would serve him, and not sever his head from his body." Zál was pleased with this determination, and rejoiced that there was a promise of a happy issue to the engagement.

In the morning Rustem arrayed himself in his war-attire, helmet and breast-plate, and mounted Rakush, also armed in his bargustuwan. His troops, too, were all assembled, and Zál appointed Zúára to take charge of them, and be careful of his brother on all occasions where assistance might be necessary. The old man then prostrated himself in prayer, and said, "O God, turn from us all affliction, and vouchsafe to us a prosperous day." Rustem being prepared for the struggle, directed Zúára to wait with the troops at a distance, whilst he went alone to meet Isfendiyár. When Bashútan first saw him, he thought he was coming to offer terms of peace, and said to Isfendiyár, "He is coming alone, and it is better that he should go to thy father of his own accord, than in bonds."--"But," replied Isfendiyár, "he is coming completely equipped in mail--quick, bring me my arms."--"Alas!" rejoined Bashútan, "thy brain is wild, and thou art resolved upon fighting. This impetuous spirit will break my heart." But Isfendiyár took no notice of the gentle rebuke. Presently he saw Rustem ascend a high place, and heard his summons to single combat. He then told his brother to keep at a distance with the army, and not to interfere till aid was positively required. Insisting rigidly on these instructions, he mounted his night-black charger, and hastened towards Rustem, who now proposed to him that they should wait awhile, and that in the meantime the two armies might be put in motion against each other. "Though," said he, "my men of Zábul are few, and thou hast a numerous host."

  "This is a strange request," replied the prince,   "But thou art all deceit and artifice;   Mark thy position, lofty and commanding,   And mine, beneath thee--in a spreading vale.   Now, Heaven forbid that I, in reckless mood,   Should give my valiant legions to destruction,   And look unpitying on! No, I advance,   Whoever may oppose me; and if thou   Requirest aid, select thy friend, and come,   For I need none, save God, in battle--none."   And Rustem said the same, for he required   No human refuge, no support but Heaven.

  The battle rose, and numerous javelins whizzed   Along the air, and helm and mail were bruised;   Spear fractured spear, and then with shining swords   The strife went on, till, trenched with many a wound,   They, too, snapped short. The battle-axe was next   Wielded, in furious wrath; each bending forward   Struck brain-bewildering blows; each tried in vain   To hurl the other from his fiery horse.   Wearied, at length, they stood apart to breathe   Their charges panting from excessive toil,   Covered with foam and blood, and the strong armor,   Of steed and rider rent. The combatants   Thus paused, in mutual consternation lost.

In the meantime Zúára, impatient at this delay, advanced towards the Iránians, and reproached them for their cowardice so severely, that Núsháwer, the younger son of Isfendiyár, felt ashamed, and immediately challenged the bravest of the enemy to fight. Alwaí, one of Rustem's followers, came boldly forward, but his efforts only terminated in his discomfiture and death. After him came Zúára himself:--

  Who galloped to the charge incensed, and, high   Lifting his iron mace, upon the head   Of bold Núsháwer struck a furious blow,   Which drove him from his steed a lifeless corse.   Seeing their gallant leader thus overthrown,   The troops in terror fled, and in their flight   Thousands were slain, among them brave Mehrnús,   Another kinsman of Isfendiyár.

Bahman, observing the defeat and confusion of the Iránians, went immediately to his father, and told him that two of his own family were killed by the warriors of Zábul, who had also attacked him and put his troops to the rout with great slaughter. Isfendiyár was extremely irritated at this intelligence, and called aloud to Rustem: "Is treachery like this becoming in a warrior?" The champion being deeply concerned, shook like a branch, and swore by the head and life of the king, by the sun, and his own conquering sword, that he was ignorant of the event, and innocent of what had been done. To prove what he said, he offered to bind in fetters his brother Zúára, who must have authorized the movement; and also to secure Ferámurz, who slew Mehrnús, and deliver them over to Gushtásp, the fire-worshipper. "Nay," said he, "I will deliver over to thee my whole family, as well as my brother and son, and thou mayest sacrifice them all as a punishment for having commenced the fight without permission." Isfendiyár replied: "Of what use would it be to sacrifice thy brother and thy son? Would that restore my own to me? No. Instead of them, I will put thee to death, therefore come on!" Accordingly both simultaneously bent their bows, and shot their arrows with the utmost rapidity; but whilst Rustem's made no impression, those of Isfendiyár's produced great effect on the champion and his horse. So severely was Rakush wounded, that Rustem, when he perceived how much his favorite horse was exhausted, dismounted, and continued to impel his arrows against the enemy from behind his shield. But Rakush brooked not the dreadful storm, and galloped off unconscious that his master himself was in as bad a plight. When Zúára saw the noble animal, riderless, crossing the plain, he gasped for breath, and in an agony of grief hurried to the fatal spot, where he found Rustem desperately hurt, and the blood flowing copiously from every wound. The champion observed, that though he was himself bleeding so much, not one drop of blood appeared to have issued from the veins of his antagonist. He was very weak, but succeeded in dragging himself up to his former position, when Isfendiyár, smiling to see them thus, exclaimed:--

  "Is this the valiant Rustem, the renowned,   Quitting the field of battle? Where is now   The raging tiger, the victorious chief?   Was it from thee the Demons shrunk in terror,   And did thy burning sword sear out their hearts?   What has become of all thy valour now?   Where is thy matchless mace, and why art thou,   The roaring lion, turned into a fox,   An animal of slyness, not of courage,   Losing thy noble character and name?"

Zúára, when he came to Rustem, alighted and resigned his horse to his brother; and placing an arrow on his bow-string, wished himself to engage Isfendiyár, who was ready to fight him, but Rustem cried, "No, I have not yet done with thee." Isfendiyár replied: "I know thee well, and all thy dissimulation, but nothing yet is accomplished. Come and consent to be fettered, or I must compel thee." Rustem, however, was not to be overcome, and he said: "If I were really subdued by thee, I might agree to be bound like a vanquished slave; but the day is now closing, to-morrow we will resume the fight!" Isfendiyár acquiesced, and they separated, Rustem going to his own tent, and the prince remaining on the field. There he affectionately embraced the severed heads of his kinsmen, placed them himself on a bier, and sent them to his father, the king, with a letter in which he said, "Thy commands must be obeyed, and such is the result of to-day; Heaven only knows what may befall to-morrow." Then he spoke privately to Bashútan: "This Rustem is not human, he is formed of rock and iron, neither sword nor javelin has done him mortal harm; but the arrows went deep into his body, and it will indeed be wonderful if he lives throughout the night. I know not what to think of to-morrow, or how I shall be able to overcome him."

When Rustem arrived at his quarters, Zál soon discovered that he had received many wounds, which occasioned great affliction in his family, and he said: "Alas! that in my old age such a misfortune should have befallen us, and that with my own eyes I should see these gaping wounds!" He then rubbed Rustem's feet, and applied healing balm to the wounds, and bound them up with the skill and care of a physician. Rustem said to his father: "I never met with a foe, warrior or demon, of such amazing strength and bravery as this! He seems to have a brazen body, for my arrows, which I can drive through an anvil, cannot penetrate his chest. If I had applied the power which I have exerted to a mountain, the mountain would have moved from its base, but he sat firmly upon his saddle and scorned my efforts. I thank God that it is night, and that I have escaped from his grasp. To-morrow I cannot fight, and my secret wish is to retire unseen from the struggle, that no trace of me may be discovered."--"In that case," replied Zál, "the victor will come and take me and all my family into bondage. But let us not despair. Did not the Símúrgh promise that whenever I might be overcome by adversity, if I burned one of her feathers, she would instantly appear? Shall we not then solicit assistance in this awful extremity?" So saying, Zál went up to a high place, and burnt the feather in a censer, and in a short time the Símúrgh stood before him. After due praise and acknowledgment, he explained his wants. "But," said he, "may the misfortune we endure be far from him who has brought it upon us. My son Rustem is wounded almost unto death, and I am so helpless that I can do him no good." He then brought forward Rakush, pierced by numerous arrows; upon which the wonderful Bird said to him, "Be under no alarm on that account, for I will soon cure him;" and she immediately plucked out the rankling weapons with her beak, and the wounds, on passing a feather over them, were quickly healed.

  To Rustem now she turns, and soothes his grief,   And drawing forth the arrows, sucks the blood   From out the wounds, which at her bidding close,   And the illustrious champion is restored   To life and power.

Being thus reinvigorated by the magic influence of the Símúrgh, he solicits further aid in the coming strife with Isfendiyár; but the mysterious animal laments that she cannot assist him. "There never appeared in the world," said she, "so brave and so perfect a hero as Isfendiyár. The favor of Heaven is with him, for in his Heft-khan he, by some artifice, succeeded in killing a Símúrgh, and the further thou art removed from his invincible arm, the greater will be thy safety." Here Zál interposed and said: "If Rustem retires from the contest, his family will all be enslaved, and I shall equally share their bondage and affliction." The Símúrgh, hearing these words, fell into deep thought, and remained some time silent. At length she told Rustem to mount Rakush and follow her. Away she went to a far distance; and crossing a great river, arrived at a place covered with reeds, where the Kazú-tree abounded. The Símúrgh then rubbed one of her feathers upon the eyes of Rustem, and directed him to take a branch of the Kazú-tree, and make it straight upon the fire, and form that wand into a forked arrow; after which he was to advance against Isfendiyár, and, placing the arrow on his bow-string, shoot it into the eyes of his enemy. "The arrow will only make him blind," said the Símúrgh, "but he who spills the blood of Isfendiyár will never be free from calamity during his whole life. The Kazú-tree has also this peculiar quality: an arrow made of it is sure to accomplish its intended errand--it never misses the aim of the archer." Rustem expressed his boundless gratitude for this information and assistance; and the Símúrgh having transported him back to his tent, and affectionately kissed his face, returned to her own habitation. The champion now prepared the arrow according to the instructions he had received; and when morning dawned, mounted his horse, and hastened to the field. He found Isfendiyár still sleeping, and exclaimed aloud: "Warrior, art thou still slumbering? Rise, and see Rustem before thee!" When the prince heard his stern voice, he started up, and in great anxiety hurried on his armor. He said to Bashútan, "I had uncharitably thought he would have died of his wounds in the night, but this clear and bold voice seems to indicate perfect health--go and see whether his wounds are bound up or not, and whether he is mounted on Rakush or on some other horse." Rustem perceived Bashútan approach with an inquisitive look, and conjectured that his object was to ascertain the condition of himself and Rakush. He therefore vociferated to him: "I am now wholly free from wounds, and so is my horse, for I possess an elixir which heals the most cruel lacerations of the flesh the moment it is applied; but no such wounds were inflicted upon me, the arrows of Isfendiyár being only like needles sticking in my body." Bashútan now reported to his brother that Rustem appeared to be more fresh and vigorous than the day before, and, thinking from the spirit and gallantry of his demeanor that he would be victorious in another contest, he strongly recommended a reconciliation.



THE DEATH OF ISFENDIYÁR

Isfendiyár, blind to the march of fate, treated the suggestion of his brother with scorn, and mounting his horse, was soon in the presence of Rustem, whom he thus hastily addressed: "Yesterday thou wert wounded almost to death by my arrows, and to-day there is no trace of them. How is this?

 "But thy father Zál is a sorcerer,     And he by charm and spell   Has cured all the wounds of the warrior,     And now he is safe and well.   For the wounds I gave could never be   Closed up, excepting by sorcery.   Yes, the wounds I gave thee in every part,   Could never be cured but by magic art."

Rustem replied, "If a thousand arrows were shot at me, they would all drop harmless to the ground, and in the end thou wilt fall by my hands. Therefore, if thou seekest thy own welfare, come at once and be my guest, and I swear by the Almighty, by Zerdusht, and the Zendavesta, by the sun and moon, that I will go with thee, but unfetterd, to thy father, who may do with me what he lists."--"That is not enough," replied Isfendiyár, "thou must be fettered."--"Then do not bind my arms, and take whatever thou wilt from me."--"And what hast thou to give?"

  "A thousand jewels of brilliant hue,     And of unknown price, shall be thine;   A thousand imperial diadems too,     And a thousand damsels divine,   Who with angel-voices will sing and play,   And delight thy senses both night and day;   And my family wealth shall be brought thee, all   That was gathered by Narímán, Sám, and Zál."

"This is all in vain," said Isfendiyár. "I may have wandered from the way of Heaven, but I will not disobey the commands of the king. And of what use would thy treasure and property be to me? I must please my father, that he may surrender to me his crown and throne, and I have solemnly sworn to him that I will place thee before him in fetters." Rustem replied, "And in the hopes of a crown and throne thou wouldst sacrifice thyself!"--"Thou shalt see!" said Isfendiyár, and seized his bow to commence the combat. Rustem did the same, and when he had placed the forked arrow in the bow-string, he imploringly turned up his face towards Heaven, and fervently exclaimed, "O God, thou knowest how anxiously I have wished for a reconciliation, how I have suffered, and that I would now give all my treasures and wealth and go with him to Irán, to avoid this conflict; but my offers are disdained, for he is bent upon consigning me to bondage and disgrace. Thou art the redresser of grievances--direct the flight of this arrow into his eyes, but do not let me be punished for the involuntary deed." At this moment Isfendiyár shot an arrow with great force at Rustem, who dexterously eluded its point, and then, in return, instantly lodged the charmed weapon in the eyes of his antagonist.

  And darkness overspread his sight,   The world to him was hid in night;   The bow dropped from his slackened hand,   And down he sunk upon the sand.

"Yesterday," said Rustem, "thou discharged at me a hundred and sixty arrows in vain, and now thou art overthrown by one arrow of mine." Bahman, the son of Isfendiyár, seeing his father bleeding on the ground, uttered loud lamentations, and Bashútan, followed by the Iránian troops, also drew nigh with the deepest sorrow marked on their countenances. The fatal arrow was immediately drawn from the wounded eyes of the prince, and some medicine being first applied to them, they conveyed him mournfully to his own tent.

The conflict having thus terminated, Rustem at the same time returned with his army to where Zál remained in anxious suspense about the result. The old man rejoiced at the issue, but said, "O, my son, thou hast killed thy enemy, but I have learnt from the wise men and astrologers that the slayer of Isfendiyár must soon come to a fatal end. May God protect thee!" Rustem replied, "I am guiltless, his blood is upon his own head." The next day they both proceeded to visit Isfendiyár, and offer to him their sympathy and condolence, when the wounded prince thus spoke to Rustem: "I do not ascribe my misfortune to thee, but to an all-ruling power. Fate would have it so, and thus it is! I now consign to thy care and guardianship my son Bahman: instruct him in the science of government, the customs of kings, and the rules and stratagems of the warrior, for thou art exceedingly wise and experienced, and perfect in all things," Rustem readily complied, and said:--

  "That duty shall be mine alone,   To seat him firmly on the throne."

Then Isfendiyár murmured to Bashútan, that the anguish of his wound was wearing him away, and that he had but a short time to live.

  "The pace of death is fast and fleet,     And nothing my life can save,   I shall want no robe, but my winding sheet,     No mansion but the grave.

  "And tell my father the wish of his heart     Has not been breathed in vain,   The doom he desired when he made me depart,     Has been sealed, and his son is slain!

  "And, O! to my mother, in kindliest tone,     The mournful tidings bear,   And soothe her woes for her warrior gone,     For her lost Isfendiyár."

He now groaned heavily, and his last words were:--

  "I die, pursued by unrelenting fate,   The hapless victim of a father's hate."

Life having departed, his body was placed upon a bier, and conveyed to Irán, amidst the tears and lamentations of the people.

Rustem now took charge of Bahman, according to the dying request of Isfendiyár, and brought him to Sístán. This was, however, repugnant to the wishes of Zúára, who observed to his brother: "Thou hast slain the father of this youth; do not therefore nurture and instruct the son of thy enemy, for, mark me, in the end he will be avenged."--"But did not Isfendiyár, with his last breath, consign him to my guardianship? how can I refuse it now? It must be so written and determined in the dispensations of Heaven."

The arrival of the bier in Persia, at the palace of Gushtásp, produced a melancholy scene of public and domestic affliction. The king took off the covering and wept bitterly, and the mother and sisters exclaimed, "Alas! thy death is not the work of human hands; it is not the work of Rustem, nor of Zál, but of the Símúrgh. Thou hast not lived long enough to be ashamed of a gray beard, nor to witness the maturity and attainments of thy children. Alas! thou art snatched away at a moment of the highest promise, even at the commencement of thy glory." In the meanwhile the curses and imprecations of the people were poured upon the devoted head of Gushtásp on account of his cruel and unnatural conduct, so that he was obliged to confine himself to his palace till after the interment of Isfendiyár.

Rustem scrupulously fulfilled his engagement, and instructed Bahman in all manly exercises; in the use of bow and javelin, in the management of sword and buckler, and in all the arts and accomplishments of the warrior. He then wrote to Gushtásp, repeating that he was unblamable in the conflict which terminated in the death of his son Isfendiyár, that he had offered him presents and wealth to a vast extent, and moreover was ready to return with him to Irán, to his father; but every overture was rejected. Relentless fate must have hurried him on to a premature death. "I have now," continued Rustem, "completed the education of Bahman, according to the directions of his father, and await thy further commands." Gushtásp, after reading this letter, referred to Bashútan, who confirmed the declarations of Rustem, and the treacherous king, willing to ascribe the event to an overruling destiny, readily acquitted Rustem of all guilt in killing Isfendiyár. At the same time he sent for Bahman, and on his arrival from Sístán, was so pleased with him that he without hesitation appointed him to succeed to the throne.

  "Methinks I see Isfendiyár again,     Thou hast the form, the very look he bore,     And since thy glorious father is no more,   Long as I live thou must with me remain."



THE DEATH OF RUSTEM

Firdusi seems to have derived the account of Shughad, and the melancholy fate of Rustem, from a descendant of Sám and Narímán, who was particularly acquainted with the chronicles of the heroes and the kings of Persia. Shughad, it appears, was the son of Zál, by one of the old warrior's maid-servants, and at his very birth the astrologers predicted that he would be the ruin of the glorious house of Sám and Narímán, and the destruction of their race.

  Throughout Sístán the prophecy was heard   With horror and amazement; every town   And city in Irán was full of woe,   And Zál, in deepest agony and grief,   Sent up his prayers to the Almighty Power   That he would purify the infant's heart,   And free it from that quality, foretold   As the destroyer of his ancient house.   But what are prayers, opposed by destiny?

The child, notwithstanding, was brought up with great care and attention, and when arrived at maturity, he was sent to the king of Kábul, whose daughter he espoused.

Rustem was accustomed to go to Kábul every year to receive the tribute due to him; but on the last occasion, it is said that he exacted and took a higher rate than usual, and thus put many of the people to distress. The king was angry, and expressed his dissatisfaction to Shughad, who was not slow in uttering his own discontent, saying, "Though I am his brother, he has no respect for me, but treats me always like an enemy. For this personal hostility I long to punish him with death."--"But how," inquired the king, "couldst thou compass that end?" Shughad replied, "I have well considered the subject, and propose to accomplish my purpose in this manner. I shall feign that I have been insulted and injured by thee, and carry my complaint to Zál and Rustem, who will no doubt come to Kábul to redress my wrongs. Thou must in the meantime prepare for a sporting excursion, and order a number of pits to be dug on the road sufficiently large to hold Rustem and his horse, and in each several swords must be placed with their points and edges upwards. The mouths of the pits must then be slightly covered over, but so carefully that there may be no appearance of the earth underneath having been removed. Everything being thus ready, Rustem, on the pretence of going to the sporting ground, must be conducted by that road, and he will certainly fall into one of the pits, which will become his grave." This stratagem was highly approved by the king, and it was agreed that at a royal banquet, Shughad should revile and irritate the king, whose indignant answer should be before all the assembly: "Thou hast no pretensions to be thought of the stock of Sám and Narímán. Zál pays thee no attention, at least, not such attention as he would pay to a son, and Rustem declares thou art not his brother; indeed, all the family treat thee as a slave." At these words, Shughad affected to be greatly enraged, and, starting up from the banquet, hastened to Rustem to complain of the insult offered him by the king of Kábul. Rustem received him with demonstrations of affection, and hearing his complaint, declared that he would immediately proceed to Kábul, depose the king for his insolence, and place Shughad himself on the throne of that country. In a short time they arrived at the city, and were met by the king, who, with naked feet and in humble guise, solicited forgiveness. Rustem was induced to pardon the offence, and was honored in return with great apparent respect, and with boundless hospitality. In the meantime, however, the pits were dug, and the work of destruction in progress, and Rustem was now invited to share the sports of the forest. The champion was highly gratified by the courtesy which the king displayed, and mounted Rakush, anticipating a day of excellent diversion. Shughad accompanied him, keeping on one side, whilst Rustem, suspecting nothing, rode boldly forward. Suddenly Rakush stopped, and though urged to advance, refused to move a step. At last the champion became angry, and struck the noble animal severely; the blows made him dart forward, and in a moment he unfortunately fell into one of the pits.

  It was a place, deep, dark, and perilous,   All bristled o'er with swords, leaving no chance   Of extrication without cruel wounds;   And horse and rider sinking in the midst,   Bore many a grievous stab and many a cut   In limb and body, ghastly to the sight.   Yet from that depth, at one prodigious spring,   Rakush escaped with Rustem on his back;   But what availed that effort? Down again   Into another pit both fell together,   And yet again they rose, again, again;   Seven times down prostrate, seven times bruised and maimed,   They struggled on, till mounting up the edge   Of the seventh pit, all covered with deep wounds,   Both lay exhausted. When the champion's brain   Grew cool, and he had power to think, he knew   Full well to whom he owed this treachery,   And calling to Shughad, said: "Thou, my brother!   Why hast thou done this wrong? Was it for thee,   My father's son, by wicked plot and fraud   To work this ruin, to destroy my life?"   Shughad thus sternly answered: "'Tis for all   The blood that thou hast shed, God has decreed   This awful vengeance--now thy time is come!"   Then spoke the king of Kábul, as if pity   Had softened his false heart: "Alas! the day   That thou shouldst perish, so ignobly too,   And in my kingdom; what a wretched fate!   But bring some medicine to relieve his wounds--   Quick, bring the matchless balm for Rustem's cure;   He must not die, the champion must not die!"   But Rustem scorned the offer, and in wrath,   Thus spoke: "How many a mighty king has died,   And left me still triumphant--still in power,   Unconquerable; treacherous thou hast been,   Inhuman, too, but Ferámurz, the brave,   Will be revenged upon thee for this crime."

Rustem now turned towards Shughad, and in an altered and mournful tone, told him that he was at the point of death, and asked him to string his bow and give it to him, that he might seem as a scare-crow, to prevent the wolves and other wild animals from devouring him when dead.

  Shughad performed the task, and lingered not,   For he rejoiced at this catastrophe,   And with a smile of fiendish satisfaction,   Placed the strong bow before him--Rustem grasped   The bended horn with such an eager hand,   That wondering at the sight, the caitiff wretch   Shuddered with terror, and behind a tree   Shielded himself, but nothing could avail;   The arrow pierced both tree and him, and they   Were thus transfixed together--thus the hour   Of death afforded one bright gleam of joy   To Rustem, who, with lifted eyes to Heaven,   Exclaimed: "Thanksgivings to the great Creator,   For granting me the power, with my own hand,   To be revenged upon my murderer!"   So saying, the great champion breathed his last,   And not a knightly follower remained,   Zúára, and the rest, in other pits,   Dug by the traitor-king, and traitor-brother,   Had sunk and perished, all, save one, who fled,   And to the afflicted veteran at Sístán   Told the sad tidings. Zál, in agony,   Tore his white hair, and wildly rent his garments,   And cried: "Why did not I die for him, why   Was I not present, fighting by his side?   But he, alas! is gone! Oh! gone forever."

Then the old man despatched Ferámurz with a numerous force to Kábul, to bring away the dead body of Rustem. Upon his approach, the king of Kábul and his army retired to the mountains, and Ferámurz laid waste the country. He found only the skeletons of Rustem and Zúára, the beasts of prey having stripped them of their flesh: he however gathered the bones together and conveyed them home and buried them, amidst the lamentations of the people. After that, he returned to Kábul with his army, and encountered the king, captured the cruel wretch, and carried him to Sístán, where he was put to death.

Gushtásp having become old and infirm, bequeathed his empire to Bahman, and then died. He reigned one hundred and eight years.



BAHMAN

Bahman, the grandson of Gushtásp, having at the commencement of his sovereignty obtained the approbation of his people, by the clemency of his conduct and the apparent generosity of his disposition, was not long in meditating vindictive measures against the family of Rustem. "Did not Kai-khosráu," said he to his warriors, "revenge himself on Afrásiyáb for the murder of Saiáwush; and have not all my glorious ancestors pursued a similar course? Why, then, should not I be revenged on the father of Rustem for the death of Isfendiyár?" The warriors, as usual, approved of the king's resolution, and in consequence one hundred thousand veteran troops were assembled for the immediate invasion of Sístán. When Bahman had arrived on the borders of the river Behermund, he sent a message to Zál, frankly declaring his purpose, and that he must sacrifice the lives of himself and all his family as an atonement for Rustem's guilt in shedding the blood of Isfendiyár.

  Zál heard his menace with astonishment,   Mingled with anguish, and he thus replied:   "Rustem was not in fault; and thou canst tell,   For thou wert present, how he wept, and prayed   That he might not be bound. How frequently   He offered all his wealth, his gold, and gems,   To be excused that ignominious thrall;   And would have followed thy impatient father   To wait upon Gushtásp; but this was scorned;   Nothing but bonds would satisfy his pride;   All this thou know'st. Then did not I and Rustem   Strictly fulfil Isfendiyár's commands,   And most assiduously endow thy mind   With all the skill and virtues of a hero,   That might deserve some kindness in return?   Now take my house, my treasure, my possessions,   Take all; but spare my family and me."

  The messenger went back, and told the tale   Of Zál's deep grief with such persuasive grace,   And piteous accent, that the heart of Bahman   Softened at every word, and the old man   Was not to suffer. After that was known,   With gorgeous presents Zál went forth to meet   The monarch in his progress to the city;   And having prostrated himself in low   Humility, retired among the train   Attendant on the king. "Thou must not walk,"   Bahman exclaimed, well skilled in all the arts   Of smooth hypocrisy--"thou art too weak;   Remount thy horse, for thou requirest help."   But Zál declined the honour, and preferred   Doing that homage as illustrious Sám,   His conquering ancestor, had always done,   Barefoot, in presence of the royal race.

  Fast moving onwards, Bahman soon approached   Sístán, and entered Zál's superb abode;   Not as a friend, or a forgiving foe,   But with a spirit unappeased, unsoothed;   True, he had spared the old man's life, but there   His mercy stopped; all else was confiscate,   For every room was plundered, all the treasure   Seized and devoted to the tyrant's use.

After remorselessly obtaining this booty, Bahman inquired what had become of Ferámurz, and Zál pretended that, unaware of the king's approach, he had gone a-hunting. But this excuse was easily seen through, and the king was so indignant on the occasion, that he put Zál himself in fetters. Ferámurz had, in fact, secretly retired with the Zábul army to a convenient distance, for the purpose of acting as necessity might require, and when he heard that Zál was placed in confinement, he immediately marched against the invader and oppressor of his country. Both armies met, and closed, and were in desperate conflict three long days and nights. On the fourth day, a tremendous hurricane arose, which blew thick clouds of dust in the face of the Zábul army, and blinding them, impeded their progress, whilst the enemy were driven furiously forward by the strong wind at their backs. The consequence was the defeat of the Zábul troops. Ferámurz, with a few companions, however, kept his ground, though assailed by showers of arrows. He tried repeatedly to get face to face with Bahman, but every effort was fruitless, and he felt convinced that his career was now nearly at an end. He bravely defended himself, and aimed his arrows with great precision; but what is the use of art when Fortune is unfavorable?

  When Fate's dark clouds portentous lower,     And quench the light of day,   No effort, none, of human power,     Can chase the gloom away.   Arrows may fly a countless shower,     Amidst the desperate fray;   But not to sword or arrow death is given,   Unless decreed by favouring Heaven

And it was so decreed that the exertions of Ferámurz should be unsuccessful. His horse fell, he was wounded severely, and whilst insensible, the enemy secured and conveyed him in fetters to Bahman, who immediately ordered him to be hanged. The king then directed all the people of Sístán to be put to the sword; upon which Bashútan said: "Alas! why should the innocent and unoffending people be thus made to perish? Hast thou no fear of God? Thou hast taken vengeance for thy father, by slaying Ferámurz, the son of Rustem. Is not that enough? Be merciful and beneficent now to the people, and thank Heaven for the great victory thou hast gained." Bahman was thus withdrawn from his wicked purpose, and was also induced to liberate Zál, whose age and infirmities had rendered him perfectly harmless. He not only did this, but restored to him the possession of Sístán; and divesting himself of all further revenge, returned to Persia. There he continued to exercise the functions of royalty, till one day he happened to be bitten by a snake, whose venom was so excruciating, that remedies were of no avail, and he died of the wound, in the eighth year of his reign. Although he had a son named Sassán, he did not appoint him his successor; but gave the crown and the throne to his wife, Húmaí, whom he had married a short time before his death, saying: "If Húmaí should have a son, that son shall be my successor; but if a daughter, Húmaí continue to reign."



HÚMAI AND THE BIRTH OF DÁRÁB

Wisdom and generosity were said to have marked the government of Húmaí. In justice and beneficence she was unequalled. No misfortune happened in her days: even the poor and the needy became rich. She gave birth to a son, whom she entrusted to a nurse to be brought up secretly, and declared publicly that it had died the same day it was born. At this event the people rejoiced, for they were happy under the administration of Húmaí. Upon the boy attaining his seventh month, however, the queen sent for him, and wrapping him up in rich garments, put him in a box, and when she had fastened down the cover, gave it to two confidential servants, in the middle of the night, to be flung into the Euphrates. "For," thought she, "if he be found in the city, there will be an end to my authority, and the crown will be placed upon his head; wiser, therefore, will it be for me to cast him into the river; and if it please God to preserve him, he may be nurtured, and brought up in another country." Accordingly in the darkness of night, the box was thrown into the Euphrates, and it floated rapidly down the stream for some time without being observed.

  Amidst the waters, in that little ark   Was launched the future monarch. But, vain mortal!   How bootless are thy most ingenious schemes,   Thy wisest projects! Such were thine, Húmaí!   Presumptuous as thou wert to think success   Would crown that deed unnatural and unjust.   But human passions, human expectations   Are happily controlled by righteous Heaven.

In the morning the ark was noticed by a washerman; who, curious to know what it contained, drew it to the shore, and opened the lid. Within the box he then saw splendid silk-embroidered scarfs and costly raiment, and upon them a lovely infant asleep. He immediately took up the child, and carried it to his wife, saying: "It was but yesterday that our own infant died, and now the Almighty has sent thee another in its place." The woman looked at the child with affection, and taking it in her arms fed it with her own milk. In the box they also found jewels and rubies, and they congratulated themselves upon being at length blessed by Providence with wealth, and a boy at the same time. They called him Dáráb, and the child soon began to speak in the language of his foster-parents. The washerman and his wife, for fear that the boy and the wealth might be discovered, thought it safest to quit their home, and sojourn in another country. When Dáráb grew up, he was more skilful and accomplished, and more expert at wrestling than other boys of a greater age. But whenever the washerman told him to assist in washing clothes, he always ran away, and would not stoop to the drudgery. This untoward behavior grieved the washerman exceedingly, and he lamented that God had given him so useless a son, not knowing that he was destined to be the sovereign of all the world.

  How little thought he, whilst the task he prest,   A purer spirit warmed the stripling's breast,   Whose opening soul, by kingly pride inspired,   Disdained the toil a menial slave required;   The royal branch on high its foliage flung,   And showed the lofty stem from which it sprung.

Dáráb was now sent to school, and he soon excelled his master, who continually said to the washerman: "Thy son is of wonderful capacity, acute and intelligent beyond his years, of an enlarged understanding, and will be at least the minister of a king." Dáráb requested to have another master, and also a fine horse of Irák, that he might acquire the science and accomplishments of a warrior; but the washerman replied that he was too poor to comply with his wishes, which threw the youth into despair, so that he did not touch a morsel of food for two days together. His foster-mother, deeply affected by his disappointment, and naturally anxious to gratify his desires, gave an article of value to the washerman, that he might sell it, and with the money purchase the horse required. The horse obtained, he was daily instructed in the art of using the bow, the javelin, and the sword, and in every exercise becoming a young gentleman and a warrior. So devouringly did he persevere in his studies, and in his exertions to excel, that he never remained a moment unoccupied at home or abroad. The development of his talents and genius suggested to him an inquiry who he was, and how he came into the house of a washerman; and his foster-mother, in compliance with his entreaties, described to him the manner in which he was found. He had long been miserable at the thoughts of being the son of a washerman, but now he rejoiced, and looked upon himself as the son of some person of consideration. He asked her if she had anything that was taken out of the box, and she replied: "Two valuable rubies remain." The youth requested them to be brought to him; one he bound round his arm, and the other he sold to pay the expenses of travelling and change of place.

At that time, it is said, the king of Rúm had sent an army into the country of Irán. Upon receiving this information, Húmaí told her general, named Rishnawád, to collect a force corresponding with the emergency; and he issued a proclamation, inviting all young men desirous of military glory to flock to his standard. Dáráb heard this proclamation with delight, and among others hastened to Rishnawád, who presented the young warriors as they arrived successively to Húmaí. The queen steadfastly marked the majestic form and features of Dáráb, and said in her heart: "The youth who bears this dignified and royal aspect, appears to be a Kaiánian by birth;" and as she spoke, the instinctive feeling of a mother seemed to agitate her bosom.

  The queen beheld his form and face,   The scion of a princely race;   And natural instinct seemed to move   Her heart, which spoke a mother's love;   She gazed, but like the lightning's ray,   That sudden thrill soon passed away.

The army was now in motion. After the first march, a tremendous wind and heavy rain came on, and all the soldiers were under tents, excepting Dáráb, who had none, and was obliged to take shelter from the inclemency of the weather beneath an archway, where he laid himself down, and fell asleep. Suddenly a supernatural voice was heard, saying:--

  "Arch! stand firm, and from thy wall   Let no ruined fragment fall!   He who sleeps beneath is one   Destined to a royal throne.   Arch! a monarch claims thy care,   The king of Persia slumbers there!"

The voice was heard by every one near, and Rishnawád having also heard it, inquired of his people from whence it came. As he spoke, the voice repeated its caution:--

  "Arch! stand firm, and from thy wall   Let no ruined fragment fall!   Bahman's son is in thy keeping;   He beneath thy roof is sleeping.   Though the winds are loudly roaring,   And the rain in torrents pouring,   Arch! stand firm, and from thy wall   Let no loosened fragment fall."

Again Rishnawád sent other persons to ascertain from whence the voice proceeded; and they returned, saying, that it was not of the earth, but from Heaven. Again the caution sounded in his ears:--

  "Arch! stand firm, and from thy wall   Let no loosened fragment fall."

And his amazement increased. He now sent a person under the archway to see if any one was there, when the youth was discovered in deep sleep upon the ground, and the arch above him rent and broken in many parts. Rishnawád being apprised of this circumstance, desired that he might be awakened and brought to him. The moment he was removed, the whole of the arch fell down with a dreadful crash, and this wonderful escape was also communicated to the leader of the army, who by a strict and particular enquiry soon became acquainted with all the occurrences of the stranger's life. Rishnawád also summoned before him the washerman and his wife, and they corroborated the story he had been told. Indeed he himself recognized the ruby on Dáráb's arm, which convinced him that he was the son of Bahman, whom Húmaí caused to be thrown into the Euphrates. Thus satisfied of his identity, he treated him with great honor, placed him on his right hand, and appointed him to a high command in the army. Soon afterwards an engagement took place with the Rúmís, and Dáráb in the advanced guard performed prodigies of valor. The battle lasted all day, and in the evening Rishnawád bestowed upon him the praise which he merited. Next day the army was again prepared for battle, when Dáráb proposed that the leader should remain quiet, whilst he with a chosen band of soldiers attacked the whole force of the enemy. The proposal being agreed to, he advanced with fearless impetuosity to the contest.

  With loosened rein he rushed along the field,   And through opposing numbers hewed his path,   Then pierced the Kulub-gah, the centre-host,   Where many a warrior brave, renowned in arms,   Fell by his sword. Like sheep before a wolf   The harassed Rúmís fled; for none had power   To cope with his strong arm. His wondrous might   Alone, subdued the legions right and left;   And when, unwearied, he had fought his way   To where great Kaísar stood, night came, and darkness,   Shielding the trembling emperor of Rúm,   Snatched the expected triumph from his hands.

Rishnawád was so filled with admiration at his splendid prowess, that he now offered him the most magnificent presents; but when they were exposed to his view, a suit of armor was the only thing he would accept.

The Rúmís were entirely disheartened by his valor, and they said: "We understood that the sovereign of Persia was only a woman, and that the conquest of the empire would be no difficult task; but this woman seems to be more fortunate than a warrior-king. Even her general remains inactive with the great body of his army; and a youth, with a small force, is sufficient to subdue the legions of Rúm; we had, therefore, better return to our own country." The principal warriors entertained the same sentiments, and suggested to Kaísar the necessity of retiring from the field; but the king opposed this measure, thinking it cowardly and disgraceful, and said:--

  "To-morrow we renew the fight,   To-morrow we shall try our might;   To-morrow, with the smiles of Heaven,   To us the victory will be given."

Accordingly on the following day the armies met again, and after a sanguinary struggle, the Persians were again triumphant. Kaísar now despaired of success, sent a messenger to Rishnawád, in which he acknowledged the aggressions he had committed, and offered to pay him whatever tribute he might require. Rishnawád readily settled the terms of the peace; and the emperor was permitted to return to his own dominions.

After this event Rishnawád sent to Húmaí intelligence of the victories he had gained, and of the surprising valor of Dáráb, transmitting to her the ruby as an evidence of his birth. Húmaí was at once convinced that he was her son, for she well remembered the day on which he was enrolled as one of her soldiers, when her heart throbbed with instinctive affection at the sight of him; and though she had unfortunately failed to question him then, she now rejoiced that he was so near being restored to her. She immediately proceeded to the Atish-gadeh, or the Fire-altar, and made an offering on the occasion; and ordering a great fire to be lighted, gave immense sums away in charity to the poor. Having called Dáráb to her presence, she went with a splendid retinue to meet him at the distance of one journey from the city; and as soon as he approached, she pressed him to her bosom, and kissed his head and eyes with the fondest affection of a mother. Upon the first day of happy omen, she relinquished in his favor the crown and the throne, after having herself reigned thirty-two years.



DÁRÁB AND DÁRÁ

When Dáráb had ascended the throne, he conducted the affairs of the kingdom with humanity, justice, and benevolence; and by these means secured the happiness of his people. He had no sooner commenced his reign, than he sent for the washerman and his wife, and enriched them by his gifts. "But," said he, "I present to you this property on these conditions--you must not give up your occupation--you must go every day, as usual, to the river-side, and wash clothes; for perhaps in process of time you may discover another box floating down the stream, containing another infant!" With these conditions the washerman complied.

Some time afterwards the kingdom was invaded by an Arabian army, consisting of one hundred thousand men, and commanded by Sháíb, a distinguished warrior. Dáráb was engaged with this army three days and three nights, and on the fourth morning the battle terminated, in consequence of Sháíb being slain. The booty was immense, and a vast number of Arabian horses fell into the hands of the victor; which, together with the quantity of treasure captured, strengthened greatly the resources of the state. The success of this campaign enabled Dáráb to extend his military operations; and having put his army in order, he proceeded against Failakús (Philip of Macedon), then king of Rúm, whom he defeated with great loss. Many were put to the sword, and the women and children carried into captivity. Failakús himself took refuge in the fortress of Amúr, from whence he sent an ambassador to Dáráb, saying, that if peace was only granted to him, he would willingly consent to any terms that might be demanded. When the ambassador arrived, Dáráb said to him: "If Failakús will bestow upon me his daughter, Nahíd, peace shall be instantly re-established between us--I require no other terms." Failakús readily agreed, and sent Nahíd with numerous splendid presents to the king of Persia, who espoused her, and took her with him to his own country. It so happened that Nahíd had an offensive breath, which was extremely disagreeable to her husband, and in consequence he directed enquiries to be made everywhere for a remedy. No place was left unexplored; at length an herb of peculiar efficacy and fragrance was discovered, which never failed to remove the imperfection complained of; and it was accordingly administered with confident hopes of success. Nahíd was desired to wash her mouth with the infused herb, and in a few days her breath became balmy and pure. When she found she was likely to become a mother she did not communicate the circumstance, but requested permission to pay a visit to her father. The request was granted; and on her arrival in Rúm she was delivered of a son. Failakús had no male offspring, and was overjoyed at this event, which he at once determined to keep unknown to Dáráb, publishing abroad that a son had been born in his house, and causing it to be understood that the child was his own. When the boy grew up, he was called Sikander; and, like Rustem, became highly accomplished in all the arts of diplomacy and war. Failakús placed him under Aristátalís, a sage of great renown, and he soon equalled his master in learning and science.

Dáráb married another wife, by whom he had another son, named Dárá; and when the youth was twenty years of age, the father died. The period of Dáráb's reign was thirty-four years.

Dárá continued the government of the empire in the same spirit as his father; claiming custom and tribute from the inferior rulers, with similar strictness and decision. After the death of Failakús, Sikander became the king of Rúm; and refusing to pay the demanded tribute to Persia, went to war with Dárá, whom he killed in battle; the particulars of these events will be presently shown. Failakús reigned twenty-four years.



SIKANDER

Failakús, before his death, placed the crown of sovereignty upon the head of Sikander, and appointed Aristú, who was one of the disciples of the great Aflátún, his vizir. He cautioned him to pursue the path of virtue and rectitude, and to cast from his heart every feeling of vanity and pride; above all he implored him to be just and merciful, and said:--

  "Think not that thou art wise, but ignorant,   And ever listen to advice and counsel;   We are but dust, and from the dust created;   And what our lives but helplessness and sorrow!"

Sikander for a time attended faithfully to the instructions of his father, and to the counsel of Aristú, both in public and private affairs.

Upon Sikander's elevation to the throne, Dárá sent an envoy to him to claim the customary tribute, but he received for answer: "The time is past when Rúm acknowledged the superiority of Persia. It is now thy turn to pay tribute to Rúm. If my demand be refused, I will immediately invade thy dominions; and think not that I shall be satisfied with the conquest of Persia alone, the whole world shall be mine; therefore prepare for war." Dárá had no alternative, not even submission, and accordingly assembled his army, for Sikander was already in full march against him. Upon the confines of Persia the armies came in sight of each other, when Sikander, in the assumed character of an envoy, was resolved to ascertain the exact condition of the enemy. With this view he entered the Persian camp, and Dárá allowing the person whom he supposed an ambassador, to approach, enquired what message the king of Rúm had sent to him. "Hear me!" said the pretended envoy: "Sikander has not invaded thy empire for the exclusive purpose of fighting, but to know its history, its laws, and customs, from personal inspection. His object is to travel through the whole world. Why then should he make war upon thee? Give him but a free passage through thy kingdom, and nothing more is required. However if it be thy wish to proceed to hostilities, he apprehends nothing from the greatness of thy power." Dárá was astonished at the majestic air and dignity of the envoy, never having witnessed his equal, and he anxiously said:--

  "What is thy name, from whom art thou descended?   For that commanding front, that fearless eye,   Bespeaks illustrious birth. Art thou indeed   Sikander, whom my fancy would believe thee,   So eloquent in speech, in mien so noble?"   "No!" said the envoy, "no such rank is mine,   Sikander holds among his numerous host   Thousands superior to the humble slave   Who stands before thee. It is not for me   To put upon myself the air of kings,   To ape their manners and their lofty state."

Dárá could not help smiling, and ordered refreshments and wine to be brought. He filled a cup and gave it to the envoy, who drank it off, but did not, according to custom, return the empty goblet to the cup-bearer. The cup-bearer demanded the cup, and Dárá asked the envoy why he did not give it back. "It is the custom in my country," said the envoy, "when a cup is once given into an ambassador's hands, never to receive it back again." Dárá was still more amused by this explanation, and presented to him another cup, and successively four, which the envoy did not fail to appropriate severally in the same way. In the evening a feast was held, and Sikander partook of the delicious refreshments that had been prepared for him; but in the midst of the entertainment one of the persons present recognized him, and immediately whispered to Dárá that his enemy was in his power.

  Sikander's sharp and cautious eye now marked   The changing scene, and up he sprang, but first   Snatched the four cups, and rushing from the tent,   Vaulted upon his horse, and rode away.   So instantaneous was the act, amazed   The assembly rose, and presently a troop   Was ordered in pursuit--but night, dark night,   Baffled their search, and checked their eager speed.

As soon as he reached his own army, he sent for Aristátalís and his courtiers, and exultingly displayed to them the four golden cups. "These," said he, "have I taken from my enemy, I have taken them from his own table, and before his own eyes. His strength and numbers too I have ascertained, and my success is certain." No time was now lost in arrangements for the battle. The armies engaged, and they fought seven days without a decisive blow being struck. On the eighth, Dárá was compelled to fly, and his legions, defeated and harassed, were pursued by the Rúmís with great slaughter to the banks of the Euphrates. Sikander now returned to take possession of the capital. In the meantime Dárá collected his scattered forces together, and again tried his fortune, but he was again defeated. After his second success, the conqueror devoted himself so zealously to conciliate and win the affections of the people, that they soon ceased to remember their former king with any degree of attachment to his interests. Sikander said to them: "Persia indeed is my inheritance: I am no stranger to you, for I am myself descended from Dáráb; you may therefore safely trust to my justice and paternal care, in everything that concerns your welfare." The result was, that legion after legion united in his cause, and consolidated his power.

When Dárá was informed of the universal disaffection of his army, he said to the remaining friends who were personally devoted to him: "Alas! my subjects have been deluded by the artful dissimulation and skill of Sikander; your next misfortune will be the captivity of your wives and children. Yes, your wives and children will be made the slaves of the conquerors." A few troops, still faithful to their unfortunate king, offered to make another effort against the enemy, and Dárá was too grateful and too brave to discountenance their enthusiastic fidelity, though with such little chance of success. A fragment of an army was consequently brought into action, and the result was what had been anticipated. Dárá was again a fugitive; and after the defeat, escaped with three hundred men into the neighboring desert. Sikander captured his wife and family, but magnanimously restored them to the unfortunate monarch, who, destitute of all further hope, now asked for a place of refuge in his own dominions, and for that he offered him all the buried treasure of his ancestors. Sikander, in reply, invited him to his presence; and promised to restore him to his throne, that he might himself be enabled to pursue other conquests; but Dárá refused to go, although advised by his nobles to accept the invitation. "I am willing to put myself to death," said he with emotion, "but I cannot submit to this degradation. I cannot go before him, and thus personally acknowledge his authority over me." Resolved upon this point, he wrote to Faúr, one of the sovereigns of Ind, to request his assistance, and Faúr recommended that he should pay him a visit for the purpose of concerting what measures should be adopted. This correspondence having come to the knowledge of Sikander, he took care that his enemy should be intercepted in whatever direction he might proceed.

Dárá had two ministers, named Mahiyár and Jamúsipár, who, finding that according to the predictions of the astrologers their master would in a few days fall into the hands of Sikander, consulted together, and thought they had better put him to death themselves, in order that they might get into favor with Sikander. It was night, and the soldiers of the escort were dispersed at various distances, and the vizirs were stationed on each side of the king. As they travelled on, Jamúsipár took an opportunity of plunging his dagger into Dárá's side, and Mahiyár gave another blow, which felled the monarch to the ground. They immediately sent the tidings of this event to Sikander, who hastened to the spot, and the opening daylight presented to his view the wounded king.

  Dismounting quickly, he in sorrow placed   The head of Dárá on his lap, and wept   In bitterness of soul, to see that form   Mangled with ghastly wounds.

Dárá still breathed; and when he lifted up his eyes and beheld Sikander, he groaned deeply. Sikander said, "Rise up, that we may convey thee to a place of safety, and apply the proper remedies to thy wounds."--"Alas!" replied Dárá, "the time for remedies is past. I leave thee to Heaven, and may thy reign give peace and happiness to the empire."--"Never," said Sikander, "never did I desire to see thee thus mangled and fallen--never to witness this sight! If the Almighty should spare thy life, thou shalt again be the monarch of Persia, and I will go from hence. On my mother's word, thou and I are sons of the same father. It is this brotherly affection which now wrings my heart!" Saying this, the tears chased each other down his cheeks in such abundance that they fell upon the face of Dárá. Again, he said, "Thy murderers shall meet with merited vengeance, they shall be punished to the uttermost." Dárá blessed him, and said, "My end is approaching, but thy sweet discourse and consoling kindness have banished all my grief. I shall now die with a mind at rest. Weep no more--

 "My course is finished, thine is scarce begun;   But hear my dying wish, my last request:   Preserve the honour of my family,   Preserve it from disgrace. I have a daughter   Dearer to me than life, her name is Roshung;   Espouse her, I beseech thee--and if Heaven   Should bless thee with a boy, O! let his name be   Isfendiyár, that he may propagate   With zeal the sacred doctrines of Zerdusht,   The Zendavesta, then my soul will be   Happy in Heaven; and he, at Náu-rúz tide,   Will also hold the festival I love,   And at the altar light the Holy Fire;   Nor will he cease his labour, till the faith   Of Lohurásp be everywhere accepted,   And everywhere believed the true religion."

Sikander promised that he would assuredly fulfil the wishes he had expressed, and then Dárá placed the palm of his brother's hand on his mouth, and shortly afterwards expired. Sikander again wept bitterly, and then the body was placed on a golden couch, and he attended it in sorrow to the grave.

After the burial of Dárá, the two ministers, Jamúsipár and Mahiyár, were brought near the tomb, and executed upon the dar.

  Just vengeance upon the guilty head,   For they their generous monarch's blood had shed.

Sikander had now no rival to the throne of Persia, and he commenced his government under the most favorable auspices. He continued the same customs and ordinances which were handed down to him, and retained every one in his established rank and occupation. He gladdened the heart by his justice and liberality. Keeping in mind his promise to Dárá, he now wrote to the mother of Roshung, and communicating to her the dying solicitations of the king, requested her to send Roshung to him, that he might fulfil the last wish of his brother. The wife of Dárá immediately complied with the command, and sent her daughter with various presents to Sikander, and she was on her arrival married to the conqueror, acceding to the customs and laws of the empire. Sikander loved her exceedingly, and on her account remained some time in Persia, but he at length determined to proceed into Ind to conquer that country of enchanters and enchantment.

On approaching Ind he wrote to Kaid, summoning him to surrender his kingdom, and received from him the following answer: "I will certainly submit to thy authority, but I have four things which no other person in the world possesses, and which I cannot relinquish. I have a daughter, beautiful as an angel of Paradise, a wise minister, a skilful physician, and a goblet of inestimable value!" Upon receiving this extraordinary reply, Sikander again addressed a letter to him, in which he peremptorily required all these things immediately. Kaid not daring to refuse, or make any attempt at evasion, reluctantly complied with the requisition. Sikander received the minister and the physician with great politeness and attention, and in the evening held a splendid feast, at which he espoused the beautiful daughter of Kaid, and taking the goblet from her hands, drank off the wine with which it was filled. After that, Kaid himself waited upon Sikander, and personally acknowledged his authority and dominion.

Sikander then proceeded to claim the allegiance and homage of Faúr, the king of Kanúj, and wrote to him to submit to his power; but Faúr returned a haughty answer, saying:--

  "Kaid Indí is a coward to obey thee,   But I am Faúr, descended from a race   Of matchless warriors; and shall I submit,   And to a Greek!"

Sikander was highly incensed at this bold reply. The force he had now with him amounted to eighty thousand men; that is, thirty thousand Iránians, forty thousand Rúmís, and ten thousand Indís. Faúr had sixty thousand horsemen, and two thousand elephants. The troops of Sikander were greatly terrified at the sight of so many elephants, which gave the enemy such a tremendous superiority. Aristátalís, and some other ingenious counsellors, were requested to consult together to contrive some means of counteracting the power of the war-elephants, and they suggested the construction of an iron horse, and the figure of a rider also of iron, to be placed upon wheels like a carriage, and drawn by a number of horses. A soldier, clothed in iron armor, was to follow the vehicle--his hands and face besmeared with combustible matter, and this soldier, armed with a long staff, was at an appointed signal, to pierce the belly of the horse and also of the rider, previously filled with combustibles, so that when the ignited point came in contact with them, the whole engine would make a tremendous explosion and blaze in the air. Sikander approved of this invention, and collected all the blacksmiths and artisans in the country to construct a thousand machines of this description with the utmost expedition, and as soon as they were completed, he prepared for action. Faúr too pushed forward with his two thousand elephants in advance; but when the Kanújians beheld such a formidable array they were surprised, and Faúr anxiously inquired from his spies what it could be. Upon being told that it was Sikander's artillery, his troops pushed the elephants against the enemy with vigor, at which moment the combustibles were fired by the Rúmís, and the machinery exploding, many elephants were burnt and destroyed, and the remainder, with the troops, fled in confusion. Sikander then encountered Faúr, and after a severe contest, slew him, and became ruler of the kingdom of Kanúj.

After the conquest of Kanúj, Sikander went to Mekka, carrying thither rich presents and offerings. From thence he proceeded to another city, where he was received with great homage by the most illustrious of the nation. He enquired of them if there was anything wonderful or extraordinary in their country, that he might go to see it, and they replied that there were two trees in the kingdom, one a male, the other a female, from which a voice proceeded. The male-tree spoke in the day, and the female-tree in the night, and whoever had a wish, went thither to have his desires accomplished. Sikander immediately repaired to the spot, and approaching it, he hoped in his heart that a considerable part of his life still remained to be enjoyed. When he came under the tree, a terrible sound arose and rung in his ears, and he asked the people present what it meant. The attendant priest said it implied that fourteen years of his life still remained. Sikander, at this interpretation of the prophetic sound, wept and the burning tears ran down his cheeks. Again he asked, "Shall I return to Rúm, and see my mother and children before I die?" and the answer was, "Thou wilt die at Kashán.[51]

 "Nor mother, nor thy family at home   Wilt thou behold again, for thou wilt die,   Closing thy course of glory at Kashán."

Sikander left the place in sorrow, and pursued his way towards Rúm. In his progress he arrived at another city, and the inhabitants gave him the most honorable welcome, representing to him, however, that they were dreadfully afflicted by the presence of two demons or giants, who constantly assailed them in the night, devouring men and goats and whatever came in their way. Sikander asked their names; and they replied, Yájuj and Májuj (Gog and Magog). He immediately ordered a barrier to be erected five hundred yards high, and three hundred yards wide, and when it was finished he went away. The giants, notwithstanding all their efforts, were unable to scale this barrier, and in consequence the inhabitants pursued their occupations without the fear of molestation.

  To scenes of noble daring still he turned   His ardent spirit--for he knew not fear.   Still he led on his legions--and now came   To a strange place, where countless numbers met   His wondering view--countless inhabitants   Crowding the city streets, and neighbouring plains;   And in the distance presently he saw   A lofty mountain reaching to the stars.   Onward proceeding, at its foot he found   A guardian-dragon, terrible in form,   Ready with open jaws to crush his victim;   But unappalled, Sikander him beholding   With steady eye, which scorned to turn aside,   Sprang forward, and at once the monster slew.

  Ascending then the mountain, many a ridge,   Oft resting on the way, he reached the summit,   Where the dead corse of an old saint appeared   Wrapt in his grave-clothes, and in gems imbedded.   In gold and precious jewels glittering round,   Seeming to show what man is, mortal man!   Wealth, worldly pomp, the baubles of ambition,   All left behind, himself a heap of dust!

  None ever went upon that mountain top,   But sought for knowledge; and Sikander hoped   When he had reached its cloudy eminence,   To see the visions of futurity   Arise from that departed, holy man!   And soon he heard a voice: "Thy time is nigh!   Yet may I thy career on earth unfold.   It will be thine to conquer many a realm,   Win many a crown; thou wilt have many friends   And numerous foes, and thy devoted head   Will be uplifted to the very heavens.   Renowned and glorious shalt thou be; thy name   Immortal; but, alas! thy time is nigh!"   At these prophetic words Sikander wept,   And from that ominous mountain hastened down.

After that Sikander journeyed on to the city of Kashán, where he fell sick, and in a few days, according to the oracle and the prophecy, expired. He had scarcely breathed his last, when Aristú, and Bilniyás the physician, and his family, entered Kashán, and found him dead. They beat their faces, and tore their hair, and mourned for him forty days.



FIRDUSI'S INVOCATION

  Thee I invoke, the Lord of Life and Light!   Beyond imagination pure and bright!   To thee, sufficing praise no tongue can give,   We are thy creatures, and in thee we live!   Thou art the summit, depth, the all in all,   Creator, Guardian of this earthly ball;   Whatever is, thou art--Protector, King,   From thee all goodness, truth, and mercy spring.   O pardon the misdeeds of him who now   Bends in thy presence with a suppliant brow.   Teach them to tread the path thy Prophet trod;   To wash his heart from sin, to know his God;   And gently lead him to that home of rest,   Where filled with holiest rapture dwell the blest.

   Saith not that book divine, from Heaven supplied,   "Mustafa is the true, the unerring guide,   The purest, greatest Prophet!" Next him came   Wise Abu Buker, of unblemished name;   Then Omer taught the faith, unknown to guile,   And made the world with vernal freshness smile;   Then Othmán brave th' imperial priesthood graced;   All, led by him, the Prophet's faith embraced.   The fourth was Alí; he, the spouse adored   Of Fatima, then spread the saving word.   Alí, of whom Mahommed spoke elate,   "I am the city of knowledge--he my gate."   Alí the blest. Whoever shall recline   A supplicant at his all-powerful shrine,   Enjoys both this life and the next; in this,   All earthly good, in that, eternal bliss!

  From records true my legends I rehearse,   And string the pearls of wisdom in my verse,   That in the glimmering days of life's decline,   Its fruits, in wealth and honor, may be mine.   My verse, a structure pointing to the skies;   Whose solid strength destroying time defies.   All praise the noble work, save only those   Of impious life, or base malignant foes;   All blest with learning read, and read again,   The sovereign smiles, and thus approves my strain:   "Richer by far, Firdusi, than a mine   Of precious gems, is this bright lay of thine."   Centuries may pass away, but still my page   Will be the boast of each succeeding age.

  Praise, praise to Mahmud, who of like renown,   In battle or the banquet, fills the throne;   Lord of the realms of Chín and Hindústán,   Sovereign and Lord of Persia and Túrán,   With his loud voice he rends the flintiest ear;   On land a tiger fierce, untouched by fear,   And on the wave, he seems the crocodile   That prowls amidst the waters of the Nile.   Generous and brave, his equal is unknown;   In deeds of princely worth he stands alone.   The infant in the cradle lisps his name;   The world exults in Mahmud's spotless fame.   In festive hours Heaven smiles upon his truth;   In combat deadly as the dragon's tooth;   Bounteous in all things, his exhaustless hand   Diffuses blessings through the grateful land;   And, of the noblest thoughts and actions, lord;   The soul of Gabriel breathes in every word,   May Heaven with added glory crown his days;   Praise, praise to mighty Mahmud--everlasting praise!



FIRDUSI'S SATIRE ON MAHMUD

  Know, tyrant as thou art, this earthly state   Is not eternal, but of transient date;   Fear God, then, and afflict not human-kind;   To merit Heaven, be thou to Heaven resigned.   Afflict not even the Ant; though weak and small,   It breathes and lives, and life is sweet to all.   Knowing my temper, firm, and stern, and bold,   Didst thou not, tyrant, tremble to behold   My sword blood-dropping? Hadst thou not the sense   To shrink from giving man like me offence?   What could impel thee to an act so base?   What, but to earn and prove thy own disgrace?   Why was I sentenced to be trod upon,   And crushed to death by elephants? By one   Whose power I scorn! Couldst thou presume that I   Would be appalled by thee, whom I defy?   I am the lion, I, inured to blood,   And make the impious and the base my food;   And I could grind thy limbs, and spread them far   As Nile's dark waters their rich treasures bear.   Fear thee! I fear not man, but God alone,   I only bow to his Almighty throne.   Inspired by Him my ready numbers flow;   Guarded by Him I dread no earthly foe.   Thus in the pride of song I pass my days,   Offering to Heaven my gratitude and praise.

  From every trace of sense and feeling free,   When thou art dead, what will become of thee?   If thou shouldst tear me limb from limb, and cast   My dust and ashes to the angry blast,   Firdusi still would live, since on thy name,   Mahmud, I did not rest my hopes of fame   In the bright page of my heroic song,   But on the God of Heaven, to whom belong   Boundless thanksgivings, and on Him whose love   Supports the Faithful in the realms above,   The mighty Prophet! none who e'er reposed   On Him, existence without hope has closed.

  And thou wouldst hurl me underneath the tread   Of the wild elephant, till I were dead!   Dead! by that insult roused, I should become   An elephant in power, and seal thy doom--   Mahmud! if fear of man hath never awed   Thy heart, at least fear thy Creator, God.   Full many a warrior of illustrious worth,   Full many of humble, of imperial birth:   Túr, Sílim, Jemshíd, Minúchihr the brave,   Have died; for nothing had the power to save   These mighty monarchs from the common doom;   They died, but blest in memory still they bloom.   Thus kings too perish--none on earth remain,   Since all things human seek the dust again.

  O, had thy father graced a kingly throne,   Thy mother been for royal virtues known,   A different fate the poet then had shared,   Honors and wealth had been his just reward;   But how remote from thee a glorious line!   No high, ennobling ancestry is thine;   From a vile stock thy bold career began,   A Blacksmith was thy sire of Isfahán.   Alas! from vice can goodness ever spring?   Is mercy hoped for in a tyrant king?   Can water wash the Ethiopian white?   Can we remove the darkness from the night?   The tree to which a bitter fruit is given,   Would still be bitter in the bowers of Heaven;   And a bad heart keeps on its vicious course;   Or if it changes, changes for the worse;   Whilst streams of milk, where Eden's flowrets blow,   Acquire more honied sweetness as they flow.   The reckless king who grinds the poor like thee,   Must ever be consigned to infamy!

  Now mark Firdusi's strain, his Book of Kings   Will ever soar upon triumphant wings.   All who have listened to its various lore   Rejoice, the wise grow wiser than before;   Heroes of other times, of ancient days,   Forever flourish in my sounding lays;   Have I not sung of Káús, Tús, and Gíw;   Of matchless Rustem, faithful, still, and true.   Of the great Demon-binder, who could throw   His kamund to the Heavens, and seize his foe!   Of Húsheng, Feridún, and Sám Suwár,   Lohurásp, Kai-khosráu, and Isfendiyár;   Gushtásp, Arjásp, and him of mighty name,   Gúdarz, with eighty sons of martial fame!

  The toil of thirty years is now complete,   Record sublime of many a warlike feat,   Written midst toil and trouble, but the strain   Awakens every heart, and will remain   A lasting stimulus to glorious deeds;   For even the bashful maid, who kindling reads,   Becomes a warrior. Thirty years of care,   Urged on by royal promise, did I bear,   And now, deceived and scorned, the aged bard   Is basely cheated of his pledged reward!



[FOOTNOTES to the SHÁH NÁMEH]

[Footnote 1: Love at first sight, and of the most enthusiastic kind, is the passion described in all Persian poems, as if a whole life of love were condensed into one moment. It is all wild and rapturous. It has nothing of a rational cast. A casual glance from an unknown beauty often affords the subject of a poem. The poets whom Dr. Johnson has denominated metaphysical, such as Donne, Jonson, and Cowley, bear a strong resemblance to the Persians on the subject of love.

  Now, sure, within this twelvemonth past,   I've loved at least some twenty years or more;   Th' account of love runs much more fast,   Than that with which our life does score:   So, though my life be short, yet I may prove,       The Great Methusalem of love!!!                   "Love and Life."--Cowley.

The odes of Háfiz also, with all their spirit and richness of expression, abound in conceit and extravagant metaphor. There is, however, something very beautiful in the passage which may be paraphrased thus:

  Zephyr thro' thy locks is straying,   Stealing fragrance, charms displaying;   Should it pass where Háfiz lies,   From his conscious dust would rise,   Flowrets of a thousand dyes!]

[Footnote 2: Ancient Scythia embraced the whole of Túrán and the northern part of Persia. The Túránians are the Scythians of the Greek Historians, who are said, about the year B.C. 639, to have invaded the kingdom of the Medes.

Túrán, which is the ancient name of the country of Turkistán, appears from Des Guignes, to be the source and fountain of all the celebrated Scythian nations, which, under the name of Goths and Vandals, subsequently overran the Roman empire. Irán and Túrán, according to the Oriental historians, comprehended all that is comprised in upper Asia, with the exception of India and China. Every country beyond the pale of the Persian empire was considered barbarous. The great river called by the Arabs and Persians, Jihún or Amú, and by the Greeks and Romans, Oxus, divided these two great countries from each other.]

[Footnote 3: Sám, Sám Suwár, was the son of Narímán. He is said to have vanquished or tamed a great number of animals and terrible monsters, amongst which was one remarkable for its ferocity. This furious animal was called Sohám, on account of its being of the color and nature of fire. According to fabulous history, he made it his war-horse, in all his engagements against the Demons.]

[Footnote 4: The sex of this fabulous animal is not clearly made out! It tells Zál that it had nursed him like a _father_, and therefore I have, in this place, adopted the masculine gender, though the preserver of young ones might authorize its being considered a female. The Símúrgh is probably neither one nor the other, or both! Some have likened the Símúrgh to the Ippogrif or Griffin; but the Símúrgh is plainly a biped; others again have supposed that the fable simply meant a holy recluse of the mountains, who nourished and educated the poor child which had been abandoned by its father.]

[Footnote 5: This custom is derived from the earliest ages of Persia, and has been continued down to the present times with no abatement of its pomp or splendor Mr. Morier thus speaks of the progress of the Embassy to Persia:--

  "An Istakbál composed of fifty horsemen of our Mehmandar's tribe,   met us about three miles from our encampment; they were succeeded as   we advanced by an assemblage on foot, who threw a glass vessel   filled with sweetmeats beneath the Envoy's horse, a ceremony which   we had before witnessed at Kauzeroon, and which we again understood   to be an honor shared with the King and his sons alone. Then came   two of the principal merchants of Shiraz, accompanied by a boy, the   son of Mahomed Nebee Khan, the new Governor of Bushere. They,   however, incurred the Envoy's displeasure by not dismounting from   their horses, a form always observed in Persia by those of lower   rank, when they met a superior. We were thus met by three Istakbáls   during the course of the day."]

[Footnote 6: The province of Mázinderán, of which the principal city is Amol, comprehends the whole of the southern coast of the Caspian sea. It was known to the ancients by the name of Hyrcania. At the period to which the text refers, the country was in the possession of demons.]

[Footnote 7: The fort called Killah Suffeed, lies about seventy-six miles northwest of the city of Shiraz. It is of an oblong form, and encloses a level space at the top of the mountain, which is covered with delightful verdure, and watered by numerous springs. The ascent is near three miles, and for the last five or six hundred yards, the summit is so difficult of approach, that the slightest opposition, if well directed, must render it impregnable.]

[Footnote 8: The numerical strength of the Persian and Túránian forces appears prodigious on all occasions, but nothing when compared with the army under Xerxes at Thermopylae, which, with the numerous retinue of servants, eunuchs, and women that attended it, is said to have amounted to no less than 5,283,220 souls.]

[Footnote 9: Herodotus speaks of a people confederated with the army of Xerxes, who employed the noose. "Their principal dependence in action is upon cords made of twisted leather, which they use in this manner: when they engage an enemy, they throw out these cords, having a noose at the extremity; if they entangle in them either horse or man, they without difficulty put them to death."--Beloe's transl. Polymnia, Sec. 85.]

[Footnote 10: Istakhar, also called Persepolis, and Chehel-minar, or the Forty Pillars. This city was said to have been laid in ruins by Alexander after the conquest of Darius.]

[Footnote 11: Kai-káús, the second King of Persia of the dynasty called Kaiánides. He succeeded Kai-kobád, about six hundred years B.C. According to Firdusi he was a foolish tyrannical prince. He appointed Rustem captain-general of the armies, to which the lieutenant-generalship and the administration of the state was annexed, under the title of "the champion of the world." He also gave him a taj, or crown of gold, which kings only were accustomed to wear, and granted him the privilege of giving audience seated on a throne of gold. It is said that Kai-káús applied himself much to the study of astronomy, and that he founded two great observatories, the one at Babel, and the other on the Tigris.]

[Footnote 12: The armor called Burgustuwán almost covered the horse, and as usually made of leather and felt-cloth.]

[Footnote 13: In this hunting excursion he is completely armed, being supplied with spear, sword, shield, mace, bow and arrows. Like the knight-errants of after times, he seldom even slept unarmed. Single combat and the romantic enterprises of European Chivalry may indeed be traced to the East. Rustem was a most illustrious example of all that is pious, disinterested, and heroic. The adventure now describing is highly characteristic of a chivalrous age. In the Dissertation prefixed to Richardson's Dictionary, mention is made of a famous Arabian Knight-errant called Abu Mahommud Albatal, "who wandered everywhere in quest of adventures, and redressing grievances. He was killed in the year 738."]

[Footnote 14: As a proof of her innocence Tahmíneh declares to Rustem, "No person has ever seen me out of my private chamber, or even heard the sound of my voice." It is but just to remark, that the seclusion in which women of rank continue in Persia, and other parts of the East, is not, by them, considered intolerable, or even a hardship. Custom has not only rendered it familiar, but happy. It has nothing of the unprofitable severity of the cloister. The Zenanas are supplied with everything that can please and gratify a reasonable wish, and it is well known that the women of the East have influence and power, more flattering and solid, than the free unsecluded beauties of the Western world.]

[Footnote 15: In Percy's Collection, there is an old song which contains a similar idea.

  You meaner beauties of the night,    That poorly satisfie our eies,   More by your number, than your light;    You common people of the skies,    What are you when the Moon shall rise?

     SIR HENRY WOTTON.]

[Footnote 16: Kus is a tymbal, or large brass drum, which is beat in the palaces or camps of Eastern Princes.]

[Footnote 17: It appears throughout the Sháh Námeh that whenever any army was put in motion, the inhabitants and the country, whether hostile or friendly, were equally given up to plunder and devastation, and "Everything in their progress was burnt and destroyed."]

[Footnote 18: Literally, Húmán was not at first aware that Sohráb was wounded in the LIVER. In this organ, Oriental as well as the Greek and Roman poets, place the residence of love.]

[Footnote 19: The paper upon which the letters of royal and distinguished personages in the East are written is usually perfumed, and covered with curious devices in gold. This was scented with amber. The degree of embellishment is generally regulated according to the rank of the party.]

[Footnote 20: Four days were consumed in uninterrupted feasting. This seems to have been an ancient practice previous to the commencement of any important undertaking, or at setting out on a journey.]

[Footnote 21: Zúára, it will be remembered, was the brother of Rustem, and had the immediate superintendence of the Zábul troops.]

[Footnote 22: The original is, "Seize and inflict upon him the punishment of the dar." According to Burháni-katia, dar is a tree upon which felons are hanged. But the general acceptation of the term is breaking or tearing the body upon a stake.]

[Footnote 23: In this speech Rustem recounts the services which he had performed for Káús. He speaks of his conquests in Egypt, China, Hámáverán, Rúm, Súk-sar, and Mázinderán. Thus Achilles boasts of his unrequited achievements in the cause of Greece.

  The warriors now, with sad forebodings wrung,   I sacked twelve ample cities on the main,   And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain.

     POPE.--Iliad ix. 328.]

[Footnote 24: Literally, "Kings ought to be endowed with judgment and discretion; no advantage can arise from impetuosity and rage." Gúdarz was one of the greatest generals of Persia, he conquered Judea, and took Jerusalem under the reign of Lohurásp, of the first dynasty of Persia, and sustained many wars against Afrásiyáb under the Kings of the second dynasty. He was the father of Gíw, who is also celebrated for his valor in the following reigns. The opinion of this venerable and distinguished warrior appears to have had considerable weight and influence with Káús.]

[Footnote 25: Káús, in acknowledging the violence Of his disposition, uses a singular phrase: "When you departed in anger, Champion! I repented; ashes fell into my mouth." A similar metaphor is used in Hindústaní: If a person falls under the displeasure of his friend, he says, "Ashes have fallen into my meat": meaning, that his happiness is gone.]

[Footnote 26: This is one of Firdusi's favorite similes.

  "My heart became as slender as the new moon."]

[Footnote 27: The beautiful arbors referred to in the text are often included within the walls of Eastern palaces. They are fancifully fitted up, and supplied with reservoirs, fountains, and flower-trees. These romantic garden-pavilions are called Kiosks in Turkey, and are generally situated upon an eminence near a running stream.]

[Footnote 28: Milton alludes to this custom in Paradise Lost:

  Where the gorgeous east with richest hand   Showers on her Kings barbaric pearl and gold.

In the note on this passage by Warburton, it is said to have been an eastern ceremony, at the coronation of their Kings, to powder them with gold-dust and seed-pearl. The expression in Firdusi is, "he showered or scattered gems." It was usual at festivals, and the custom still exists, to throw money amongst the people. In Háfiz, the term used is nisar, which is of the same import. Clarke, in the second volume of his Travels, speaks of the four principal Sultanas of the Seraglio at Constantinople being powdered with diamonds:

  "Long spangled robes, open in front, with pantaloons embroidered in   gold and silver, and covered by a profusion of pearls and precious   stones, displayed their persons to great advantage. Their hair hung in   loose and very thick tresses on each side of their cheeks, falling   quite down to the waist, and covering their shoulders behind. Those   tresses were quite powdered with diamonds, not displayed according to   any studied arrangement, but as if carelessly scattered, by handfuls,   among their flowing locks."

--Vol. ii. p. 14.]

[Footnote 29: In his descriptions of battle-array, Firdusi seldom omits "golden slippers," which, however, I have not preserved in this place.]

[Footnote 30: The original is Sandur[=u]s, sandaraca; for which I have substituted amber, Sandur[=u]s is the Arabic name for Gum Juniper.]

[Footnote 31: The banners were adorned with the figure of an elephant, to denote his royal descent.]

[Footnote 32: The text says that he was also the son-in-law of Rustem.]

[Footnote 33: The word Guráz signifies a wild boar, but this acceptation is not very accordant to Mussulman notions, and consequently it is not supposed, by the orthodox, to have that meaning in the text. It is curious that the name of the warrior, Guráz, should correspond with the bearings on the standard. This frequently obtains in the heraldry of Europe. Family bearings seem to be used in every country of any degree of civilization. Krusenstern, the Russian circumnavigator, speaking of the Japanese, says, "Everyone has his family arms worked into his clothes, in different places, about the size of a half dollar, a practice usual to both sexes; and in this manner any person may be recognized, and the family to which he belongs easily ascertained. A young lady wears her father's arms until after her marriage, when she assumes those of her husband. The greatest mark of honor which a Prince or a Governor can confer upon any one, is to give him a cloak with his arms upon it, the person having such a one wearing his own arms upon his under dress."]

[Footnote 34: Firdusi considers this to be destiny! It would have been natural in Sohráb to have gloried in the fame of his father, but from an inevitable dispensation, his lips are here sealed on that subject; and he inquires of Rustem as if he only wanted to single him out for the purpose of destroying him. The people of Persia are all fatalists.]

[Footnote 35: This passage will remind the classical reader of the speech of Themistocles, in Plutarch, addressed to Xerxes. The Persian King had assured him of his protection, and ordered him to declare freely whatever he had to propose concerning Greece. Themistocles replied, that a man's discourse was like a piece of tapestry which, when spread open, displays its figures; but when it is folded up, they are hidden and lost; therefore he begged time. The King, delighted with the comparison, bade him take what time he pleased; and he desired a year; in which space he learned the Persian language, so as to be able to converse with the King without an interpreter.]

[Footnote 36: Hujír was the son of Gúdarz. A family of the extent mentioned in the text is not of rare occurrence amongst the Princes of the East. The King of Persia had, in 1809, according to Mr. Morier, "sixty-five sons!" As the Persians make no account of females, it is not known how many daughters he had.]

[Footnote 37: The Kulub-gah is the centre or heart of the army, where the Sovereign or Chief of the troops usually remains.]

[Footnote 38: Ahirmun, a demon, the principle of evil.]

[Footnote 39: This girdle was the gift of the king, as a token of affection and gratitude. Jonathan gives to David, among other things, his girdle: "Because he loved him as his own soul."--I Samuel, xviii. 3. 4.]

[Footnote 40: A crocodile in war, with Firdusi, is a figure of great power and strength.]

[Footnote 41: It is difficult to account for this denial of his name, as there appears to be no equivalent cause. But all the famous heroes, described in the Sháh Námeh, are as much distinguished for their address and cunning, as their bravery.]

[Footnote 42: The original is Um[=u]d, which appears to have been a weapon made of iron. Um[=u]d also signifies a column, a beam.]

[Footnote 43: Thus also Sa'di "Knowest thou What Zál said to Rustem the Champion? Never calculate upon the weakness or insignificance of an enemy."]

[Footnote 44: Rustem is as much distinguished for piety as bravery. Every success is attributed by him to the favor of Heaven. In the achievement of his labors in the Heft-Khan, his devotion is constant and he everywhere justly acknowledges that power and victory are derived from God alone.]

[Footnote 45: The expression in the original is remarkable. "Assuredly, as thou hast thirsted for blood, Destiny will also thirst for thine, and the very hairs upon thy body will become daggers to destroy thee." This passage is quoted in the preface to the Sháh Námeh, collated by order of Bayisunghur Khan, as the production of the poet Unsarí. Unsarí was one of the seven poets whom Mahmud appointed to give specimens of their powers in versifying the History of the Kings of Persia. The story of Rustem and Sohráb fell to Unsarí, and his arrangement of it contained the above verses, which so delighted the Sultan that he directed the poet to undertake the whole work. This occurred before Firdusi was introduced at Court and eclipsed every competitor. In compliment to Mahmud, perhaps he ingrafted them on his own poem, or more probably they have been interpolated since.]

[Footnote 46: Jemshíd's glory and misfortunes, as said before, are the constant theme of admiration and reflection amongst the poets of Persia.]

[Footnote 47: These medicated draughts are often mentioned in Romances. The reader will recollect the banter upon them in Don Quixote, where the Knight of La enumerates to Sancho the cures which had been performed upon many valorous champions, covered with wounds. The Hindús, in their books on medicine, talk of drugs for the recovery of the dead!]

[Footnote 48: Zúára conducted the troops of Afrásiyáb across the Jihún. Rustem remained on the field of battle till his return.]

[Footnote 49: Maníjeh was the daughter of Afrásiyáb.]

[Footnote 50: Theocritus introduces a Greek singing-girl in Idyllium xv, at the festival of Adonis. In the Arabian Nights, the Caliph is represented at his feasts surrounded by troops of the most beautiful females playing on various instruments.]

[Footnote 51: Kashán is here made to be the deathplace of Alexander, whilst, according to the Greek historians, he died suddenly at Babylon, as foretold by the magicians, on the 21st of April, B.C. 323, in the thirty-second year of his age.]






THE RUBÁIYÁT OF OMAR KHAYYÁM

[_Translation by Edward Fitzgerald_]



Introduction

It is seldom that we come across a poem which it is impossible to classify in accordance with European standards. Yet such a poem is Omar's "Rubáiyát." If elegiac poetry is the expression of subjective emotion, sentiment, and thought, we might class this Persian masterpiece as elegy; but an elegy is a sustained train of connected imagery and reflection. The "Rubáiyát" is, on the other hand, a string of quatrains, each of which has all the complete and independent significance of an epigram. Yet there is so little of that lightness which should characterize an epigram that we can scarcely put Omar in the same category with Martial, and it is easy to understand why the author should have been contented to name his book the "Rubáiyát," or Quatrains, leaving it to each individual to make, if he chooses, a more definite description of the work. To English readers, Mr. Edward Fitzgerald's version of the poem has provided one of the most masterly translations that was ever made from an Oriental classic. For Omar, like Háfiz, is one of the most Persian of Persian writers. There is in this volume all the gorgeousness of the East: all the luxury of the most refined civilization. Omar's bowers are always full of roses; the notes of the nightingale tremble through his stanzas. The intoxication of wine and the bright eyes of lovely women are ever present to his mind. The feast, the revel, the joys of love, and the calm satisfaction of appetite make up the grosser elements in his song. But the prevailing note of his music is that of deep and settled melancholy, breaking out occasionally into words of misanthropy and despair. The keenness and intensity of this poet's style seem to be inspired by an ever-present fear of death. This sense of approaching Fate is never absent from him, even in his most genial moments; and the strange fascination which he exercises over his readers is largely due to the thrilling sweetness of some passage which ends in a note of dejection and anguish.

Strange to say, Omar was the greatest mathematician of his day. The exactness of his fine and analytic mind is reflected in the exquisite finish, the subtile wit, the delicate descriptive touches, that abound in his Quatrains. His verses hang together like gems of the purest water exquisitely cut and clasped by "jacinth work of subtlest jewelry." But apart from their masterly technique, these Quatrains exhibit in their general tone the revolt of a clear intellect from the prevailing bigotry and fanaticism of an established religion. There is in the poet's mind the lofty indignation of one who sees, in its true light, the narrowness of an ignorant and hypocritical clergy, yet can find no solid ground on which to build up for himself a theory of supernaturalism, illumined by hope. Yet there are traces of Mysticism in his writings, which only serve to emphasize his profound longing for some knowledge of the invisible, and his foreboding that the grave is the "be-all" and "end-all" of life. The poet speaks in tones of bitterest lamentation when he sees succumb to Fate all that is bright and fresh and beautiful. At his brightest moments he gives expression to a vague pantheism, but all his views of the power that lies behind life are obscured and perturbed by sceptical despondency. He is the great man of science, who, like other men of genius too deeply immersed in the study of natural law or abstract reasoning, has lost all touch with that great world of spiritual things which we speak of as religion, and which we can only come in contact with through those instinctive emotions which scientific analysis very often does so much to stifle. There are many men of science who, like Darwin, have come, through the study of material phenomena in nature, to a condition of mind which is indifferent in matters of religion. But the remarkable feature in the case of Omar is that he, who could see so clearly and feel so acutely, has been enabled also to embody in a poem of imperishable beauty the opinions which he shared with many of his contemporaries. The range of his mind can only be measured by supposing that Sir Isaac Newton had written Manfred or Childe Harold. But even more remarkable is what we may call the modernity of this twelfth century Persian poet. We sometimes hear it said that great periods of civilization end in a manifestation of infidelity and despair. There can be no doubt that a great deal of restlessness and misgiving characterizes the minds of to-day in regard to all questions of religion. Europe, in the nineteenth century, as reflected in the works of Byron, Spencer, Darwin, and Schopenhauer, is very much in the same condition as intellectual Persia in the twelfth century, so far as the pessimism of Omar is representative of his day. This accounts for the wide popularity of Fitzgerald's "Rubáiyát." The book has been read eagerly and fondly studied, as if it were a new book of _fin du siècle_ production: the last efflorescence of intellectual satiety, cynicism, and despair. Yet the book is eight centuries old, and it has been the task of this seer of the East to reveal to the West the heart-sickness under which the nations were suffering.

Omar Khayyám--that is, Omar the tent-maker--was born in the year 1050 at Níshapúr, the little Damascus (as it is called) of Persia: famous as a seat of learning, as a place of religion, and a centre of commerce. In the days of Omar it was by far the most important city of Khorasan. The poet, like his father before him, held a court office under the Vizir of his day. It was from the stipend which he thus enjoyed that he secured leisure for mathematical and literary work. His father had been a khayyám, or tent-maker, and his gifted son doubtless inherited the handicraft as well as the name; but his position at Court released him from the drudgery of manual labor. He was thus also brought in contact with the luxurious side of life, and became acquainted with those scenes of pleasure which he recalls only to add poignancy to the sorrow with which he contemplates the yesterday of life. Omar's astronomical researches were continued for many years, and his algebra has been translated into French: but his greatest claim to renown is based upon his immortal Quatrains, which will always live as the best expression of a phase of mind constantly recurring in the history of civilization, from the days of Anaxagoras to those of Darwin and Spencer.

E.W.



OMAR KHAYYÁM By John Hay

_Address delivered December 8, 1897, at the Dinner of the Omar Khayyám Club, London_.

I can never forget my emotions when I first saw Fitzgerald's translations of the Quatrains. Keats, in his sublime ode on Chapman's Homer, has described the sensation once for all:

  "Then felt I like some watcher of the skies   When a new planet swims into his ken."

The exquisite beauty, the faultless form, the singular grace of those amazing stanzas were not more wonderful than the depth and breadth of their profound philosophy, their knowledge of life, their dauntless courage, their serene facing of the ultimate problems of life and death. Of course the doubt did not spare me, which has assailed many as ignorant as I was of the literature of the East, whether it was the poet or the translator to whom was due this splendid result. Was it, in fact, a reproduction of an antique song, or a mystification of a great modern, careless of fame and scornful of his time? Could it be possible that in the eleventh century, so far away as Khorasan, so accomplished a man of letters lived, with such distinction, such breadth, such insight, such calm disillusions, such cheerful and jocund despair? Was this "Weltschmerz," which we thought a malady of our day, endemic in Persia in 1100? My doubt only lasted until I came upon a literal translation of the Rubáiyát, and I saw that not the least remarkable quality of Fitzgerald's poem was its fidelity to the original.

In short, Omar was a Fitzgerald, or Fitzgerald was a reincarnation of Omar. It was not to the disadvantage of the latter poet that he followed so closely in the footsteps of the earlier. A man of extraordinary genius had appeared in the world, had sung a song of incomparable beauty and power in an environment no longer worthy of him, in a language of narrow range; for many generations the song was virtually lost; then by a miracle of creation, a poet, a twin-brother in the spirit to the first, was born, who took up the forgotten poem and sang it anew with all its original melody and force, and all the accumulated refinement of ages of art. It seems to me idle to ask which was the greater master; each seems greater than his work. The song is like an instrument of precious workmanship and marvellous tone, which is worthless in common hands, but when it falls, at long intervals, into the hands of the supreme master, it yields a melody of transcendent enchantment to all that have ears to hear. If we look at the sphere of influence of the poets, there is no longer any comparison. Omar sang to a half-barbarous province: Fitzgerald to the world. Wherever the English speech is spoken or read, the "Rubáiyát" have taken their place as a classic. There is not a hill post in India, nor a village in England, where there is not a coterie to whom Omar Khayyám is a familiar friend and a bond of union. In America he has an equal following, in many regions and conditions. In the Eastern States his adepts form an esoteric sect; the beautiful volume of drawings by Mr. Vedder is a centre of delight and suggestion wherever it exists. In the cities of the West you will find the Quatrains one of the most thoroughly read books in any club library. I heard them quoted once in one of the most lonely and desolate spots in the high Rockies. We had been camping on the Great Divide, our "roof of the world," where in the space of a few feet you may see two springs, one sending its waters to the Polar solitudes, the other to the eternal Carib summer. One morning at sunrise, as we were breaking camp, I was startled to hear one of our party, a frontiersman born, intoning these words of sombre majesty:--

  "Tis but a Tent where takes his one day's rest   A Sultan to the realm of Death addrest;     The Sultan rises, and the dark Ferrash   Strikes, and prepares it for another Guest."

I thought that sublime setting of primeval forest and pouring canyon was worthy of the lines; I am sure the dewless, crystalline air never vibrated to strains of more solemn music. Certainly, our poet can never be numbered among the great writers of all time. He has told no story; he has never unpacked his heart in public; he has never thrown the reins on the neck of the winged horse, and let his imagination carry him where it listed. "Ah! the crowd must have emphatic warrant," as Browning sang. Its suffrages are not for the cool, collected observer, whose eyes no glitter can dazzle, no mist suffuse. The many cannot but resent that air of lofty intelligence, that pale and subtle smile. But he will hold a place forever among that limited number, who, like Lucretius and Epicurus--without range or defiance, even without unbecoming mirth, look deep into the tangled mysteries of things; refuse credence to the absurd, and allegiance to arrogant authority; sufficiently conscious of fallibility to be tolerant of all opinions; with a faith too wide for doctrine and a benevolence untrammelled by creed; too wise to be wholly poets, and yet too surely poets to be implacably wise.



THE RUBÁIYÁT

  Wake! For the Sun, who scatter'd into flight   The Stars before him from the Field of Night,     Drives Night along with them from Heav'n, and strikes   The Sultan's Turret with a Shaft of Light.

  Before the phantom of False morning died,   Methought a Voice within the Tavern cried,     "When all the Temple is prepared within,   Why nods the drowsy Worshipper outside?"

  And, as the Cock crew, those who stood before   The Tavern shouted--"Open then the Door!     You know how little while we have to stay,   And, once departed, may return no more."

  Now the New Year reviving old Desires,   The thoughtful Soul to Solitude retires,     Where the White Hand of Moses on the Bough   Puts out, and Jesus from the Ground suspires.

  Iram indeed is gone with all his Rose,   And Jemshíd's Sev'n-ring'd Cup where no one knows;     But still a Ruby kindles in the Vine,   And many a Garden by the Water blows.

  And David's lips are lockt; but in divine   High-piping Pehleví, with "Wine! Wine! Wine!     Red Wine!"--the Nightingale cries to the Rose   That sallow cheek of hers to incarnadine.

  Come, fill the Cup, and in the fire of Spring   Your Winter-garment of Repentance fling:     The Bird of Time has but a little way   To flutter--and the Bird is on the Wing.

  Whether at Níshapúr or Babylon,   Whether the Cup with sweet or bitter run,     The Wine of Life keeps oozing drop by drop,   The Leaves of Life keep falling one by one.

  Each Morn a thousand Roses brings, you say;   Yes, but where leaves the Rose of Yesterday?     And this first Summer month that brings the Rose   Shall take Jemshíd and Kai-kobád away.

  Well, let it take them! What have we to do   With Kai-kobád the Great, or Kai-khosráu?     Let Zál and Rustem bluster as they will,   Or Hátím call to Supper--heed not you.

  With me along the strip of Herbage strewn   That just divides the desert from the sown,     Where name of Slave and Sultan is forgot--   And Peace to Mahmud on his golden Throne!

  A Book of Verses underneath the Bough,   A Jug of Wine, a Loaf of Bread--and Thou     Beside me singing in the Wilderness--   Oh, Wilderness were Paradise enow!

  Some for the Glories of This World; and some   Sigh for the Prophet's Paradise to come;     Ah, take the Cash, and let the Credit go,   Nor heed the rumble of a distant Drum!

  Look to the blowing Rose about us--"Lo,   Laughing," she says, "into the world I blow,     At once the silken tassel of my Purse   Tear, and its Treasure on the Garden throw."

  And those who husbanded the Golden grain,   And those who flung it to the winds like Rain,     Alike to no such aureate Earth are turn'd   As, buried once, Men want dug up again.

  The Worldly Hope men set their Hearts upon   Turns Ashes--or it prospers; and anon,     Like Snow upon the Desert's dusty Face,   Lighting a little hour or two--is gone.

  Think, in this batter'd Caravanserai   Whose Portals are alternate Night and Day,     How Sultan after Sultan with his Pomp   Abode his destined Hour, and went his way.

  They say the Lion and the Lizard keep   The Courts where Jemshíd gloried and drank deep:     And Báhrám, that great Hunter--the Wild Ass   Stamps o'er his Head, but cannot break his Sleep.

  I sometimes think that never blows so red   The Rose as where some buried Caesar bled;     That every Hyacinth the Garden wears   Dropt in her Lap from some once lovely Head.

  And this reviving Herb whose tender Green   Fledges the River-Lip on which we lean--     Ah, lean upon it lightly! for who knows   From what once lovely Lip it springs unseen!

  Ah, my Belovéd, fill the Cup that clears   To-day of past Regrets and future Fears:     _To-morrow!_--Why, To-morrow I may be   Myself with Yesterday's Sev'n thousand Years.

  For some we loved, the loveliest and the best   That from his Vintage rolling Time hath prest,     Have drunk their Cup a Round or two before,   And one by one crept silently to rest.

  And we, that now make merry in the Room   They left, and Summer dresses in new bloom,     Ourselves must we beneath the Couch of Earth   Descend--ourselves to make a Couch--for whom?

  Ah, make the most of what we yet may spend,   Before we too into the Dust descend;     Dust into Dust, and under Dust to lie,   Sans Wine, sans Song, sans Singer, and--sans End!

  Alike for those who for TO-DAY prepare,   And those that after some TO-MORROW stare,     A Muezzín from the Tower of Darkness cries,   "Fools! your Reward is neither Here nor There."

  Why, all the Saints and Sages who discuss'd   Of the Two Worlds so wisely--they are thrust     Like foolish Prophets forth; their Words to Scorn   Are scattered, and their Mouths are stopt with Dust.

  Myself when young did eagerly frequent   Doctor and Saint, and heard great argument     About it and about: but evermore   Came out by the same door where in I went.

  With them the seed of Wisdom did I sow,   And with mine own hand wrought to make it grow;     And this was all the Harvest that I reap'd--   "I came like Water, and like Wind I go."

  Into this Universe, and _Why_ not knowing   Nor _Whence_, like Water willy-nilly flowing;     And out of it, as Wind along the Waste,   I know not _Whither_, willy-nilly blowing.

  What, without asking, hither hurried _Whence_?   And, without asking, _Whither_ hurried hence!     Oh, many a Cup of this forbidden Wine   Must drown the memory of that insolence!

  Up from Earth's Centre through the Seventh Gate   I rose, and on the Throne of Saturn sate,     And many a Knot unravel'd by the Road;   But not the Master-knot of Human Fate.

  There was the Door to which I found no Key;   There was the Veil through which I might not see:     Some little talk awhile of ME and THEE   There was--and then no more of THEE and ME.

  Earth could not answer; nor the Seas that mourn   In flowing Purple, of their Lord forlorn;     Nor rolling Heaven, with all his Signs reveal'd   And hidden by the sleeve of Night and Morn.

  Then of the THEE IN ME who works behind   The Veil, I lifted up my hands to find     A lamp amid the Darkness; and I heard,   As from Without--"THE ME WITHIN THEE BLIND!"

  Then to the Lip of this poor earthen Urn   I lean'd, the Secret of my Life to learn:     And Lip to Lip it murmur'd--"While you live,   Drink!--for, once dead, you never shall return."

  I think the Vessel, that with fugitive   Articulation answer'd, once did live,     And drink; and Ah! the passive Lip I kiss'd,   How many Kisses might it take--and give!

  For I remember stopping by the way   To watch a Potter thumping his wet Clay:     And with its all-obliterated Tongue   It murmur'd--"Gently, Brother, gently, pray!"

  And has not such a story from of Old   Down Man's successive generations roll'd     Of such a clod of saturated Earth   Cast by the Maker into Human mould?

  And not a drop that from our Cups we throw   For Earth to drink of, but may steal below     To quench the fire of Anguish in some Eye   There hidden--far beneath, and long ago.

  As then the Tulip for her morning sup   Of Heav'nly Vintage from the soil looks up,     Do you devoutly do the like, till Heav'n   To Earth invert you--like an empty Cup.

  Perplext no more with Human or Divine,   To-morrow's tangle to the winds resign,     And lose your fingers in the tresses of   The Cypress-slender Minister of Wine.

  And if the Wine you drink, the Lip you press,   End in what All begins and ends in--Yes;     Think then you are To-day what Yesterday   You were--To-morrow you shall not be less.

  So when that Angel of the darker Drink   At last shall find you by the river-brink,     And, offering his Cup, invite your Soul   Forth to your Lips to quaff--you shall not shrink.

  Why, if the Soul can fling the Dust aside,   And naked on the Air of Heaven ride,     Were't not a Shame--were't not a Shame for him   In this clay carcase crippled to abide?

  'Tis but a Tent where takes his one day's rest   A Sultan to the realm of Death addrest;     The Sultan rises, and the dark Ferrash   Strikes, and prepares it for another Guest

  And fear not lest Existence closing your   Account, and mine, should know the like no more;     The Eternal Sákí from the Bowl has pour'd   Millions of Bubbles like us, and will pour.

  When You and I behind the Veil are past,   Oh, but the long, long while the World shall last,     Which of our Coming and Departure heeds   As the Sea's self should heed a pebble-cast.

  A Moment's Halt--a momentary taste   Of Being from the Well amid the Waste--     And Lo!--the phantom Caravan has reach'd   The Nothing it set out from--Oh, make haste!

  Would you that spangle of Existence spend   About THE SECRET--quick about it, Friend!     A Hair perhaps divides the False and True--   And upon what, prithee, may life depend?

  A Hair perhaps divides the False and True;   Yes; and a single Alif were the clue--     Could you but find it--to the Treasure-house,   And peradventure to THE MASTER too;

  Whose secret Presence, through Creation's veins   Running Quicksilver-like eludes your pains;     Taking all shapes from Máh to Máhí; and   They change and perish all--but He remains;

  A moment guess'd--then back behind the Fold   Immerst of Darkness round the Drama roll'd     Which, for the Pastime of Eternity,   He doth Himself contrive, enact, behold.

  But if in vain, down on the stubborn floor   Of Earth, and up to Heav'n's unopening Door,     You gaze To-day, while You are You--how then   To-morrow, when You shall be You no more?

  Waste not your Hour, nor in the vain pursuit   Of This and That endeavor and dispute;     Better be jocund with the fruitful Grape   Than sadden after none, or bitter, Fruit.

  You know, my Friends, with what a brave Carouse   I made a Second Marriage in my house;     Divorced old barren Reason from my Bed,   And took the Daughter of the Vine to Spouse.

  For "Is" and "Is-not" though with Rule and Line   And "Up-and-down" by Logic I define,     Of all that one should care to fathom, I   Was never deep in anything but--Wine.

  Ah, but my Computations, People say,   Reduced the Year to better reckoning?--Nay,     'Twas only striking from the Calendar   Unborn To-morrow, and dead Yesterday.

  And lately, by the Tavern Door agape,   Came shining through the Dusk an Angel Shape     Bearing a Vessel on his Shoulder; and   He bid me taste of it; and 'twas--the Grape!

  The Grape that can with Logic absolute   The Two-and-Seventy jarring Sects confute:     The Sovereign Alchemist that in a trice   Life's leaden metal into Gold transmute:

  The mighty Mahmud, Allah-breathing Lord,   That all the misbelieving and black Horde     Of Fears and Sorrows that infest the Soul   Scatters before him with his whirlwind Sword.

  Why, be this Juice the growth of God, who dare   Blaspheme the twisted tendril as a Snare?     A Blessing, we should use it, should we not?   And if a Curse--why, then, Who set it there?

  I must abjure the Balm of Life, I must,   Scared by some After-reckoning ta'en on trust,     Or lured with Hope of some Diviner Drink,   To fill the Cup--when crumbled into Dust!

  Oh threats of Hell and Hopes of Paradise!   One thing at least is certain--This Life flies;     One thing is certain and the rest is Lies;   The Flower that once has blown forever dies.

  Strange, is it not? that of the myriads who   Before us pass'd the door of Darkness through,     Not one returns to tell us of the Road,   Which to discover we must travel too.

  The Revelations of Devout and Learn'd   Who rose before us, and as Prophets burn'd,     Are all but Stories, which, awoke from Sleep   They told their comrades, and to Sleep return'd.

  I sent my Soul through the Invisible,   Some letter of that After-life to spell:     And by and by my Soul return'd to me,   And answered, "I Myself am Heav'n and Hell:"

  Heav'n but the Vision of fulfill'd Desire,   And Hell the Shadow from a Soul on fire,     Cast on the Darkness into which Ourselves,   So late emerged from, shall so soon expire.

  We are no other than a moving row   Of Magic Shadow-shapes that come and go     Round with the Sun-illumined Lantern held   In Midnight by the Master of the Show;

  But helpless Pieces of the Game He plays   Upon this Checker-board of Nights and Days;     Hither and thither moves, and checks, and slays,   And one by one back in the Closet lays.

  The Ball no question makes of Ayes and Noes,   But Here or There as strikes the Player goes;     And He that toss'd you down into the Field,   _He_ knows about it all--HE knows--HE knows!

  The Moving Finger writes; and, having writ,   Moves on: nor all your Piety nor Wit     Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,   Nor all your Tears wash out a Word of it.

  And that inverted Bowl they call the Sky,   Whereunder crawling coop'd we live and die,     Lift not your hands to _It_ for help--for It   As impotently moves as you or I.

  With Earth's first Clay They did the Last Man knead,   And there of the Last Harvest sow'd the Seed:     And the first Morning of Creation wrote   What the Last Dawn of Reckoning shall read.

  Yesterday This Day's Madness did prepare;   To-morrow's Silence, Triumph, or Despair:     Drink! for you know not whence you came, nor why:   Drink! for you know not why you go, nor where.

  I tell you this--When, started from the Goal,   Over the flaming shoulders of the Foal     Of Heav'n Parwín and Mushtarí they flung,   In my predestined Plot of Dust and Soul

  The Vine had struck a fibre: which about   If clings my Being--let the Dervish flout;     Of my Base metal may be filed a Key,   That shall unlock the Door he howls without.

  And this I know: whether the one True Light   Kindle to Love, or Wrath-consume me quite,     One Flash of It within the Tavern caught   Better than in the Temple lost outright.

  What! out of senseless Nothing to provoke   A conscious Something to resent the yoke     Of unpermitted Pleasure, under pain   Of Everlasting Penalties, if broke!

  What! from his helpless Creature be repaid   Pure Gold for what he lent him dross-allay'd--     Sue for a Debt he never did contract,   And cannot answer--Oh the sorry trade!

  Oh Thou, who didst with pitfall and with gin   Beset the Road I was to wander in,     Thou wilt not with Predestined Evil round   Enmesh, and then impute my Fall to Sin!

  O Thou, who Man of baser Earth didst make,   And ev'n with Paradise devise the Snake:     For all the Sin wherewith the Face of Man   Is blacken'd--Man's forgiveness give--and take!

  As under cover of departing Day   Slunk hunger-stricken Ramazán away,     Once more within the Potter's house alone   I stood, surrounded by the Shapes of Clay.

  Shapes of all Sorts and Sizes, great and small,   That stood along the floor and by the wall;     And some loquacious Vessels were; and some   Listen'd perhaps, but never talk'd at all.

  Said one among them--"Surely not in vain   My substance of the common Earth was ta'en     And to this Figure moulded, to be broke,   Or trampled back to shapeless Earth again."

  Then said a Second--"Ne'er a peevish Boy   Would break the Bowl from which he drank in joy;     And He that with his hand the Vessel made   Will surely not in after Wrath destroy."

  After a momentary silence spake   Some Vessel of a more ungainly Make;     "They sneer at me for leaning all awry:   What! did the Hand then of the Potter shake?"

  Whereat some one of the loquacious Lot--   I think a Súfi pipkin--waxing hot--     "All this of Pot and Potter--Tell me, then,   Who is the Potter, pray, and who the Pot?"

  "Why," said another, "some there are who tell   Of one who threatens he will toss to Hell     The luckless Pots he marr'd in making--Pish!   He's a Good Fellow, and 't will all be well."

  "Well," murmur'd one, "let whoso make or buy,   My Clay with long Oblivion is gone dry:     But fill me with the old familiar Juice,   Methinks I might recover by and by."

  So while the Vessels one by one were speaking,   The little Moon look'd in that all were seeking:     And then they jogg'd each other, "Brother! Brother!   Now for the Potter's shoulder-knot a-creaking!"

  Ah, with the Grape my fading Life provide,   And wash the Body whence the Life has died,     And lay me, shrouded in the living Leaf,   By some not unfrequented Garden-side.

  That ev'n my buried Ashes such a snare   Of Vintage shall fling up into the Air     As not a True-believer passing by   But shall be overtaken unaware.

  Indeed the Idols I have loved so long   Have done my credit in this World much wrong:     Have drown'd my Glory in a shallow Cup,   And sold my Reputation for a Song.

  Indeed, indeed, Repentance oft before   I swore--but was I sober when I swore?     And then and then came Spring, and Rose-in-hand   My threadbare Penitence apieces tore.

  And much as Wine has play'd the Infidel,   And robb'd me of my Robe of Honor--Well,     I wonder often what the Vintners buy   One half so precious as the stuff they sell.

  Yet ah, that Spring should vanish with the Rose!   That Youth's sweet-scented manuscript should close!     The Nightingale that in the branches sang,   Ah whence, and whither flown again, who knows!

  Would but the Desert of the Fountain yield   One glimpse--if dimly, yet indeed, reveal'd,     To which the fainting Traveller might spring,   As springs the trampled herbage of the field!

  Would but some wingèd Angel ere too late   Arrest the yet unfolded Roll of Fate,     And make the stern Recorder otherwise   Enregister, or quite obliterate!

  Ah, Love! could you and I with Him conspire   To grasp this sorry Scheme of Things entire,     Would not we shatter it to bits--and then   Re-mould it nearer to the Heart's Desire!

  Yon rising Moon that looks for us again--   How oft hereafter will she wax and wane;     How oft hereafter rising look for us   Through this same Garden--and for _one_ in vain!

  And when like her, oh Sákí, you shall pass   Among the Guests Star-scatter'd on the Grass,     And in your joyous errand reach the spot   Where I made One--turn down an empty Glass!






THE DIVAN

BY HÁFIZ

[_Translation by H. Bicknell_]



NOTE

The reader will be struck with the apparent want of unity in many of the Odes. The Orientals compare each couplet to a single pearl and the entire "Ghazal," or Ode, to a string of pearls. It is the rhyme, not necessarily the sense, which links them together. Hence the single pearls or couplets may often be arranged in various orders without injury to the general effect; and it would probably be impossible to find two manuscripts either containing the same number of Odes, or having the same couplets following each other in the same order.



INTRODUCTION

We are told in the Persian histories that when Tamerlane, on his victorious progress through the East, had reached Shiraz, he halted before the gates of the city and sent two of his followers to search in the bazar for a certain dervish Muhammad Shams-ad-din, better known to the world by the name of Háfiz. And when this man of religion, wearing the simple woollen garment of a Sufi, was brought into the presence of the great conqueror, he was nothing abashed at the blaze of silks and jewelry which decorated the pavilion where Tamerlane sat in state. And Tamerlane, meeting the poet with a frown of anger, said, "Art not thou the insolent verse-monger who didst offer my two great cities Samarkand and Bokhara for the black mole upon thy lady's cheek?" "It is true," replied Háfiz calmly, smiling, "and indeed my munificence has been so great throughout my life, that it has left me destitute, so that I shall be hereafter dependent upon thy generosity for a livelihood." The reply of the poet, as well as his imperturbable self-possession, pleased the Asiatic Alexander, and he dismissed Háfiz with a liberal present.

This story, we are told, cannot be true, for Tamerlane did not reach Shiraz until after the death of the greatest of Persian lyric poets; but if it is not true in fact, it is true in spirit, and gives the real key to the character of Háfiz. For we must look upon Háfiz as one of the few poets in the world who utters an unbroken strain of joy and contentment. His poverty was to him a constant fountain of satisfaction, and he frankly took the natural joys of life as they came, supported under every vicissitude by his religious sense of the goodness and kindliness of the One God, manifested in everything in the world that was sweet and genial, and beautiful to behold. It is strange that we have to go to the literature of Persia to find a poet whose deep religious convictions were fully reconciled with the theory of human existence which was nothing more or less than an optimistic hedonism. There is nothing parallel to this in classic literature. The greatest of Roman Epicureans, the materialist, whose maxim was: enjoy the present for there is no God, and no to-morrow, speaks despairingly of that drop of bitterness, which rises in the fountain of Delight and brings torture, even amid the roses of the feast. It is with mocking irony that Dante places Epicurus in the furnace-tombs of his Inferno amid those heresiarchs who denied the immortality of the soul. Háfiz was an Epicurean without the atheism or the despair of Epicurus. The roses in his feast are ever fresh and sweet and there is nothing of bitterness in the perennial fountain of his Delight. This unruffled serenity, this joyful acceptance of material existence and its pleasures are not in the Persian poet the result of the carelessness and shallowness of Horace, or the cold-blooded worldliness and sensuality of Martial. The theory of life which Háfiz entertained was founded upon the relation of the human soul to God. The one God of Sufism was a being of exuberant benignity, from whose creative essence proceeded the human soul, whose experiences on earth were intended to fit it for re-entrance into the circle of light and re-absorption into the primeval fountain of being. In accordance with the beautiful and pathetic imagery of the Mystic, life was merely a journey of many stages, and every manifestation of life which the traveller met on the high road was a manifestation and a gift of God Himself. Every stage on the journey towards God which the soul made in its religious experience was like a wayside inn in which to rest awhile before resuming the onward course. The pleasures of life, all that charmed the eye, all that gratified the senses, every draught that intoxicated, and every fruit that pleased the palate, were, in the pantheistic doctrine of the Sufi considered as equally good, because God was in each of them, and to partake of them was therefore to be united more closely with God. Never was a theology so well calculated to put to rest the stings of doubt or the misgivings of the pleasure-seeker. This theology is of the very essence of Háfiz's poetry. It is in full reliance on this interpretation of the significance of human existence that Háfiz faces the fierce Tamerlane with a placid smile, plunges without a qualm into the deepest abysses of pleasure, finds in the love-song of the nightingale the voice of God, and in the bright eyes of women and the beaker brimming with crimson wine the choicest sacraments of life, the holiest and the most sublime intermediaries between divine and human life.

It is this that makes Háfiz almost the only poet of unadulterated gladsomeness that the world has ever known. There is no shadow in his sky, no discord in his music, no bitterness in his cup. He passes through life like a happy pilgrim, singing all the way, mounting in his own way from strength to strength, sure of a welcome when he reaches the goal, contented with himself, because every manifestation of life of which he is conscious must be the stirrings within him of that divinity of which he is a portion. When we have thus spoken of Háfiz we have said almost all that is known of the Persian lyric poet, for to know Háfiz we must read his verses, whose magic charm is as great for Europeans as for Asiatics. The endless variety of his expressions, the deep earnestness of his convictions, the persistent gayety of his tone, are qualities of irresistible attractiveness. Even to this day his tomb is visited as the Mecca of literary pilgrims, and his numbers are cherished in the memory and uttered on the tongue of all educated Persians. The particulars of his life may be briefly epitomized as follows: He was born at Shiraz in the early part of the fourteenth century, dying in the year 1388. The name Háfiz means, literally, the man who remembers, and was applied to himself by Háfiz from the fact that he became a professor of the Mohammedan scriptures, and for this purpose had committed to memory the text of the Koran. His manner of life was not approved of by the dervishes of the monastic college in which he taught, and he satirizes his colleagues in revenge for their animadversions. The whole Mohammedan world hailed with delight the lyrics which Háfiz published to the world, and kings and rulers vied with each other in making offers to him of honors and hospitality. At one time he started for India on the invitation of a great Southern Prince, who sent a vessel to meet him on the way, but the hardships of the sea were too severe for him, and he made his way back to Shiraz without finishing his journey.

His out-and-out pantheism, as well as his manner of life, caused him at his death to be denied burial in consecrated ground. The ecclesiastical authorities were, however, induced to relent in their plan of excommunication at the dictates of a passage from the poet's writings, which was come upon by opening the book at random. The passage ran as follows: "Turn not thy feet from the bier of Háfiz, for though immersed in sin, he will be admitted into Paradise." And so he rests in the cemetery at Shiraz, where the nightingales are singing and the roses bloom the year through, and the doves gather with low murmurs amid the white stones of the sacred enclosure. The poets of nature, the mystical pantheist, the joyous troubadour of life, Háfiz, in the naturalness and spontaneity of his poetry, and in the winning sweetness of his imagery, occupies a unique place in the literature of the world, and has no rival in his special domain.



FRAGMENT BY HÁFIZ

_In Praise of His Verses_.

  The beauty of these verses baffles praise:   What guide is needed to the solar blaze?   Extol that artist by whose pencil's aid   The virgin, Thought, so richly is arrayed.   For her no substitute can reason show,   Nor any like her human judgment know.   This verse, a miracle, or magic white--   Brought down some voice from Heaven, or Gabriel bright?   By me as by none else are secrets sung,   No pearls of poesy like mine are strung.



THE DIVAN



I

  "Alá yá ayyuha's-Sákí!"--pass round and offer thou the bowl,   For love, which seemed at first so easy, has now brought trouble to my         soul.

  With yearning for the pod's aroma, which by the East that lock shall         spread   From that crisp curl of musky odor, how plenteously our hearts have         bled!

  Stain with the tinge of wine thy prayer-mat, if thus the aged Magian         bid,   For from the traveller from the Pathway[1] no stage nor usage can be         hid.

  Shall my beloved one's house delight me, when issues ever and anon   From the relentless bell the mandate: "'Tis time to bind thy litters         on"?

  The waves are wild, the whirlpool dreadful, the shadow of the night         steals o'er,   How can my fate excite compassion in the light-burdened of the shore?

  Each action of my froward spirit has won me an opprobrious name;   Can any one conceal the secret which the assembled crowds proclaim?

    If Joy be thy desire, O Háfiz,     From Him far distant never dwell.     "As soon as thou hast found thy Loved one,     Bid to the world a last farewell."



II

  Thou whose features clearly-beaming make the moon of Beauty bright,   Thou whose chin contains a well-pit[2] which to Loveliness gives light.

  When, O Lord! shall kindly Fortune, sating my ambition, pair   This my heart of tranquil nature and thy wild and ruffled hair?

  Pining for thy sight my spirit trembling on my lip doth wait:   Forth to speed it, back to lead it, speak the sentence of its fate.

  Pass me with thy skirt uplifted from the dusty bloody ground:   Many who have been thy victims dead upon this path are found.

  How this heart is anguish-wasted let my heart's possessor know:   Friends, your souls and mine contemplate, equal by their common woe.

  Aught of good accrues to no one witched by thy Narcissus eye:   Ne'er let braggarts vaunt their virtue, if thy drunken orbs are nigh.

  Soon my Fortune sunk in slumber shall her limbs with vigor brace:   Dashed upon her eye is water, sprinkled by thy shining face.

  Gather from thy cheek a posy, speed it by the flying East;   Sent be perfume to refresh me from thy garden's dust at least.

  Háfiz offers a petition, listen, and "Amen" reply:   "On thy sugar-dropping rubies let me for life's food rely."

  Many a year live on and prosper, Sákís of the court of Jem,[3]   E'en though I, to fill my wine-cup, never to your circle come.

  East wind, when to Yazd thou wingest, say thou to its sons from me:   "May the head of every ingrate ball-like 'neath your mall-bat be!"

  "What though from your dais distant, near it by my wish I seem;   Homage to your Ring I render, and I make your praise my theme."

  Sháh of Shahs, of lofty planet, Grant for God what I implore;   Let me, as the sky above thee, Kiss the dust which strews thy floor.



V

  Up, Sákí!--let the goblet flow;   Strew with dust the head of our earthly woe!

  Give me thy cup; that, joy-possessed,   I may tear this azure cowl from my breast,[4]

  The wise may deem me lost to shame,   But no care have I for renown or name.

  Bring wine!--how many a witless head   By the wind of pride has with dust been spread!

  My bosom's fumes, my sighs so warm,   Have inflamed yon crude and unfeeling swarm.[5]

  This mad heart's secret, well I know,   Is beyond the thoughts of both high and low.

  E'en by that sweetheart charmed am I,   Who once from my heart made sweetness fly.

  Who that my Silvern Tree hath seen,   Would regard the cypress that decks the green?[6]

    In grief be patient,       Night and day,     Till thy fortune, Háfiz,       Thy wish obey.



VI

  My heart no longer brooks my hand: sages, aid for God my woe!   Else, alas! my