[KYA-shah-nameh  —  part 5 of 5, continuation of part 4]
============================================================

secret-deep soon the curious world must know.

  The bark we steer has stranded: O breeze auspicious swell:   We yet may see once more the Friend we love so well.

  The ten days' favor of the Sphere--magic is; a tale which lies!   Thou who wouldst befriend thy friends, seize each moment ere it flies.

  At night, 'mid wine and flowers, the bulbul tuned his song:   "Bring thou the morning bowl: prepare, ye drunken throng!"

  Sikander's mirror, once so famed, is the wine-filled cup: behold   All that haps in Dárá's realm glassed within its wondrous mould.[7]

  O bounteous man, since Heaven sheds o'er thee blessings mild,   Inquire, one day at least, how fares Misfortune's child.

  What holds in peace this twofold world, let this twofold sentence show:   "Amity to every friend, courtesy to every foe."

  Upon the way of honor, impeded was my range;   If this affect thee, strive my destiny to change.

  That bitter, which the Súfi styled "Mother of all woes that be,"[8]   Seems, with maiden's kisses weighed, better and more sweet to me.

  Seek drunkenness and pleasure till times of strait be o'er:   This alchemy of life can make the beggar Kore.[9]

  Submit; or burn thou taper-like e'en from jealousy o'er-much:   Adamant no less than wax, melts beneath that charmer's touch.

  When fair ones talk in Persian, the streams of life out-well:   This news to pious Pirs, my Sákí, haste to tell.

    Since Háfiz, not by his own choice,     This his wine-stained cowl did win,     Shaikh, who hast unsullied robes,     Hold me innocent of sin.[10]

  Arrayed in youthful splendor, the orchard smiles again;   News of the rose enraptures the bulbul of sweet strain.

  Breeze, o'er the meadow's children, when thy fresh fragrance blows,   Salute for me the cypress, the basil, and the rose.

  If the young Magian[11] dally with grace so coy and fine,   My eye shall bend their fringes to sweep the house of wine.

  O thou whose bat of amber hangs o'er a moon below,[12]   Deal not to me so giddy, the anguish of a blow.

  I fear that tribe of mockers who topers' ways impeach,   Will part with their religion the tavern's goal to reach.

  To men of God be friendly: in Noah's ark was earth[13]   Which deemed not all the deluge one drop of water worth.

  As earth, two handfuls yielding, shall thy last couch supply,   What need to build thy palace, aspiring to the sky?

  Flee from the house of Heaven, and ask not for her bread:   Her goblet black shall shortly her every guest strike dead.[14]

  To thee, my Moon of Kanaan, the Egyptian throne pertains;   At length has come the moment that thou shouldst quit thy chains.

  I know not what dark projects those pointed locks design,   That once again in tangles their musky curls combine.

    Be gay, drink wine, and revel;     But not, like others, care,     O Háfiz, from the Koran     To weave a wily snare!



XII

  Oh! where are deeds of virtue and this frail spirit where?   How wide the space that sunders the bounds of Here and There!

  Can toping aught in common with works and worship own?   Where is regard for sermons, where is the rebeck's Tone?[15]

  My heart abhors the cloister, and the false cowl its sign:   Where is the Magian's cloister, and where is his pure wine?

  'Tis fled: may memory sweetly mind me of Union's days!   Where is that voice of anger, where those coquettish ways?

  Can a foe's heart be kindled by the friend's face so bright?   Where is a lamp unlighted, and the clear Day-star's light?

  As dust upon thy threshold supplies my eyes with balm,   If I forsake thy presence, where can I hope for calm?

  Turn from that chin's fair apple; a pit is on the way.   To what, O heart, aspir'st thou? Whither thus quickly? Say!

    Seek not, O friend, in Háfiz     Patience, nor rest from care:     Patience and rest--what are they?     Where is calm slumber, where?



XIV

  At eve a son of song--his heart be cheerful long!--   Piped on his vocal reed a soul-inflaming lay.

  So deeply was I stirred, that melody once heard,   That to my tearful eyes the things of earth grew gray.

  With me my Sákí was, and momently did he   At night the sun of Daï[16] by lock and cheek display.

  When he perceived my wish, he filled with wine the bowl;   Then said I to that youth whose track was Fortune's way:

  "Sákí, from Being's prison deliverance did I gain,   When now and now the cup thou lit'st with cheerful ray.

  "God guard thee here below from all the haps of woe;   God in the Seat of Bliss reward thee on His day!"

    When Háfiz rapt has grown,     How, at one barleycorn,     Should he appraise the realm,     E'en of Káús the Kay?[17]



XVI

  I said: "O Monarch of the lovely, a stranger seeks thy grace this day."   I heard: "The heart's deceitful guidance inclines the stranger from         his way."

  Exclaimed I then: "One moment tarry!" "Nay," was the answer, "let me go;   How can the home-bred child be troubled by stories of a stranger's         woe?"

  Shall one who, gently nurtured, slumbers with royal ermine for a bed,   "Care if on rocks or thorns reposing the stranger rests his weary head?"

  O thou whose locks hold fast on fetters so many a soul known long ago,   How strange that musky mole and charming upon thy cheek of vermil glow!

  Strange is that ant-like down's appearance circling the oval of thy         face;   Yet musky shade is not a stranger within the Hall which paintings         grace.[18]

  A crimson tint, from wine reflected gleams in that face of moonlight         sheen;   E'en as the bloom of syrtis, strangely, o'er clusters of the pale         Nasrín.[19]

  I said: "O thou, whose lock so night-black is evening in the         stranger's sight,   Be heedful if, at break of morning, the stranger sorrow for his         plight."

    "Háfiz," the answer was, "familiars     Stand in amaze at my renown;     It is no marvel if a stranger     In weariness and grief sit down."



XVII

  'Tis morn; the clouds a ceiling make:   The morn-cup, mates, the morn-cup take!

  Drops of dew streak the tulip's cheek;   The wine-bowl, friends, the wine-bowl seek

  The greensward breathes a gale divine;   Drink, therefore, always limpid wine.

  The Flower her emerald throne displays:   Bring wine that has the ruby's blaze

  Again is closed the vintner's store,   "Open, Thou Opener of the door!"[20]

  While smiles on us the season's boon,   I marvel that they close so soon.

  Thy lips have salt-rights, 'tis confessed,   O'er wounds upon the fire-burnt breast.

    Háfiz, let not     Thy courage fail!     Fortune, thy charmer     Shall unveil.



XIX

  Lo! from thy love's enchanting bowers Rizván's bright gardens fresher         grow;[21]   From the fierce heat thine absence kindles, Gehenna's flames intenser         glow.

  To thy tall form and cheek resplendent, as to a place of refuge, fleet   Heaven and the Túbâ-tree, and find there--"Happiness--and a fair         retreat."[22]

  When nightly the celestial river glides through the garden of the skies,   As my own eye, it sees in slumber, nought but thy drunk narcissus eyes.

  Each section of the spring-tide's volume makes a fresh comment on thy         name,   Each portal of the Empyrean murmurs the title of thy fame.

  My heart has burned, but to ambition, the aim, still wished for, is         denied:   These tears that tinged with blood are flowing, if I could reach it,         would be dried.

  What ample power thy salt-rights give thee (which both thy mouth and         lips can claim),   Over a breast by sorrow wounded, and a heart burnt within its flame!

  Oh! think not that the amorous only are drunk with rapture at thy sway:   Hast thou not heard of zealots, also, as reckless and as wrecked as         they?

  By thy lips' reign I hold it proven that the bright ruby's sheen is won   By the resplendent light that flashes out of a world-illuming sun.[23]

  Fling back thy veil! how long, oh tell me! shall drapery thy beauty         pale?   This drapery, no profit bringing, can only for thy shame avail.

  A fire within the rose's bosom was kindled when she saw thy face;   And soon as she inhaled thy fragrance, she grew all rose-dew from         disgrace.

  The love thy countenance awakens whelms Háfiz in misfortune's sea;   Death threatens him! ho there! give help, ere yet that he has ceased         to be!

    While life is thine, consent not, Háfiz,     That it should speed ignobly by;     But strive thou to attain the object     Of thy existence ere thou die.



XX

  I swear--my master's soul bear witness, faith of old times, and         promise leal!--   At early morning, my companion, is prayer for thy unceasing weal.

  My tears, a more o'erwhelming deluge than was the flood which Noah         braved,   Have washed not from my bosom's tablet the image which thy love has         graved.

  Come deal with me, and strike thy bargain: I have a broken heart to         sell,   Which in its ailing state out-values a hundred thousand which are well.

  Be lenient, if thou deem me drunken: on the primeval day divine   Love, who possessed my soul as master, bent my whole nature unto wine.

  Strive after truth that for thy solace the Sun may in thy spirit rise;   For the false dawn of earlier morning grows dark of face because it         lies.[24]

  O heart, thy friend's exceeding bounty should free thee from unfounded         dread;   This instant, as of love thou vauntest, be ready to devote thy head!

  I gained from thee my frantic yearning for mountains and the barren         plain,   Yet loath art thou to yield to pity, and loosen at mid-height my chain.

  If the ant casts reproach on Ásaf, with justice does her tongue upbraid,   For when his Highness lost Jem's signet, no effort for the quest he         made.[25]

    No constancy--yet grieve not, Háfiz--     Expect thou from the faithless fair;     What right have we to blame the garden,     Because the plant has withered there?



XXII

  Veiled in my heart my fervent love for him dwells,   And my true eye holds forth a glass to his spells.

  Though the two worlds ne'er bowed my head when elate,   Favors as his have bent my neck with their weight.

  Thine be the lote, but I Love's stature would reach.   High like his zeal ascends the fancy of each.

  Yet who am I that sacred temple to tread?   Still let the East that portal guard in my stead!

  Spots on my robe--shall they arouse my complaint?   Nay! the world knows that he at least has no taint.

  My turn has come; behold! Majnún is no more;[26]   Five days shall fly, and each one's turn shall be o'er.

  Love's ample realm, sweet joy, and all that is glad,   Save for his bounty I should never have had.[27]

  I and my heart--though both should sacrificed be,   Grant my friend's weal, their loss were nothing to me.

  Ne'er shall his form within my pupil be dim,   For my eye's cell is but a chamber for him.

  All the fresh blooms that on the greensward we view,   Gain but from him their scent and beauty of hue.

    Háfiz seems poor;     But look within, for his breast,     Shrining his love,     With richest treasure is blest.



XXIII

  Prone at my friend's high gates, my Will its head lays still:   Whate'er my head awaits is ordered by that will.

  My friend resembles none; in vain I sought to trace,   In glance of moon or sun, the radiance of that face.

  Can morning's breeze make known what grief this heart doth hold,   Which as a bud hath grown, compressed by fold on fold?

  Not I first drained the jar where rev'lers pass away:[28]   Heads in this work-yard are nought else than wine-jars' clay.

  Meseems thy comb has wreathed those locks which amber yield:   The gale has civet breathed, and amber scents the field.

  Flowers of verdant nooks be strewn before thy face:   Let cypresses of brooks bear witness to thy grace!

  When dumb grow tongues of men that on such love would dwell,   Why should a tongue-cleft pen by babbling strive to tell?

  Thy cheek is in my heart; no more will bliss delay;   Glad omens e'er impart news of a gladder day.

    Love's fire has dropped its spark     In Háfiz' heart before:     The wild-grown tulip's mark     Branded of old its core.[29]



XXV

  Breeze of the morn, if hence to the land thou fliest--Of my friend,   Return with a musky breath from the lock so sweet     Of my friend.

  Yea, by that life, I swear I would lay down mine in content,   If once I received through thee but a message sent     Of my friend.

  But--at that sacred court, if approach be wholly denied,   Convey, for my eyes, the dust that the door supplied     Of my friend.

  I--but a beggar mean--can I hope for Union at last?   Ah! would that in sleep I saw but the shadow cast     Of my friend.

  Ever my pine-cone heart, as the aspen trembling and shy,   Has yearned for the pine-like shape and the stature high     Of my friend.

  Not at the lowest price would my friend to purchase me care;   Yet I, a whole world to win, would not sell one hair     Of my friend.

    How should this heart gain aught,     Were its gyves of grief flung aside?     I, Háfiz, a bondsman, still     Would the slave abide       Of my friend.



XXIX

  Who of a Heaven on earth can tell, pure as the cell--Of dervishes?   If in the highest state you'd dwell, be ever slaves     Of dervishes.

  The talisman of magic Might hid in some ruin's lonely site,   Emerges from its ancient night at the wild glance     Of dervishes.

  When the proud sun has run his race, and he puts off his crown apace,   He bows before the pomp and place which are the boast     Of dervishes.

  The palace portal of the sky, watched by Rizván's unsleeping eye,   All gazers can at once descry from the glad haunts     Of dervishes.

  When mortal hearts are black and cold, that which transmutes them into         gold   Is the alchemic stone we hold from intercourse     Of dervishes.

  When tyranny, from pole to pole, sways o'er the earth with dire control,   We see from first to last unroll the victor-flag     Of dervishes.

  There is a wealth which lasts elate, unfearful of decline from fate;   Hear it with joy--this wealth so great, is in the hands     Of dervishes.

  Khosráus, the kiblahs of our prayer have weight to solace our         despair,[30]   But they are potent by their care for the high rank     Of dervishes.

  O, vaunter of thy riches' pride! lay all thy vanity aside,   And know that health and wealth abide but by the will     Of dervishes.

  Korah lost all his treasured store, which, cursed of Heaven, sinks         daily more,   (Hast thou not heard this tale of yore?) from disregard     Of dervishes,[31]

  The smiling face of joy unknown, yet sought by tenants of a throne,   Is only in the mirror shown of the clear face     Of dervishes.

  Let but our Ásaf's eye request, I am the slave of his behest,   For though his looks his rank attest, he has the mind     Of dervishes.

  Háfiz, if of the tide thou think, which makes immortal those who drink,   Seek in the dust that fountain's brink, at the cell door     Of dervishes.

    Háfiz, while here on earth, be wise:     He who to empire's rule would rise,     Knows that his upward pathway lies     Through his regard       Of dervishes.



XXXI

  In blossom is the crimson rose, and the rapt bulbul trills his song;   A summons that to revel calls you, O Súfis, wine-adoring throng!

  The fabric of my contrite fervor appeared upon a rock to bide;   Yet see how by a crystal goblet it hath been shattered in its pride.

  Bring wine; for to a lofty spirit, should they at its tribunal be,   What were the sentry, what the Sultan, the toper, or the foe of glee?

  Forth from this hostel of two portals as finally thou needs must go,   What of the porch and arch of Being be of high span or meanly low?

  To bliss' goal we gain not access, if sorrow has been tasted not;   Yea, with Alastu's pact was coupled the sentence of our baleful lot.

  At Being and Non-being fret not; but either with calm temper see:   Non-being is the term appointed for the most lovely things that be.

  Ásaf's display, the airy courser, the language which the birds employed,   The wind has swept; and their possessor no profit from his wealth         enjoyed.[32]

  Oh! fly not from thy pathway upward, for the winged shaft that quits         the bow   A moment to the air has taken, to settle in the dust below.

    What words of gratitude, O Háfiz     Shall thy reed's tongue express anon,     As its choice gems of composition     From hands to other hands pass on?



XXXV

  Now on the rose's palm the cup with limpid wine is brimming,   And with a hundred thousand tongues the bird her praise is hymning.

  Ask for a song-book, seek the wild, no time is this for knowledge;   The Comment of the Comments spurn, and learning of the college,[33]

  Be it thy rule to shun mankind, and let the Phoenix monish,   For the reports of hermit fame, from Káf to Káf astonish.[34]

  When yesterday our rector reeled, this sentence he propounded:   "Wine is a scandal; but far worse what men's bequests have founded."

  Turbid or clear, though not thy choice, drink thankfully; well knowing   That all which from our Sákí flows to his free grace is owing.

  Each dullard who would share my fame, each rival self-deceiver,   Reminds me that at times the mat seems golden to its weaver.

    Cease, Háfiz! store as ruddy gold     The wit that's in thy ditty:     The stampers of false coin, behold!     Are bankers for the city.[35]



XLII

  'Tis a deep charm which wakes the lover's flame,   Not ruby lip, nor verdant down its name.

  Beauty is not the eye, lock, cheek, and mole;   A thousand subtle points the heart control.



XLIII

  Zealot, censure not the toper, guileless though thou keep thy soul:   Certain 'tis that sins of others none shall write upon thy scroll.

  Be my deeds or good or evil, look thou to thyself alone;   All men, when their work is ended, reap the harvest they have sown.

  Never of Eternal Mercy preach that I must yet despair;   Canst thou pierce the veil, and tell me who is ugly, who is fair?

  Every one the Friend solicits, be he sober, quaff he wine;   Every place has love its tenant, be it or the mosque, or shrine.

  From the still retreat of virtue not the first am I to roam,   For my father also quitted his eternal Eden home.

  See this head, devout submission: bricks at many a vintner's door:   If my foe these words misconstrue--"Bricks and head!"--Say nothing more.

  Fair though Paradise's garden, deign to my advice to yield:   Here enjoy the shading willow, and the border of the field.

  Lean not on thy store of merits; know'st thou 'gainst thy name for aye   What the Plastic Pen indited, on the Unbeginning Day?

    Háfiz, if thou grasp thy beaker     When the hour of death is nigh,     From the street where stands the tavern     Straight they'll bear thee to the sky.



XLV

  O breeze of morn! where is the place which guards my friend from strife?   Where is the abode of that sly Moon who lovers robs of life?

  The night is dark, the Happy Vale in front of me I trace.[36]   Where is the fire of Sinäi, where is the meeting place?

  Here jointly are the wine-filled cup, the rose, the minstrel; yet   While we lack love, no bliss is here: where can my Loved be met?

  Of the Shaikh's cell my heart has tired, and of the convent bare:   Where is my friend, the Christian's child, the vintner's mansion, where?

    Háfiz, if o'er the glade of earth     The autumn-blast is borne,     Grieve not, but musing ask thyself:     "Where has the rose no thorn?"



LIX

  My Prince, so gracefully thou steppest, that where thy footsteps         fall--I'd die.   My Turk, so gracefully thou glidest, before thy stature tall     I'd die.

  "When wilt thou die before me?"--saidst thou. Why thus so eagerly         inquire?   These words of thy desire delight me; forestalling thy desire     I'd die.

  I am a lover, drunk, forsaken: Sákí, that idol, where is he?   Come hither with thy stately bearing! let me thy fair form see,     I'd die.

  Should he, apart from whom I've suffered a life-long illness, day by         day,   Bestow on me a glance, one only, beneath that orb dark-gray     I'd die.

  "The ruby of my lips," thou saidst, "now bale, now balsam may exhale":   At one time from their healing balsam, at one time from their bale     I'd die.

  How trim thy gait! May eye of evil upon thy face be never bent!   There dwells within my head this fancy; that at thy feet content     I'd die.

    Though no place has been found for Háfiz     In Love's retreat, where hid thou art,     For me thine every part has beauty,     Before thine every part--       I'd die.



LXIII

  My heart has of the world grown weary and all that it can lend:   The shrine of my affection holds no Being but my friend.

  If e'er for me thy love's sweet garden a fragrant breath exhale,   My heart, expansive in its joy, shall bud-like burst its veil.

  Should I upon love's path advise thee, when now a fool I've grown,   'Twould be the story of the fool, the pitcher, and the stone.

  Go! say to the secluded zealot: "Withhold thy blame; for know,   I find the arch of the Mihráb[37] but in an eyebrow's bow."

  Between the Ka'bah and the wine-house, no difference I see:   Whate'er the spot my glance surveys, there equally is He.

  'Tis not for beard, hair, eyebrow only, Kalandarism should care:   The Kalandar computes the Path by adding hair to hair.[38]

    The Kalandar who gives a hair's head,     An easy path doth tread:     The Kalandar of genuine stamp,     As Háfiz gives his head.



LXIX

  My heart desires the face so fair--Of Farrukh;[39]   It is perturbed as is the hair     Of Farrukh.

  No creature but that lock, that Hindú swart,   Enjoyment from the cheek has sought     Of Farrukh.

  A blackamoor by Fortune blest is he,   Placed at the side, and near the knee     Of Farrukh.

  Shy as the aspen is the cypress seen,   Awed by the captivating mien     Of Farrukh.

  Sákí, bring syrtis-tinted wine to tell   Of those narcissi, potent spell     Of Farrukh.

  Bent as the archer's bow my frame is now,   From woes continuous as the brow     Of Farrukh.

  E'en Tartar gales which musky odors whirl,   Faint at the amber-breathing curl     Of Farrukh.

  If leans the human heart to any place,   Mine has a yearning to the grace     Of Farrukh.

    That lofty soul     Shall have my service true,     That serves, as Háfiz,     The Hindú--[40]        Of Farrukh.



LXXI

  When now the rose upon the meadow from Nothing into Being springs,   When at her feet the humble violet with her head low in worship clings,

  Take from thy morn-filled cup refreshment while tabors and the harp         inspire,   Nor fail to kiss the chin of Sákí while the flute warbles and the lyre.

  Sit thou with wine, with harp, with charmer, until the rose's bloom be         past;   For as the days of life which passes, is the brief week that she shall         last.

  The face of earth, from herbal mansions, is lustrous as the sky; and         shines   With asterisms of happy promise, with stars that are propitious signs.

  In gardens let Zoroaster's worship again with all its rites revive,   While now within the tulip's blossoms the fires of Nimrod[41] are alive.

  Drink wine, presented by some beauty of Christ-like breath, of cheek         fair-hued;   And banish from thy mind traditions to Ád relating, and Thamúd.[42]

  Earth rivals the Immortal Garden during the rose and lily's reign;   But what avails when the immortal is sought for on this earth in vain?

  When riding on the windy courser, as Solomon, the rose is found,   And when the Bird, at hour of morning, makes David's melodies resound,

  Ask thou, in Solomon's dominion, a goblet to the brim renewed;   Pledge the Vizir, the cycle's Ásaf, the column of the Faith, Mahmud.

  O Háfiz, while his days continue, let joy eternal be thine aim;   And may the shadow of his kindness eternally abide the same!

    Bring wine; for Háfiz, if in trouble,     Will ceaselessly the help implore     Of him who bounty shall aid ever,     As it have aid vouchsafed before.



LXXVII

  Upon the path of Love, O heart, deceit and risk are great!   And fall upon the way shall he who at swift rate     Shall go.

  Inflated by the wind of pride, the bubble's head may shine;   But soon its cap of rule shall fall, and merged in wine     Shall go.

  O heart, when thou hast aged grown, show airs of grace no more:   Remember that such ways as these when youth is o'er     Shall go.

  Has the black book of black locks closed, the album yet shall stay,   Though many a score the extracts be which day by day     Shall go.



LXXXV

  To me love's echo is the sweetest sound   Of all that 'neath this circling Round     Hath stayed.



LXXXVI

  A beggar am I; yet enamoured of one of cypress mould:   One in whose belt the hand bides only with silver and with gold.

    Bring wine! let first the hand of Háfiz     The cheery cup embrace!     Yet only on one condition--     No word beyond this place!



LXXXVII

  When beamed Thy beauty on creation's morn,   The world was set on fire by love new-born.

  Thy cheek shone bright, yet angels' hearts were cold:   Then flashed it fire, and turned to Adam's mould.

  The lamp of Reason from this flame had burned,   But lightning jealousy the world o'erturned.

  The enemy Thy secret sought to gain;   A hand unseen repelled the beast profane.

  The die of Fate may render others glad:   My own heart saddens, for its lot is sad.

  Thy chin's deep pit allures the lofty mind:   The hand would grasp thy locks in twines entwined,

    Háfiz his love-scroll     To Thyself addressed,     When he had cancelled     What his heart loved best.



LXXXVIII

  The preacher of the town will find my language hard, maybe:   While bent upon deceit and fraud, no Mussulman is he.

  Learn drinking and do gracious deeds; the merit is not great   If a mere brute shall taste not wine, and reach not man's estate.

  Efficient is the Name Divine; be of good cheer, O heart!   The dív becomes not Solomon by guile and cunning's art.

  The benisons of Heaven are won by purity alone:   Else would not pearl and coral spring from every clod and stone?



CI

  Angels I saw at night knock at the wine-house gate:   They shaped the clay of Adam, flung into moulds its weight.

  Spirits of the Unseen World of Purities divine,   With me an earth-bound mortal, poured forth their 'wildering wine.

  Heaven, from its heavy trust aspiring to be free,   The duty was allotted, mad as I am, to me.

  Thank God my friend and I once more sweet peace have gained!   For this the houris dancing thanksgiving cups have drained.

  With Fancy's hundred wisps what wonder that I've strayed,   When Adam in his prudence was by a grain bewrayed?[43]

  Excuse the wrangling sects, which number seventy-two:   They knock at Fable's portal, for Truth eludes their view.

  No fire is that whose flame the taper laughs to scorn:   True fire consumes to ashes the moth's upgarnered corn.

  Blood fills recluses' hearts where Love its dot doth place,   Fine as the mole that glistens upon a charmer's face.

    As Háfiz, none Thought's face     Hath yet unveiled; not e'en     Since for the brides of Language     Combed have their tresses been.



CXV

  Lost Joseph shall return to Kanaan's land--Despair not:   Affliction's cell of gloom with flowers shall bloom:     Despair not

  Sad heart, thy state shall mend; repel despondency;   Thy head confused with pain shall sense regain:     Despair not.

  When life's fresh spring returns upon the daïs mead,   O night-bird! o'er thy head the rose shall spread:     Despair not,

  Hope on, though things unseen may baffle thy research;   Mysterious sports we hail beyond the veil:     Despair not.

  Has the revolving Sphere two days opposed thy wish,   Know that the circling Round is changeful found:     Despair not.

  If on the Ka'bah bent, thou brave the desert sand,   Though from the acacias thorn thy foot be torn,     Despair not,

  Heart, should the flood of death life's fabric sweep away,   Noah shall steer the ark o'er billows dark:     Despair not,

  Though perilous the stage, though out of sight the goal,   Whither soe'er we wend, there is an end:     Despair not,

  If Love evades our grasp, and rivals press our suit,   God, Lord of every change, surveys the range:     Despair not.

    Háfiz, in thy poor nook--     Alone, the dark night through--     Prayer and the Koran's page     Shall grief assuage--       Despair not.



CXXIX

  Endurance, intellect, and peace have from my bosom flown,   Lured by an idol's silver ear-lobes, and its heart of stone.

  An image brisk, of piercing looks, with peris' beauty blest,   Of slender shape, of lunar face, in Turk-like tunic drest!

  With a fierce glow within me lit--in amorous frenzy lost--   A culinary pot am I, in ebullition tost.

  My nature as a shirt's would be, at all times free from smart,   If like yon tunic garb I pressed the wearer to my heart.

  At harshness I have ceased to grieve, for none to light can bring   A rose that is apart from thorns, or honey void of sting.

  The framework of this mortal form may rot within the mould,   But in my soul a love exists which never shall grow cold.

  My heart and faith, my heart and faith--of old they were unharmed,   Till by yon shoulders and yon breast, yon breast and shoulders charmed.

    Háfiz, a medicine for thy woe,     A medicine must thou sip,     No other than that lip so sweet,     That lip so sweet, that lip.



CXXXIV

  Although upon his moon-like cheek delight and beauty glow,   Nor constancy nor love is there: O Lord! these gifts bestow.

  A child makes war against my heart; and he in sport one day   Will put me to a cruel death, and law shall not gainsay.

  What seems for my own good is this: my heart from him to guard;   For one who knows not good from ill its guardianship were hard.

  Agile and sweet of fourteen years that idol whom I praise:   His ear-rings in her soul retains the moon of fourteen days.

  A breath as the sweet smell of milk comes from those sugary lips;   But from those black and roguish eyes behold what blood there drips!

  My heart to find that new-born rose has gone upon its way;   But where can it be found, O Lord? I've lost it many a day.

  If the young friend who owns my heart my centre thus can break,   The Pasha will command him soon the lifeguard's rank to take.

    I'd sacrifice my life in thanks,       If once that pearl of sheen     Would make the shell of Háfiz' eye       Its place of rest serene.



CXXXV

  I tried my fortune in this city lorn:   From out its whirlpool must my pack be borne.

  I gnaw my hand, and, heaving sighs of ire,   I light in my rent frame the rose's fire.

  Sweet sang the bulbul at the close of day,   The rose attentive on her leafy spray:

  "O heart! be joyful, for thy ruthless Love   Sits down ill-temper'd at the sphere above.

  "To make the false, harsh world thyself pass o'er,   Ne'er promise falsely and be harsh no more.

  "If beat misfortune's waves upon heaven's roof,   Devout men's fate and gear bide ocean-proof.

          "Háfiz, if lasting             Were enjoyment's day,           Jem's throne would never             Have been swept away."



CXLV

  Breeze of the North, thy news allays my fears:   The hour of meeting with my Loved one nears.

  Prospered by Heaven, O carrier pigeon, fly:   Hail to thee, hail to thee, come nigh, come nigh!

  How fares our Salmâ? What Zú Salam's state?   Our neighbors there--are they unscathed by Fate?

  The once gay banquet-hall is now devoid   Of circling goblets, and of friends who joyed.

  Perished the mansion with its lot serene:   Interrogate the mounds where once 'twas seen.

  The night of absence has now cast its shade:   What freaks by Fancy's night-gang will be played?

  He who has loved relates an endless tale:   Here the most eloquent of tongues must fail.

  My Turk's kind glances no one can obtain:   Alas, this pride, this coldness, this disdain!

  In perfect beauty did thy wish draw nigh:   God guard thee from Kamál's malefic eye![44]

    Háfiz, long will last       Patience, love, and pain?     Lovers wail is sweet:       Do thou still complain.



CXLVI

  O thou who hast ravished my heart by thine exquisite grace and thy         shape,   Thou carest for no one, and yet not a soul from thyself can escape.

  At times I draw sighs from my heart, and at times, O my life, thy         sharp dart:   Can aught I may say represent all the ills I endure from my heart?

  How durst I to rivals commend thy sweet lips by the ruby's tent gemmed,   When words that are vivid in hue by a soul unrefined are contemned?

  As strength to thy beauty accrues ev'ry day from the day sped before,   To features consummate as thine, will we liken the night-star no more.

  My heart hast thou reft: take my soul! For thine envoy of grief what         pretence?   One perfect in grief as myself with collector as he may dispense.

    O Háfiz, in Love's holy bane,       As thy foot has at last made its way,     Lay hold of his skirt with thy hand,       And with all sever ties from to-day.



CXLIX

  Both worlds, the Transient and Eterne, for Sákí and the Loved I'd yield:   To me appears Love's satellite the universe's ample field.

  Should a new favorite win my place, my ruler shall be still supreme:   It were a sin should I my life more precious than my friend esteem.



CLV

  Last night my tears, a torrent stream, stopped Sleep by force:   I painted, musing on thy down, upon the water-course.

  Then, viewing my Beloved one's brow--my cowl burnt up--   In honor of the sacred Arch I drained my flowing cup.

  From my dear friend's resplendent brow pure light was shed;   And on that moon there fell from far the kisses that I sped.

  The face of Sákí charmed my eye, the harp my ear:   At once for both mine ear and eye what omens glad were here!

  I painted thine ideal face till morning's light,   Upon the studio of my eye, deprived of sleep at night.

  My Sákí took at this sweet strain the wine-bowl up:   I sang to him these verses first; then drank to sparkling cup.

  If any of my bird-like thoughts from joy's branch flew,   Back from the springes of thy lock their fleeting wings I drew.

    The time of Háfiz passed in joy:     To friends I brought     For fortune and the days of life     The omens that they sought.



CLVII

  Come, Súfi, let us from our limbs the dress that's worn for cheat Draw:   Let us a blotting line right through this emblem of deceit     Draw.

  The convent's revenues and alms we'd sacrifice for wine awhile,   And through the vintry's fragrant flood this dervish-robe of guile     Draw.

  Intoxicated, forth we'll dash, and from our feasting foe's rich stores   Bear off his wine, and then by force his charmer out of doors     Draw.

  Fate may conceal her mystery, shut up within her hiding pale,   But we who act as drunken men will from its face the veil     Draw.

  Here let us shine by noble deeds, lest we at last ashamed appear,   When starting for the other world, we hence our spirit's gear     Draw.

  To-morrow at Rizván's green glade, should they refuse to make it ours,   We from their halls will the ghilmán, the houris from their bowers     Draw.

  Where can we see her winking brow, that we, as the new moon of old,   At once may the celestial ball, as with a bat of gold,     Draw?

    O Háfiz! it becomes us not     Our boastful claims thus forth to put:     Beyond the limits of our rug     Why would we fain our foot       Draw?



CLIX

  Aloud I say it, and with heart of glee:   "Love's slave am I, and from both worlds am free."

  Can I, the bird of sacred gardens, tell   Into this net of chance how first I fell?

  My place the Highest Heaven, an angel born,   I came by Adam to this cloister lorn.

  Sweet houris, Túbâ's shade, and Fountain's brink   Fade from my mind when of thy street I think.

  Knows no astrologer my star of birth:   Lord, 'neath what plant bore me Mother Earth?

  Since with ringed ear I've served Love's house of wine,   Grief's gratulations have each hour been mine.

  My eyeball's man drains my heart's blood; 'tis just:   In man's own darling did I place my trust.

  My Loved one's Alif-form[45] stamps all my thought:   Save that, what letter has my master taught?

    Let Háfiz' tear-drops       By thy lock be dried,     For fear I perish       In their rushing tide.



CLXVI

    Knowest thou what fortune is?       'Tis Beauty's sight obtaining;     'Tis asking in her lane for alms,       And royal pomp disdaining.

  Sev'erance from the wish for life an easy task is ever;   But lose we friends who sweeten life, the tie is hard to sever.

  Bud-like with a serried heart I'll to the orchard wander;   The garment of my good repute I'll tear to pieces yonder;

  Now, as doth the West-wind, tell deep secrets to the Flower,   Hear now of Love's mysterious sport from bulbuls of the bower.

  Kiss thy Beloved one's lips at first while the occasion lingers:   Await thou else disgust at last from biting lip and fingers.

  Profit by companionship: this two-doored house forsaken,   No pathway that can thither lead in future time is taken.

    Háfiz from the thought, it seems,       Of Sháh Mansur has fleeted;     O Lord! remind him that the poor       With favor should be treated.



CLXXIII

  With my heart's blood I wrote to one most dear:   "The earth seems doom-struck if thou are not near.

  "My eyes a hundred signs of absence show:   These tears are not their only signs of woe."

  I gained no boon from her for labor spent:   "Who tries the tried will in the end repent."

  I asked how fared she; the physician spake:   "Afar from her is health; but near her ache."

  The East-wind from my Moon removed her veil:   At morn shone forth the Sun from vapors pale.

  I said: "They'll mock, if I go round thy lane."   By God! no love escapes the mocker's bane.

    Grant Háfiz' prayer:     "One cup, by life so sweet!"     He seeks a goblet     With thy grace replete!



CLXXX

  O thou who art unlearned still, the quest of love essay:   Canst thou who hast not trod the path guide others on the way?

  While in the school of Truth thou stay'st, from Master Love to learn,   Endeavor, though a son to-day, the father's grade to earn.

  Slumber and food have held thee far from Love's exalted good:   Wouldst thou attain the goal of love, abstain from sleep and food.

  If with the rays of love of truth thy heart and soul be clear,   By God! thy beauty shall outshine the sun which lights the sphere.

  Wash from the dross of life thy hands, as the Path's men of old,   And winning Love's alchemic power, transmute thyself to gold.

  On all thy frame, from head to foot, the light of God shall shine,   If on the Lord of Glory's path nor head nor foot be thine.

  An instant plunge into God's sea, nor e'er the truth forget   That the Seven Seas' o'erwhelming tide, no hair of thine shall wet.

  If once thy glancing eye repose on the Creator's face.   Thenceforth among the men who glance shall doubtless be thy place.[46]

  When that which thy existence frames all upside-down shall be,   Imagine not that up and down shall be the lot of thee.

    Háfiz, if ever in thy head       Dwell Union's wish serene,     Thou must become the threshold's dust       Of men whose sight is keen.



[FOOTNOTES to THE DIVAN]

[Footnote 1: "The traveller of the Pathway"--the Magian, or Shaikh. In former times wine was chiefly sold by Magians, and as the keepers of taverns and caravansaries grew popular, the term Magian was used to designate not only "mine host," but also a wise old man, or spiritual teacher.]

[Footnote 2: An allusion to the dimple and moisture of the chin, considered great beauties by Orientals.]

[Footnote 3: Jem or Jemshíd, an ancient King of Persia. By Jem and his Sákí are to be understood, in this couplet, the King of Yazd and his courtiers.]

[Footnote 4: By the azure cowl is implied the cloak of deceit and false humility. Háfiz uses this expression to cast ridicule upon Shaikh Hazan's order of dervishes, who were inimical to the brotherhood of which the poet was a member. The dervishes mentioned wore blue to express their celestial aspirations.]

[Footnote 5: The disciples of Shaikh Hasan. Háfiz had incurred their displeasure by the levity of his conduct.]

[Footnote 6: In the "Gulistan" of Sa'di a philosopher declares that, of all the trees, the cypress is alone to be called free, because, unlike the others, it is not subject to the vicissitudes of appointed place and season, "but is at all times fresh and green, and this is the condition of the free."]

[Footnote 7: In some MSS. we read: "The mirror of Sikander is the goblet of Jem." King Jem, or Jemshíd, had a talismanic cup: Sikander, or Alexander, had inherited from pre-Adamite times a magic mirror by means of which he was enabled to see into the camp of his enemy Dárá (Darius). Háfiz here informs us that the knowledge imputed to either king was obtained by wine.]

[Footnote 8: Referring to wine, which in the Koran is declared to be the Mother of Vices.]

[Footnote 9: Korah, Kore, or Kárun, the Dives of his age, was an alchemist. He lived in an excess of luxury and show. At the height of his pride and gluttony he rebelled against Moses, refusing to pay a tithe of his possessions for the public use. The earth then opened and swallowed him up together with the palace in which he dwelt. (See Koran, chap, xxviii, and, for the Bible narrative, The Book of Numbers, chap, xvi.)]

[Footnote 10: It was decreed from all eternity that Háfiz should drink wine. He had therefore no free agency and could not be justly blamed.]

[Footnote 11: The boy serving at the wine-house.]

[Footnote 12: The curl of hair over a moon-like face is here compared to a curved mall-bat sweeping over a ball.]

[Footnote 13: By "earth" is to be understood Noah himself.]

[Footnote 14: Fate, Fortune, and the Sky, are in Oriental poetry intervertible expressions; and the dome of Heaven is compared to a cup which is full of poison for the unfortunate.]

[Footnote 15: The rebeck is a sort of violin having only three chords.]

[Footnote 16: His locks being black as night and his cheek cheerful as the Sun of Daï or December.]

[Footnote 17: Kai-káús, one of the most celebrated monarchs of Persia.]

[Footnote 18: The pictured halls of China, or, in particular, the palace of Arzhang, the dwelling of Manes. Manes lived in the third century of our era, and his palace was famed as the Chinese picture-gallery. Háfiz compares the bloom upon the cheek of his friend to the works of art executed by Manes, in which dark shadows, like velvety down upon the human face, excite no surprise.]

[Footnote 19: The Nasrín is the dog-rose.]

[Footnote 20: In Mohammedan countries it is customary to write upon the doors: "O Opener of the gates! open unto us the gates of blessing."]

[Footnote 21: Rizván is the gardener and gatekeeper of Paradise.]

[Footnote 22: The lote-tree, known to Arabs as the Túbâ, is a prickly shrub. The Koran says: "To those who believe, and perform good works, appertain welfare and a fair retreat. The men of the right hand--how happy shall be the men of the right hand!--shall dwell among the lote-trees without thorns. Under their feet rivers shall flow in the garden of Delight."]

[Footnote 23: According to Oriental belief, the ruby and all other gems, derive their brilliancy from the action of the sun. By a similar process of Nature, ruby lips obtain their vivid color from the sun above them.]

[Footnote 24: The zodiacal light or faint illumination of the sky which disappears before the light of daybreak.]

[Footnote 25: Ásaf, Solomon's "Vizir," was entrusted with the guardianship of the imperial signet ring, which was possessed of magical properties. While in his care it was stolen. When Solomon granted an audience to animals, and even insects, the ant, it is related, brought as an offering a blade of grass and rebuked Ásaf for having guarded the royal treasure so carelessly. By Ásaf, Háfiz symbolizes in the present instance his friend or favorite; by the ant is implied a small hair on the face, and by the lost signet of Jem, a beautiful mouth, so small and delicate as to be invisible.]

[Footnote 26: Majnún, a celebrated lover, maddened by the charms of Lailà.]

[Footnote 27: This ode may have been written in gratitude for the patronage of a man of rank.]

[Footnote 28: Literally in this toper-consuming shrine (of the world). The second line of the couplet probably means: Other revellers have preceded me, but their heads are now potter's clay in the potter's field of the earth.]

[Footnote 29: The wild tulip of Shiraz has white petals streaked with pink, the inner end of each bearing a deep puce mark. The dark spot formed thus in the centre of the flower is compared to the brand of love, pre-ordained on the Past Day of Eternity to be imprinted on the heart of Háfiz.]

[Footnote 30: Khosráu (Cyrus) is the title of several ancient kings of Persia, and is here used in the plural to denote monarchs in general. The term "kiblah," fronting-point, signifies the object towards which the worshipper turns when he prays.]

[Footnote 31: Korah or Kárun--the miser who disobeyed Moses and was swallowed up with his treasures by the earth. They are said to be still sinking deeper and deeper. (See Numbers, xvi.)]

[Footnote 32: How vain were the glories of Solomon! Ásaf was his minister, the East wind his courser, and the language of birds one of his accomplishments; but the blast of time had swept them away.]

[Footnote 33: The "Comment of the Comments" is a celebrated explanatory treatise on the Koran.]

[Footnote 34: Káf is a fabulous mountain encircling the world. In this couplet and the following the poet ridicules the ascetics of his time.]

[Footnote 35: The false coiners are inferior poets who endeavor to pass off their own productions as the work of Háfiz.]

[Footnote 36: Aiman (Happiness) is the valley in which God appeared to Moses--metaphorically, the abode of the Beloved.]

[Footnote 37: "Mihráb"--the niche in a mosque, towards which Mohammedans pray.]

[Footnote 38: Kalandars are an order of Mohammedan dervishes who wander about and beg. The worthless sectaries of Kalandarism, Háfiz says, shave off beard and tonsure, but the true or spiritual Kalandar shapes his path by a scrupulous estimate of duty.]

[Footnote 39: "Farrukh" (auspicious) is doubtless the name of some favorite of the Poet.]

[Footnote 40: "Hindú" is here equivalent to "slave."]

[Footnote 41: Zerdusht (in Latin, Zoroaster)--the celebrated prophet of the Gulbres, or fire-worshippers. Nimrod is said to have practised a religion, similar to theirs.]

[Footnote 42: Ád and Thamúd were Arab tribes exterminated by God in consequence of their having disobeyed the prophet Sálih.]

[Footnote 43: By a "grain" is meant a grain of wheat; according to Mohammedans, the forbidden fruit of Paradise.]

[Footnote 44: Kamál was an Arab whose glance inflicted death.]

[Footnote 45: "Alif-form," meaning a straight and erect form: the letter Alif being, as it were, of upright stature.]

[Footnote 46: "The men who glance" are lovers. The spiritual or true lover is he who loves God.]


END OF VOLUME ONE



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PERSIAN LITERATURE, COMPRISING THE SHAH NAMEH, THE RUBAIYAT, THE DIVAN, AND THE GULISTAN, VOLUME 1 ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most     other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions     whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms     of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online     at www.gutenberg.org. If you     are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws     of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from         the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method         you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed         to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has         agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid         within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are         legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty         payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project         Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in         Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg         Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies         you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he         does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™         License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all         copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue         all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™         works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of         any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the         electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of         receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free         distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516, Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


