[KYA-shah-nameh  —  part 2 of 5, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

himself superior in might and influence to either Feridún, Jemshíd, Minúchihr, or Kai-kobád, who had never aspired to the conquest of Mázinderán. He further observed, that he had a bolder heart, a larger army, and a fuller treasury than any of them, and the whole world was under his sway--

  And what are all these Demon-charms,   That they excite such dread alarms?   What is a Demon-host to me,   Their magic spells and sorcery?   One effort, and the field is won;   Then why should I the battle shun?   Be thou and Rustem (whilst afar   I wage the soul-appalling war),   The guardians of the kingdom; Heaven   To me hath its protection given;   And, when I reach the Demon's fort,   Their severed heads shall be my sport!

When Zál became convinced of the unalterable resolution of Kai-káús, he ceased to oppose his views, and expressed his readiness to comply with whatever commands he might receive for the safety of the state.

  May all thy actions prosper--may'st thou never   Have cause to recollect my warning voice,   With sorrow or repentance. Heaven protect thee!

Zál then took leave of the king and his warrior friends, and returned to Sístán, not without melancholy forebodings respecting the issue of the war against Mázinderán.

As soon as morning dawned, the army was put in motion. The charge of the empire, and the keys of the treasury and jewel-chamber were left in the hands of Mílad, with injunctions, however, not to draw a sword against any enemy that might spring up, without the consent and assistance of Zál and Rustem. When the army had arrived within the limits of Mázinderán, Kai-káús ordered Gíw to select two thousand of the bravest men, the boldest wielders of the battle-axe, and proceed rapidly towards the city. In his progress, according to the king's instructions, he burnt and destroyed everything of value, mercilessly slaying man, woman, and child. For the king said:

  Kill all before thee, whether young or old,   And turn their day to night; thus free the world   From the magician's art.

Proceeding in his career of desolation and ruin, Gíw came near to the city, and found it arrayed in all the splendor of heaven; every street was crowded with beautiful women, richly adorned, and young damsels with faces as bright as the moon. The treasure-chamber was full of gold and jewels, and the country abounded with cattle. Information of this discovery was immediately sent to Kai-káús, who was delighted to find that Mázinderán was truly a blessed region, the very garden of beauty, where the cheeks of the women seemed to be tinted with the hue of the pomegranate flower, by the gate-keeper of Paradise.

This invasion filled the heart of the king of Mázinderán with grief and alarm, and his first care was to call the gigantic White Demon to his aid. Meanwhile Kai-káús, full of the wildest anticipations of victory, was encamped on the plain near the city in splendid state, and preparing to commence the final overthrow of the enemy on the following day. In the night, however, a cloud came, and deep darkness like pitch overspread the earth, and tremendous hail-stones poured down upon the Persian host, throwing them into the greatest confusion. Thousands were destroyed, others fled, and were scattered abroad in the gloom. The morning dawned, but it brought no light to the eyes of Kai-káús; and amidst the horrors he experienced, his treasury was captured, and the soldiers of his army either killed or made prisoners of war. Then did he bitterly lament that he had not followed the wise counsel of Zál. Seven days he was involved in this dreadful affliction, and on the eighth day he heard the roar of the White Demon, saying:

  "O king, thou art the willow-tree, all barren,   With neither fruit, nor flower. What could induce   The dream of conquering Mázinderán?   Hadst thou no friend to warn thee of thy folly?   Hadst thou not heard of the White Demon's power--   Of him, who from the gorgeous vault of Heaven   Can charm the stars? From this mad enterprise   Others have wisely shrunk--and what hast thou   Accomplished by a more ambitious course?   Thy soldiers have slain many, dire destruction   And spoil have been their purpose--thy wild will   Has promptly been obeyed; but thou art now   Without an army, not one man remains   To lift a sword, or stand in thy defence;   Not one to hear thy groans and thy despair."

There were selected from the army twelve thousand of the demon-warriors, to take charge of and hold in custody the Iránian captives, all the chiefs, as well as the soldiers, being secured with bonds, and only allowed food enough to keep them alive. Arzang, one of the demon-leaders, having got possession of the wealth, the crown and jewels, belonging to Kai-káús, was appointed to escort the captive king and his troops, all of whom were deprived of sight, to the city of Mázinderán, where they were delivered into the hands of the monarch of that country. The White Demon, after thus putting an end to hostilities, returned to his own abode.

Kai-káús, strictly guarded as he was, found an opportunity of sending an account of his blind and helpless condition to Zál, in which he lamented that he had not followed his advice, and urgently requested him, if he was not himself in confinement, to come to his assistance, and release him from captivity. When Zál heard the melancholy story, he gnawed the very skin of his body with vexation, and turning to Rustem, conferred with him in private.

  "The sword must be unsheathed, since Kai-káús   Is bound a captive in the dragon's den,   And Rakush must be saddled for the field,   And thou must bear the weight of this emprize;   For I have lived two centuries, and old age   Unfits me for the heavy toils of war.   Should'st thou release the king, thy name will be   Exalted o'er the earth.--Then don thy mail,   And gain immortal honor."

Rustem replied that it was a long journey to Mázinderán, and that the king had been six months on the road. Upon this Zál observed that there were two roads--the most tedious one was that which Kai-káús had taken; but by the other, which was full of dangers and difficulty, and lions, and demons, and sorcery, he might reach Mázinderán in seven days, if he reached it at all.

On hearing these words Rustem assented, and chose the short road, observing:

  "Although it is not wise, they say,   With willing feet to track the way   To hell; though only men who've lost,   All love of life, by misery crossed,   Would rush into the tiger's lair,   And die, poor reckless victims, there;   I gird my loins, whate'er may be,   And trust in God for victory."

On the following day, resigning himself to the protection of Heaven, he put on his war attire, and with his favorite horse, Rakush, properly caparisoned, stood prepared for the journey. His mother, Rúdábeh, took leave of him with great sorrow; and the young hero departed from Sístán, consoling himself and his friends, thus:

  "O'er him who seeks the battle-field,     Nobly his prisoned king to free,   Heaven will extend its saving shield,     And crown his arms with victory."



THE SEVEN LABORS OF RUSTEM

First Stage.--He rapidly pursued his way, performing two days' journey in one, and soon came to a forest full of wild asses. Oppressed with hunger, he succeeded in securing one of them, which he roasted over a fire, lighted by sparks produced by striking the point of his spear, and kept in a blaze with dried grass and branches of trees. After regaling himself, and satisfying his hunger, he loosened the bridle of Rakush, and allowed him to graze; and choosing a safe place for repose during the night, and taking care to have his sword under his head, he went to sleep among the reeds of that wilderness. In a short space a fierce lion appeared, and attacked Rakush with great violence; but Rakush very speedily with his teeth and heels put an end to his furious assailant. Rustem, awakened by the confusion, and seeing the dead lion before him, said to his favorite companion:--

  "Ah! Rakush, why so thoughtless grown,   To fight a lion thus alone;   For had it been thy fate to bleed,   And not thy foe, my gallant steed!   How could thy master have conveyed   His helm, and battle-axe, and blade,   Kamund, and bow, and buberyán,   Unaided, to Mázinderán?   Why didst thou fail to give the alarm,   And save thyself from chance of harm,   By neighing loudly in my ear;   But though thy bold heart knows no fear,   From such unwise exploits refrain,   Nor try a lion's strength again."

Saying this, Rustem laid down to sleep, and did not awake till the morning dawned. As the sun rose, he remounted Rakush, and proceeded on his journey towards Mázinderán.

Second Stage.--After travelling rapidly for some time, he entered a desert, in which no water was to be found, and the sand was so burning hot, that it seemed to be instinct with fire. Both horse and rider were oppressed with the most maddening thirst. Rustem alighted, and vainly wandered about in search of relief, till almost exhausted, he put up a prayer to Heaven for protection against the evils which surrounded him, engaged as he was in an enterprise for the release of Kai-káús and the Persian army, then in the power of the demons. With pious earnestness he besought the Almighty to bless him in the great work; and whilst in a despairing mood he was lamenting his deplorable condition, his tongue and throat being parched with thirst, his body prostrate on the sand, under the influence of a raging sun, he saw a sheep pass by, which he hailed as the harbinger of good. Rising up and grasping his sword in his hand, he followed the animal, and came to a fountain of water, where he devoutly returned thanks to God for the blessing which had preserved his existence, and prevented the wolves from feeding on his lifeless limbs. Refreshed by the cool water, he then looked out for something to allay his hunger, and killing a gor, he lighted a fire and roasted it, and regaled upon its savory flesh, which he eagerly tore from the bones.

When the period of rest arrived, Rustem addressed Rakush, and said to him angrily:--

  "Beware, my steed, of future strife.   Again thou must not risk thy life;   Encounter not with lion fell,   Nor demon still more terrible;   But should an enemy appear,   Ring loud the warning in my ear."

After delivering these injunctions, Rustem laid down to sleep, leaving Rakush unbridled, and at liberty to crop the herbage close by.

Third Stage.--At midnight a monstrous dragon-serpent issued from the forest; it was eighty yards in length, and so fierce, that neither elephant, nor demon, nor lion, ever ventured to pass by its lair. It came forth, and seeing the champion asleep, and a horse near him, the latter was the first object of attack. But Rakush retired towards his master, and neighed and beat the ground so furiously, that Rustem soon awoke; looking around on every side, however, he saw nothing--the dragon had vanished, and he went to sleep again. Again the dragon burst out of the thick darkness, and again Rakush was at the pillow of his master, who rose up at the alarm: but anxiously trying to penetrate the dreary gloom, he saw nothing--all was a blank; and annoyed at this apparently vexatious conduct of his horse, he spoke sharply:--

  "Why thus again disturb my rest,   When sleep had softly soothed my breast?   I told thee, if thou chanced to see   Another dangerous enemy,   To sound the alarm; but not to keep   Depriving me of needful sleep;   When nothing meets the eye nor ear,   Nothing to cause a moment's fear!   But if again my rest is broke,   On thee shall fall the fatal stroke,   And I myself will drag this load   Of ponderous arms along the road;   Yes, I will go, a lonely man,   Without thee, to Mázinderán."

Rustem again went to sleep, and Rakush was resolved this time not to move a step from his side, for his heart was grieved and afflicted by the harsh words that had been addressed to him. The dragon again appeared, and the faithful horse almost tore up the earth with his heels, to rouse his sleeping master. Rustem again awoke, and sprang to his feet, and was again angry; but fortunately at that moment sufficient light was providentially given for him to see the prodigious cause of alarm.

  Then swift he drew his sword, and closed in strife   With that huge monster.--Dreadful was the shock   And perilous to Rustem; but when Rakush   Perceived the contest doubtful, furiously,   With his keen teeth, he bit and tore away   The dragon's scaly hide; whilst quick as thought   The Champion severed off the ghastly head,   And deluged all the plain with horrid blood.   Amazed to see a form so hideous   Breathless stretched out before him, he returned   Thanks to the Omnipotent for his success,   Saying--"Upheld by thy protecting arm,   What is a lion's strength, a demon's rage,   Or all the horrors of the burning desert,   With not one drop to quench devouring thirst?   Nothing, since power and might proceed from Thee."

Fourth Stage.--Rustem having resumed the saddle, continued his journey through an enchanted territory, and in the evening came to a beautifully green spot, refreshed by flowing rivulets, where he found, to his surprise, a ready-roasted deer, and some bread and salt. He alighted, and sat down near the enchanted provisions, which vanished at the sound of his voice, and presently a tambourine met his eyes, and a flask of wine. Taking up the instrument he played upon it, and chanted a ditty about his own wanderings, and the exploits which he most loved. He said that he had no pleasure in banquets, but only in the field fighting with heroes and crocodiles in war. The song happened to reach the ears of a sorceress, who, arrayed in all the charms of beauty, suddenly approached him, and sat down by his side. The champion put up a prayer of gratitude for having been supplied with food and wine, and music, in the desert of Mázinderán, and not knowing that the enchantress was a demon in disguise, he placed in her hands a cup of wine in the name of God; but at the mention of the Creator, the enchanted form was converted into a black fiend. Seeing this, Rustem threw his kamund, and secured the demon; and, drawing his sword, at once cut the body in two!

Fifth Stage.--

  From thence proceeding onward, he approached   A region destitute of light, a void   Of utter darkness. Neither moon nor star   Peep'd through the gloom; no choice of path remained,   And therefore, throwing loose the rein, he gave   Rakush the power to travel on, unguided.   At length the darkness was dispersed, the earth   Became a scene, joyous and light, and gay,   Covered with waving corn--there Rustem paused   And quitting his good steed among the grass,   Laid himself gently down, and, wearied, slept;   His shield beneath his head, his sword before him.

When the keeper of the forest saw the stranger and his horse, he went to Rustem, then asleep, and struck his staff violently on the ground, and having thus awakened the hero, he asked him, devil that he was, why he had allowed his horse to feed upon the green corn-field. Angry at these words, Rustem, without uttering a syllable, seized hold of the keeper by the ears, and wrung them off. The mutilated wretch, gathering up his severed ears, hurried away, covered with blood, to his master, Aúlád, and told him of the injury he had sustained from a man like a black demon, with a tiger-skin cuirass and an iron helmet; showing at the same time the bleeding witnesses of his sufferings. Upon being informed of this outrageous proceeding, Aúlád, burning with wrath, summoned together his fighting men, and hastened by the directions of the keeper to the place where Rustem had been found asleep. The champion received the angry lord of the land, fully prepared, on horseback, and heard him demand his name, that he might not slay a worthless antagonist, and why he had torn off the ears of his forest-keeper! Rustem replied that the very sound of his name would make him shudder with horror. Aúlád then ordered his troops to attack Rustem, and they rushed upon him with great fury; but their leader was presently killed by the master-hand, and great numbers were also scattered lifeless over the plain. The survivors running away, Rustem's next object was to follow and secure, by his kamund, the person of Aúlád, and with admirable address and ingenuity, he succeeded in dismounting him and taking him alive. He then bound his hands, and said to him:--

  "If thou wilt speak the truth unmixed with lies,   Unmixed with false prevaricating words,   And faithfully point out to me the caves   Of the White Demon and his warrior chiefs--   And where Káús is prisoned--thy reward   Shall be the kingdom of Mázinderán;   For I, myself, will place thee on that throne.   But if thou play'st me false--thy worthless blood   Shall answer for the foul deception."

                                         "Stay,   Be not in wrath," Aúlád at once replied--   "Thy wish shall be fulfilled--and thou shalt know   Where king Káús is prisoned--and, beside,   Where the White Demon reigns. Between two dark   And lofty mountains, in two hundred caves   Immeasurably deep, his people dwell.   Twelve hundred Demons keep the watch by night   And Baid, and Sinja. Like a reed, the hills   Tremble whenever the White Demon moves.   But dangerous is the way. A stony desert   Lies full before thee, which the nimble deer   Has never passed. Then a prodigious stream   Two farsangs wide obstructs thy path, whose banks   Are covered with a host of warrior-Demons,   Guarding the passage to Mázinderán;   And thou art but a single man--canst thou   O'ercome such fearful obstacles as these?"

  At this the Champion smiled. "Show but the way,   And thou shalt see what one man can perform,   With power derived from God! Lead on, with speed,   To royal Káús." With obedient haste   Aúlád proceeded, Rustem following fast,   Mounted on Rakush. Neither dismal night   Nor joyous day they rested--on they went   Until at length they reached the fatal field,   Where Káús was o'ercome. At midnight hour,   Whilst watching with attentive eye and ear,   A piercing clamor echoed all around,   And blazing fires were seen, and numerous lamps   Burnt bright on every side. Rustem inquired   What this might be. "It is Mázinderán,"   Aúlád rejoined, "and the White Demon's chiefs   Are gathered there." Then Rustem to a tree   Bound his obedient guide--to keep him safe,   And to recruit his strength, laid down awhile   And soundly slept.

                      When morning dawned, he rose,   And mounting Rakush, put his helmet on,   The tiger-skin defended his broad chest,   And sallying forth, he sought the Demon chief,   Arzang, and summoned him with such a roar   That stream and mountain shook. Arzang sprang up,   Hearing a human voice, and from his tent   Indignant issued--him the champion met,   And clutched his arms and ears, and from his body   Tore off the gory head, and cast it far   Amidst the shuddering Demons, who with fear   Shrunk back and fled, precipitate, lest they   Should likewise feel that dreadful punishment.

Sixth Stage.--After this achievement Rustem returned to the place where he had left Aúlád, and having released him, sat down under the tree and related what he had done. He then commanded his guide to show the way to the place where Kai-káús was confined; and when the champion entered the city of Mázinderán, the neighing of Rakush was so loud that the sound distinctly reached the ears of the captive monarch. Káús rejoiced, and said to his people: "I have heard the voice of Rakush, and my misfortunes are at an end;" but they thought he was either insane or telling them a dream. The actual appearance of Rustem, however, soon satisfied them. Gúdarz, and Tús, and Báhrám, and Gíw, and Gustahem, were delighted to meet him, and the king embraced him with great warmth and affection, and heard from him with admiration the story of his wonderful progress and exploits. But Káús and his warriors, under the influence and spells of the Demons, were still blind, and he cautioned Rustem particularly to conceal Rakush from the sight of the sorcerers, for if the White Demon should hear of the slaughter of Arzang, and the conqueror being at Mázinderán, he would immediately assemble an overpowering army of Demons, and the consequences might be terrible.

  "But thou must storm the cavern of the Demons   And their gigantic chief--great need there is   For sword and battle-axe--and with the aid   Of Heaven, these miscreant sorcerers may fall   Victims to thy avenging might. The road   Is straight before thee--reach the Seven Mountains,   And there thou wilt discern the various groups,   Which guard the awful passage. Further on,   Within a deep and horrible recess,   Frowns the White Demon--conquer him--destroy   That fell magician, and restore to sight   Thy suffering king, and all his warrior train.   The wise in cures declare, that the warm blood   From the White Demon's heart, dropped in the eye,   Removes all blindness--it is, then, my hope,   Favored by God, that thou wilt slay the fiend,   And save us from the misery we endure,   The misery of darkness without end."

Rustem accordingly, after having warned his friends and companions in arms to keep on the alert, prepared for the enterprise, and guided by Aúlád, hurried on till he came to the Haft-koh, or Seven Mountains. There he found numerous companies of Demons; and coming to one of the caverns, saw it crowded with the same awful beings. And now consulting with Aúlád, he was informed that the most advantageous time for attack would be when the sun became hot, for then all the Demons were accustomed to go to sleep, with the exception of a very small number who were appointed to keep watch. He therefore waited till the sun rose high in the firmament; and as soon as he had bound Aúlád to a tree hand and foot, with the thongs of his kamund, drew his sword, and rushed among the prostrate Demons, dismembering and slaying all that fell in his way. Dreadful was the carnage, and those who survived fled in the wildest terror from the champion's fury.

Seventh Stage.--Rustem now hastened forward to encounter the White Demon.

  Advancing to the cavern, he looked down   And saw a gloomy place, dismal as hell;   But not one cursed, impious sorcerer   Was visible in that infernal depth.   Awhile he stood--his falchion in his grasp,   And rubbed his eyes to sharpen his dim sight,   And then a mountain-form, covered with hair,   Filling up all the space, rose into view.   The monster was asleep, but presently   The daring shouts of Rustem broke his rest,   And brought him suddenly upon his feet,   When seizing a huge mill-stone, forth he came,   And thus accosted the intruding chief:   "Art thou so tired of life, that reckless thus   Thou dost invade the precincts of the Demons?   Tell me thy name, that I may not destroy   A nameless thing!" The champion stern replied,   "My name is Rustem--sent by Zál, my father,   Descended from the champion Sám Súwár,   To be revenged on thee--the King of Persia   Being now a prisoner in Mázinderán."   When the accursed Demon heard the name   Of Sám Súwár, he, like a serpent, writhed   In agony of spirit; terrified   At that announcement--then, recovering strength,   He forward sprang, and hurled the mill-stone huge   Against his adversary, who fell back   And disappointed the prodigious blow.   Black frowned the Demon, and through Rustem's heart   A wild sensation ran of dire alarm;   But, rousing up, his courage was revived,   And wielding furiously his beaming sword,   He pierced the Demon's thigh, and lopped the limb;   Then both together grappled, and the cavern   Shook with the contest--each, at times, prevailed;   The flesh of both was torn, and streaming blood   Crimsoned the earth. "If I survive this day,"   Said Rustem in his heart, in that dread strife,   "My life must be immortal." The White Demon,   With equal terror, muttered to himself:   "I now despair of life--sweet life; no more   Shall I be welcomed at Mázinderán."   And still they struggled hard--still sweat and blood   Poured down at every strain. Rustem, at last,   Gathering fresh power, vouchsafed by favouring Heaven   And bringing all his mighty strength to bear,   Raised up the gasping Demon in his arms,   And with such fury dashed him to the ground,   That life no longer moved his monstrous frame.   Promptly he then tore out the reeking heart,   And crowds of demons simultaneous fell   As part of him, and stained the earth with gore;   Others who saw this signal overthrow,   Trembled, and hurried from the scene of blood.   Then the great victor, issuing from that cave   With pious haste--took off his helm, and mail,   And royal girdle--and with water washed   His face and body--choosing a pure place   For prayer--to praise his Maker--Him who gave   The victory, the eternal source of good;   Without whose grace and blessing, what is man!   With it his armor is impregnable.

The Champion having finished his prayer, resumed his war habiliments, and going to Aúlád, released him from the tree, and gave into his charge the heart of the White Demon. He then pursued his journey back to Káús at Mázinderán. On the way Aúlád solicited some reward for the services he had performed, and Rustem again promised that he should be appointed governor of the country.

  "But first the monarch of Mázinderán,   The Demon-king, must be subdued, and cast   Into the yawning cavern--and his legions   Of foul enchanters, utterly destroyed."

Upon his arrival at Mázinderán, Rustem related to his sovereign all that he had accomplished, and especially that he had torn out and brought away the White Demon's heart, the blood of which was destined to restore Kai-káús and his warriors to sight. Rustem was not long in applying the miraculous remedy, and the moment the blood touched their eyes, the fearful blindness was perfectly cured.

  The champion brought the Demon's heart,   And squeezed the blood from every part,   Which, dropped upon the injured sight,   Made all things visible and bright;   One moment broke that magic gloom,   Which seemed more dreadful than the tomb.

The monarch immediately ascended his throne surrounded by all his warriors, and seven days were spent in mutual congratulations and rejoicing. On the eighth day they all resumed the saddle, and proceeded to complete the destruction of the enemy. They set fire to the city, and burnt it to the ground, and committed such horrid carnage among the remaining magicians that streams of loathsome blood crimsoned all the place.

Káús afterwards sent Ferhád as an ambassador to the king of Mázinderán, suggesting to him the expediency of submission, and representing to him the terrible fall of Arzang, and of the White Demon with all his host, as a warning against resistance to the valor of Rustem. But when the king of Mázinderán heard from Ferhád the purpose of his embassy, he expressed great astonishment, and replied that he himself was superior in all respects to Káús; that his empire was more extensive, and his warriors more numerous and brave. "Have I not," said he, "a hundred war-elephants, and Káús not one? Wherever I move, conquest marks my way; why then should I fear the sovereign of Persia? Why should I submit to him?"

This haughty tone made a deep impression upon Ferhád, who returning quickly, told Káús of the proud bearing and fancied power of the ruler of Mázinderán. Rustem was immediately sent for; and so indignant was he on hearing the tidings, that "every hair on his body started up like a spear," and he proposed to go himself with a second dispatch. The king was too much pleased to refuse, and another letter was written more urgent than the first, threatening the enemy to hang up his severed head on the walls of his own fort, if he persisted in his contumacy and scorn of the offer made.

As soon as Rustem had come within a short distance of the court of the king of Mázinderán, accounts reached his majesty of the approach of another ambassador, when a deputation of warriors was sent to receive him. Rustem observing them, and being in sight of the hostile army, with a view to show his strength, tore up a large tree on the road by the roots, and dexterously wielded it in his hand like a spear. Tilting onwards, he flung it down before the wondering enemy, and one of the chiefs then thought it incumbent upon him to display his own prowess. He advanced, and offered to grasp hands with Rustem: they met; but the gripe of the champion was so excruciating that the sinews of his adversary cracked, and in agony he fell from his horse. Intelligence of this discomfiture was instantly conveyed to the king, who then summoned his most valiant and renowned chieftain, Kálahúr, and directed him to go and punish, signally, the warrior who had thus presumed to triumph over one of his heroes. Accordingly Kálahúr appeared, and boastingly stretched out his hand, which Rustem wrung with such grinding force, that the very nails dropped off, and blood started from his body. This was enough, and Kálahúr hastily returned to the king, and anxiously recommended him to submit to terms, as it would be in vain to oppose such invincible strength. The king was both grieved and angry at this situation of affairs, and invited the ambassador to his presence. After inquiring respecting Káús and the Persian army, he said:

  "And thou art Rustem, clothed with mighty power,   Who slaughtered the White Demon, and now comest   To crush the monarch of Mázinderán!"   "No!" said the champion, "I am but his servant,   And even unworthy of that noble station;   My master being a warrior, the most valiant   That ever graced the world since time began.   Nothing am I; but what doth he resemble!   What is a lion, elephant, or demon!   Engaged in fight, he is himself a host!"

The ambassador then tried to convince the king of the folly of resistance, and of his certain defeat if he continued to defy the power of Káús and the bravery of Rustem; but the effort was fruitless, and both states prepared for battle.

The engagement which ensued was obstinate and sanguinary, and after seven days of hard fighting, neither army was victorious, neither defeated. Afflicted at this want of success, Káús grovelled in the dust, and prayed fervently to the Almighty to give him the triumph. He addressed all his warriors, one by one, and urged them to increased exertions; and on the eighth day, when the battle was renewed, prodigies of valor were performed. Rustem singled out, and encountered the king of Mázinderán, and fiercely they fought together with sword and javelin; but suddenly, just as he was rushing on with overwhelming force, his adversary, by his magic art, transformed himself into a stony rock. Rustem and the Persian warriors were all amazement. The fight had been suspended for some time, when Káús came forward to inquire the cause; and hearing with astonishment of the transformation, ordered his soldiers to drag the enchanted mass towards his own tent; but all the strength that could be applied was unequal to move so great a weight, till Rustem set himself to the task, and amidst the wondering army, lifted up the rock and conveyed it to the appointed place. He then addressed the work of sorcery, and said: "If thou dost not resume thy original shape, I will instantly break thee, flinty-rock as thou now art, into atoms, and scatter thee in the dust." The magician-king was alarmed by this threat, and reappeared in his own form, and then Rustem, seizing his hand, brought him to Káús, who, as a punishment for his wickedness and atrocity, ordered him to be slain, and his body to be cut into a thousand pieces! The wealth of the country was immediately afterwards secured; and at the recommendation of Rustem, Aúlád was appointed governor of Mázinderán. After the usual thanksgivings and rejoicings on account of the victory, Káús and his warriors returned to Persia, where splendid honors and rewards were bestowed on every soldier for his heroic services. Rustem having received the highest acknowledgments of his merit, took leave, and returned to his father Zál at Zábulistán.

Suddenly an ardent desire arose in the heart of Káús to survey all the provinces and states of his empire. He wished to visit Túrán, and Chín, and Mikrán, and Berber, and Zirra. Having commenced his royal tour of inspection, he found the King of Berberistán in a state of rebellion, with his army prepared to dispute his authority. A severe battle was the consequence; but the refractory sovereign was soon compelled to retire, and the elders of the city came forward to sue for mercy and protection. After this triumph, Káús turned towards the mountain Káf, and visited various other countries, and in his progress became the guest of the son of Zál in Zábulistán where he stayed a month, enjoying the pleasures of the festive board and the sports of the field.

The disaffection of the King of Hámáverán, in league with the King of Misser and Shám, and the still hostile King of Berberistán, soon, however, drew him from Ním-rúz, and quitting the principality of Rustem, his arms were promptly directed against his new enemy, who in the contest which ensued, made an obstinate resistance, but was at length overpowered, and obliged to ask for quarter. After the battle, Káús was informed that the Sháh had a daughter of great beauty, named Súdáveh, possessing a form as graceful as the tall cypress, musky ringlets, and all the charms of Heaven. From the description of this damsel he became enamoured, and through the medium of a messenger, immediately offered himself to be her husband. The father did not seem to be glad at this proposal, observing to the messenger, that he had but two things in life valuable to him, and those were his daughter and his property; one was his solace and delight, and the other his support; to be deprived of both would be death to him; still he could not gainsay the wishes of a king of such power, and his conqueror. He then sorrowfully communicated the overture to his child, who, however, readily consented; and in the course of a week, the bride was sent escorted by soldiers, and accompanied by a magnificent cavalcade, consisting of a thousand horses and mules, a thousand camels, and numerous female attendants. When Súdáveh descended from her litter, glowing with beauty, with her rich dark tresses flowing to her feet, and cheeks like the rose, Káús regarded her with admiration and rapture; and so impatient was he to possess that lovely treasure, that the marriage rites were performed according to the laws of the country without delay.

The Sháh of Hámáverán, however, was not satisfied, and he continually plotted within himself how he might contrive to regain possession of Súdáveh, as well as be revenged upon the king. With this view he invited Káús to be his guest for a while; but Súdáveh cautioned the king not to trust to the treachery which dictated the invitation, as she apprehended from it nothing but mischief and disaster. The warning, however, was of no avail, for Káús accepted the proffered hospitality of his new father-in-law. He accordingly proceeded with his bride and his most famous warriors to the city, where he was received and entertained in the most sumptuous manner, seated on a gorgeous throne, and felt infinitely exhilarated with the magnificence and the hilarity by which he was surrounded. Seven days were passed in this glorious banqueting and delight; but on the succeeding night, the sound of trumpets and the war-cry was heard. The intrusion of soldiers changed the face of the scene; and the king, who had just been waited on, and pampered with such respect and devotion, was suddenly seized, together with his principal warriors, and carried off to a remote fortress, situated on a high mountain, where they were imprisoned, and guarded by a thousand valiant men. His tents were plundered, and all his treasure taken away. At this event his wife was inconsolable and deaf to all entreaties from her father, declaring that she preferred death to separation from her husband; upon which she was conveyed to the same dungeon, to mingle groans with the captive king.

  Alas! how false and fickle is the world,   Friendship nor pleasure, nor the ties of blood,   Can check the headlong course of human passions;   Treachery still laughs at kindred;--who is safe   In this tumultuous sphere of strife and sorrow?



INVASION OF IRÁN BY AFRÁSIYÁB

The intelligence of Káús's imprisonment was very soon spread through the world, and operated as a signal to all the inferior states to get possession of Irán. Afrásiyáb was the most powerful aspirant to the throne; and gathering an immense army, he hurried from Túrán, and made a rapid incursion into the country, which after three months he succeeded in conquering, scattering ruin and desolation wherever he came.

Some of those who escaped from the field bent their steps towards Zábulistán, by whom Rustem was informed of the misfortunes in which Káús was involved; it therefore became necessary that he should again endeavor to effect the liberation of his sovereign; and accordingly, after assembling his troops from different quarters, the first thing he did was to despatch a messenger to Hámáverán, with a letter, demanding the release of the prisoners; and in the event of a refusal, declaring the king should suffer the same fate as the White Demon and the magician-monarch of Mázinderán. Although this threat produced considerable alarm in the breast of the king of Hámáverán, he arrogantly replied, that if Rustem wished to be placed in the same situation as Káús, he was welcome to come as soon as he liked.

Upon hearing this defiance, Rustem left Zábulistán, and after an arduous journey by land and water, arrived at the confines of Hámáverán. The king of that country, roused by the noise and uproar, and bold aspect of the invading army, drew up his own forces, and a battle ensued, but he was unequal to stand his ground before the overwhelming courage of Rustem. His troops fled in confusion, and then almost in despair he anxiously solicited assistance from the chiefs of Berber and Misser, which was immediately given. Thus three kings and their armies were opposed to the power and resources of one man. Their formidable array covered an immense space.

  Each proud his strongest force to bring,   The eagle of valour flapped his wing.

But when the King of Hámáverán beheld the person of Rustem in all its pride and strength, and commanding power, he paused with apprehension and fear, and intrenched himself well behind his own troops. Rustem, on the contrary, was full of confidence.

  "What, though there be a hundred thousand men   Pitched against one, what use is there in numbers   When Heaven is on my side: with Heaven my friend,   The foe will soon be mingled with the dust."

Having ordered the trumpets to sound, he rushed on the enemy, mounted on Rakush, and committed dreadful havoc among them.

  It would be difficult to tell   How many heads, dissevered, fell,     Fighting his dreadful way;   On every side his falchion gleamed,   Hot blood in every quarter streamed     On that tremendous day.

The chief of Hámáverán and his legions were the first to shrink from the conflict; and then the King of Misser, ashamed of their cowardice, rapidly advanced towards the champion with the intention of punishing him for his temerity, but he had no sooner received one of Rustem's hard blows on his head, than he turned to flight, and thus hoped to escape the fury of his antagonist. That fortune, however, was denied him, for being instantly pursued, he was caught with the kamund, or noose, thrown round his loins, dragged from his horse, and safely delivered into the hands of Báhrám, who bound him, and kept him by his side.

  Ring within ring the lengthening kamund flew,   And from his steed the astonished monarch drew.

Having accomplished this signal capture, Rustem proceeded against the troops under the Sháh of Berberistán, which, valorously aided as he was, by Zúára, he soon vanquished and dispatched; and impelling Rakush impetuously forward upon the sháh himself, made him and forty of his principal chiefs prisoners of war. The King of Hámáverán, seeing the horrible carnage, and the defeat of all his expectations, speedily sent a messenger to Rustem, to solicit a suspension of the fight, offering to deliver up Káús and all his warriors, and all the regal property and treasure which had been plundered from him. The troops of the three kingdoms also urgently prayed for quarter and protection, and Rustem readily agreed to the proffered conditions.

  "Káús to liberty restore,   With all his chiefs, I ask no more;   For him alone I conquering came;   Than him no other prize I claim."



THE RETURN OF KAI-KÁÚS

It was a joyous day when Káús and his illustrious heroes were released from their fetters, and removed from the mountain-fortress in which they were confined. Rustem forthwith reseated him on his throne, and did not fail to collect for the public treasury all the valuables of the three states which had submitted to his power. The troops of Misser, Berberistán, and Hámáverán, having declared their allegiance to the Persian king, the accumulated numbers increased Káús's army to upwards of three hundred thousand men, horse and foot, and with this immense force he moved towards Irán. Before marching, however, he sent a message to Afrásiyáb, commanding him to quit the country he had so unjustly invaded, and recommending him to be contented with the territory of Túrán.

  "Hast thou forgotten Rustem's power,   When thou wert in that perilous hour   By him overthrown? Thy girdle broke,   Or thou hadst felt the conqueror's yoke.   Thy crowding warriors proved thy shield,   They saved and dragged thee from the field;   By them unrescued then, wouldst thou   Have lived to vaunt thy prowess now?"

This message was received with bitter feelings of resentment by Afrásiyáb, who prepared his army for battle without delay, and promised to bestow his daughter in marriage and a kingdom upon the man who should succeed in taking Rustem alive.

This proclamation was a powerful excitement: and when the engagement took place, mighty efforts were made for the reward; but those who aspired to deserve it were only the first to fall. Afrásiyáb beholding the fall of so many of his chiefs, dashed forward to cope with the champion: but his bravery was unavailing; for, suffering sharply under the overwhelming attacks of Rustem, he was glad to effect his escape, and retire from the field. In short, he rapidly retraced his steps to Túrán, leaving Káús in full possession of the kingdom.

  With anguish stricken, he regained his home,   After a wild and ignominious flight;   The world presenting nothing to his lips   But poison-beverage; all was death to him.

Káús being again seated on the throne of Persia, he resumed the administration of affairs with admirable justice and liberality, and despatched some of his most distinguished warriors to secure the welfare and prosperity of the states of Mervi, and Balkh, and Níshapúr, and Hírát. At the same time he conferred on Rustem the title of Jaháni Pahlván, or, Champion of the World.

In safety now from foreign and domestic enemies, Káús turned his attention to pursuits very different from war and conquest. He directed the Demons to construct two splendid palaces on the mountain Alberz, and separate mansions for the accommodation of his household, which he decorated in the most magnificent manner. All the buildings were beautifully arranged both for convenience and pleasure; and gold and silver and precious stones were used so lavishly, and the brilliancy produced by their combined effect was so great, that night and day appeared to be the same.

Iblís, ever active, observing the vanity and ambition of the king, was not long in taking advantage of the circumstance, and he soon persuaded the Demons to enter into his schemes. Accordingly one of them, disguised as a domestic servant, was instructed to present a nosegay to Káús; and after respectfully kissing the ground, say to him:--

  "Thou art great as king can be,   Boundless in thy majesty;   What is all this earth to thee,        All beneath the sky?   Peris, mortals, demons, hear   Thy commanding voice with fear;   Thou art lord of all things here,     But, thou canst not fly!

  "That remains for thee; to know   Things above, as things below,     How the planets roll;   How the sun his light displays,   How the moon darts forth her rays;   How the nights succeed the days;   What the secret cause betrays,     And who directs the whole!"

This artful address of the Demon satisfied Káús of the imperfection of his nature, and the enviable power which he had yet to obtain. To him, therefore, it became matter of deep concern, how he might be enabled to ascend the Heavens without wings, and for that purpose he consulted his astrologers, who presently suggested a way in which his desires might be successfully accomplished.

They contrived to rob an eagle's nest of its young, which they reared with great care, supplying them well with invigorating food, till they grew large and strong. A framework of aloes-wood was then prepared; and at each of the four corners was fixed perpendicularly, a javelin, surmounted on the point with flesh of a goat. At each corner again one of the eagles was bound, and in the middle Káús was seated in great pomp with a goblet of wine before him. As soon as the eagles became hungry, they endeavored to get at the goat's flesh upon the javelins, and by flapping their wings and flying upwards, they quickly raised up the throne from the ground. Hunger still pressing them, and still being distant from their prey, they ascended higher and higher in the clouds, conveying the astonished king far beyond his own country; but after long and fruitless exertion their strength failed them, and unable to keep their way, the whole fabric came tumbling down from the sky, and fell upon a dreary solitude in the kingdom of Chín. There Káús was left, a prey to hunger, alone, and in utter despair, until he was discovered by a band of Demons, whom his anxious ministers had sent in search of him.

Rustem, and Gúdarz, and Tús, at length heard of what had befallen the king, and with feelings of sorrow not unmixed with indignation, set off to his assistance. "Since I was born," said Gúdarz, "never did I see such a man as Káús. He seems to be entirely destitute of reason and understanding; always in distress and affliction. This is the third calamity in which he has wantonly involved himself. First at Mázinderán, then at Hámáverán, and now he is being punished for attempting to discover the secrets of the Heavens!" When they reached the wilderness into which Káús had fallen, Gúdarz repeated to him the same observations, candidly telling him that he was fitter for a mad-house than a throne, and exhorting him to be satisfied with his lot and be obedient to God, the creator of all things. The miserable king was softened to tears, acknowledged his folly; and as soon as he was escorted back to his palace, he shut himself up, remaining forty days, unseen, prostrating himself in shame and repentance. After that he recovered his spirits, and resumed the administration of affairs with his former liberality, clemency, and justice, almost rivalling the glory of Feridún and Jemshíd.

One day Rustem made a splendid feast; and whilst he and his brother warriors, Gíw and Gúdarz, and Tús, were quaffing their wine, it was determined upon to form a pretended hunting party, and repair to the sporting grounds of Afrásiyáb. The feast lasted seven days; and on the eighth, preparations were made for the march, an advance party being pushed on to reconnoitre the motions of the enemy. Afrásiyáb was soon informed of what was going on, and flattered himself with the hopes of getting Rustem and his seven champions into his thrall, for which purpose he called together his wise men and warriors, and said to them: "You have only to secure these invaders, and Káús will soon cease to be the sovereign of Persia." To accomplish this object, a Túránian army of thirty thousand veterans was assembled, and ordered to occupy all the positions and avenues in the vicinity of the sporting grounds. An immense clamor, and thick clouds of dust, which darkened the skies, announced their approach; and when intelligence of their numbers was brought to Rustem, the undaunted champion smiled, and said to Garáz: "Fortune favors me; what cause is there to fear the king of Túrán? his army does not exceed a hundred thousand men. Were I alone, with Rakush, with my armor, and battle-axe, I would not shrink from his legions. Have I not seven companions in arms, and is not one of them equal to five hundred Túránian heroes? Let Afrásiyáb dare to cross the boundary-river, and the contest will presently convince him that he has only sought his own defeat." Promptly at a signal the cup-bearer produced goblets of the red wine of Zábul; and in one of them Rustem pledged his royal master with loyalty, and Tús and Zúára joined in the convivial and social demonstration of attachment to the king.

The champion arrayed in his buburiyán, mounted Rakush, and advanced towards the Túránian army. Afrásiyáb, when he beheld him in all his terrible strength and vigor, was amazed and disheartened, accompanied, as he was, by Tús, and Gúdarz, and Gurgín, and Gíw, and Báhrám, and Berzín, and Ferhád. The drums and trumpets of Rustem were now heard, and immediately the hostile forces engaged with dagger, sword, and javelin. Dreadful was the onset, and the fury with which the conflict was continued. In truth, so sanguinary and destructive was the battle that Afrásiyáb exclaimed in grief and terror: "If this carnage lasts till the close of day, not a man of my army will remain alive. Have I not one warrior endued with sufficient bravery to oppose and subdue this mighty Rustem? What! not one fit to be rewarded with a diadem, with my own throne and kingdom, which I will freely give to the victor!" Pílsum heard the promise, and was ambitious of earning the reward; but fate decreed it otherwise. His prodigious efforts were of no avail. Alkús was equally unsuccessful, though the bravest of the brave among the Túránian warriors. Encountering Rustem, his brain was pierced by a javelin wielded by the Persian hero, and he fell dead from his saddle. This signal achievement astonished and terrified the Túránians, who, however, made a further despairing effort against the champion and his seven conquering companions, but with no better result than before, and nothing remained to them excepting destruction or flight. Choosing the latter they wheeled round, and endeavored to escape from the sanguinary fate that awaited them.

Seeing this precipitate movement of the enemy, Rustem impelled Rakush forward in pursuit, addressing his favorite horse with fondness and enthusiasm:--

  "My valued friend--put forth thy speed,   This is a time of pressing need;   Bear me away amidst the strife,   That I may take that despot's life;   And with my mace and javelin, flood   This dusty plain with foe-man's blood."

  Excited by his master's cry,     The war-horse bounded o'er the plain,   So swiftly that he seemed to fly,   Snorting with pride, and tossing high     His streaming mane.

  And soon he reached that despot's side,   "Now is the time!" the Champion cried,     "This is the hour to victory given,"   And flung his noose--which bound the king   Fast for a moment in its ring;     But soon, alas! the bond was riven.

  Haply the Tartar-monarch slipt away,   Not doomed to suffer on that bloody day;   And freed from thrall, he hurrying led     His legions cross the boundary-stream,   Leaving his countless heaps of dead     To rot beneath the solar beam.

  Onward he rushed with heart opprest,     And broken fortunes; he had quaffed   Bright pleasure's cup--but now, unblest,     Poison was mingled with the draught!

The booty in horses, treasure, armor, pavilions, and tents, was immense; and when the whole was secured, Rustem and his companions fell back to the sporting-grounds already mentioned, from whence he informed Kai-káús by letter of the victory that had been gained. After remaining two weeks there, resting from the toils of war and enjoying the pleasures of hunting, the party returned home to pay their respects to the Persian king:

  And this is life! Thus conquest and defeat,   Vary the lights and shades of human scenes,   And human thought. Whilst some, immersed in pleasure,   Enjoy the sweets, others again endure   The miseries of the world. Hope is deceived   In this frail dwelling; certainty and safety   Are only dreams which mock the credulous mind;   Time sweeps o'er all things; why then should the wise   Mourn o'er events which roll resistless on,   And set at nought all mortal opposition?



STORY OF SOHRÁB

  O ye, who dwell in Youth's inviting bowers,   Waste not, in useless joy, your fleeting hours,   But rather let the tears of sorrow roll,   And sad reflection fill the conscious soul.   For many a jocund spring has passed away,   And many a flower has blossomed, to decay;   And human life, still hastening to a close,   Finds in the worthless dust its last repose.   Still the vain world abounds in strife and hate,   And sire and son provoke each other's fate;   And kindred blood by kindred hands is shed,   And vengeance sleeps not--dies not, with the dead.   All nature fades--the garden's treasures fall,   Young bud, and citron ripe--all perish, all.

  And now a tale of sorrow must be told,   A tale of tears, derived from Múbid old,   And thus remembered.--

                         With the dawn of day,   Rustem arose, and wandering took his way,   Armed for the chase, where sloping to the sky,   Túrán's lone wilds in sullen grandeur lie;   There, to dispel his melancholy mood,   He urged his matchless steed through glen and wood.   Flushed with the noble game which met his view,   He starts the wild-ass o'er the glistening dew;   And, oft exulting, sees his quivering dart,   Plunge through the glossy skin, and pierce the heart.   Tired of the sport, at length, he sought the shade,   Which near a stream embowering trees displayed,   And with his arrow's point, a fire he raised,   And thorns and grass before him quickly blazed.   The severed parts upon a bough he cast,   To catch the flames; and when the rich repast   Was drest; with flesh and marrow, savory food,   He quelled his hunger; and the sparkling flood   That murmured at his feet, his thirst represt;   Then gentle sleep composed his limbs to rest.

  Meanwhile his horse, for speed and form renown'd,   Ranged o'er the plain with flowery herbage crown'd,   Encumbering arms no more his sides opprest,   No folding mail confined his ample chest,[12]   Gallant and free, he left the Champion's side,   And cropp'd the mead, or sought the cooling tide;   When lo! it chanced amid that woodland chase,   A band of horsemen, rambling near the place,   Saw, with surprise, superior game astray,   And rushed at once to seize the noble prey;   But, in the imminent struggle, two beneath   His steel-clad hoofs received the stroke of death;   One proved a sterner fate--for downward borne,   The mangled head was from the shoulders torn.   Still undismayed, again they nimbly sprung,   And round his neck the noose entangling flung:   Now, all in vain, he spurns the smoking ground,   In vain the tumult echoes all around;   They bear him off, and view, with ardent eyes,   His matchless beauty and majestic size;   Then soothe his fury, anxious to obtain,   A bounding steed of his immortal strain.

  When Rustem woke, and miss'd his favourite horse,   The loved companion of his glorious course;   Sorrowing he rose, and, hastening thence, began   To shape his dubious way to Samengán;   "Reduced to journey thus, alone!" he said,   "How pierce the gloom which thickens round my head;   Burthen'd, on foot, a dreary waste in view,   Where shall I bend my steps, what path pursue?   The scoffing Turks will cry, 'Behold our might!   We won the trophy from the Champion-knight!   From him who, reckless of his fame and pride,   Thus idly slept, and thus ignobly died,'"   Girding his loins he gathered from the field,   His quivered stores, his beamy sword and shield,   Harness and saddle-gear were o'er him slung.   Bridle and mail across his shoulders hung.[13]   Then looking round, with anxious eye, to meet,   The broad impression of his charger's feet,   The track he hail'd, and following, onward prest.   While grief and hope alternate filled his breast.

  O'er vale and wild-wood led, he soon descries.   The regal city's shining turrets rise.   And when the Champion's near approach is known,   The usual homage waits him to the throne.   The king, on foot, received his welcome guest   With preferred friendship, and his coming blest:   But Rustem frowned, and with resentment fired,   Spoke of his wrongs, the plundered steed required.   "I've traced his footsteps to your royal town,   Here must he be, protected by your crown;   But if retained, if not from fetters freed,   My vengeance shall o'ertake the felon-deed."   "My honored guest!" the wondering King replied--   "Shall Rustem's wants or wishes be denied?   But let not anger, headlong, fierce, and blind,   O'ercloud the virtues of a generous mind.   If still within the limits of my reign,   The well known courser shall be thine again:   For Rakush never can remain concealed,   No more than Rustem in the battle-field!   Then cease to nourish useless rage, and share   With joyous heart my hospitable fare."

  The son of Zál now felt his wrath subdued,   And glad sensations in his soul renewed.   The ready herald by the King's command,   Convened the Chiefs and Warriors of the land;   And soon the banquet social glee restored,   And China wine-cups glittered on the board;   And cheerful song, and music's magic power,   And sparkling wine, beguiled the festive hour.   The dulcet draughts o'er Rustem's senses stole,   And melting strains absorbed his softened soul.   But when approached the period of repose,   All, prompt and mindful, from the banquet rose;   A couch was spread well worthy such a guest,   Perfumed with rose and musk; and whilst at rest,   In deep sound sleep, the wearied Champion lay,   Forgot were all the sorrows of the way.

  One watch had passed, and still sweet slumber shed   Its magic power around the hero's head--   When forth Tahmíneh came--a damsel held   An amber taper, which the gloom dispelled,   And near his pillow stood; in beauty bright,   The monarch's daughter struck his wondering sight.   Clear as the moon, in glowing charms arrayed,   Her winning eyes the light of heaven displayed;   Her cypress form entranced the gazer's view,   Her waving curls, the heart, resistless, drew,   Her eye-brows like the Archer's bended bow;   Her ringlets, snares; her cheek, the rose's glow,   Mixed with the lily--from her ear-tips hung   Rings rich and glittering, star-like; and her tongue,   And lips, all sugared sweetness--pearls the while   Sparkled within a mouth formed to beguile.   Her presence dimmed the stars, and breathing round   Fragrance and joy, she scarcely touched the ground,   So light her step, so graceful--every part   Perfect, and suited to her spotless heart.

  Rustem, surprised, the gentle maid addressed,   And asked what lovely stranger broke his rest.   "What is thy name," he said--"what dost thou seek   Amidst the gloom of night? Fair vision, speak!"

  "O thou," she softly sigh'd, "of matchless fame!   With pity hear, Tahmíneh is my name!   The pangs of love my anxious heart employ,   And flattering promise long-expected joy;   No curious eye has yet these features seen,   My voice unheard, beyond the sacred screen.[14]   How often have I listened with amaze,   To thy great deeds, enamoured of thy praise;   How oft from every tongue I've heard the strain,   And thought of thee--and sighed, and sighed again.   The ravenous eagle, hovering o'er his prey,   Starts at thy gleaming sword and flies away:   Thou art the slayer of the Demon brood,   And the fierce monsters of the echoing wood.   Where'er thy mace is seen, shrink back the bold,   Thy javelin's flash all tremble to behold.   Enchanted with the stories of thy fame,   My fluttering heart responded to thy name;   And whilst their magic influence I felt,   In prayer for thee devotedly I knelt;   And fervent vowed, thus powerful glory charms,   No other spouse should bless my longing arms.   Indulgent heaven propitious to my prayer,   Now brings thee hither to reward my care.   Túrán's dominions thou hast sought, alone,   By night, in darkness--thou, the mighty one!   O claim my hand, and grant my soul's desire;   Ask me in marriage of my royal sire;   Perhaps a boy our wedded love may crown,   Whose strength like thine may gain the world's renown.   Nay more--for Samengán will keep my word--   Rakush to thee again shall be restored."

  The damsel thus her ardent thought expressed,   And Rustem's heart beat joyous in his breast,   Hearing her passion--not a word was lost,   And Rakush safe, by him still valued most;   He called her near; with graceful step she came,   And marked with throbbing pulse his kindled flame.

  And now a Múbid, from the Champion-knight,   Requests the royal sanction to the rite;   O'erjoyed, the King the honoured suit approves,   O'erjoyed to bless the doting child he loves,   And happier still, in showering smiles around,   To be allied to warrior so renowned.   When the delighted father, doubly blest,   Resigned his daughter to his glorious guest,   The people shared the gladness which it gave,   The union of the beauteous and the brave.   To grace their nuptial day--both old and young,   The hymeneal gratulations sung:   "May this young moon bring happiness and joy,   And every source of enmity destroy."   The marriage-bower received the happy pair,   And love and transport shower'd their blessings there.

  Ere from his lofty sphere the morn had thrown   His glittering radiance, and in splendour shone,   The mindful Champion, from his sinewy arm,   His bracelet drew, the soul-ennobling charm;   And, as he held the wondrous gift with pride,   He thus address'd his love-devoted bride!   "Take this," he said, "and if, by gracious heaven,   A daughter for thy solace should be given,   Let it among her ringlets be displayed,   And joy and honour will await the maid;   But should kind fate increase the nuptial-joy,   And make thee mother of a blooming boy,   Around his arm this magic bracelet bind,   To fire with virtuous deeds his ripening mind;   The strength of Sám will nerve his manly form,   In temper mild, in valour like the storm;   His not the dastard fate to shrink, or turn   From where the lions of the battle burn;   To him the soaring eagle from the sky   Will stoop, the bravest yield to him, or fly;   Thus shall his bright career imperious claim   The well-won honours of immortal fame!"   Ardent he said, and kissed her eyes and face,   And lingering held her in a fond embrace.

  When the bright sun his radiant brow displayed,   And earth in all its loveliest hues arrayed,   The Champion rose to leave his spouse's side,   The warm affections of his weeping bride.   For her, too soon the winged moments flew,   Too soon, alas! the parting hour she knew;   Clasped in his arms, with many a streaming tear,   She tried, in vain, to win his deafen'd ear;   Still tried, ah fruitless struggle! to impart,   The swelling anguish of her bursting heart.

  The father now with gratulations due   Rustem approaches, and displays to view   The fiery war-horse--welcome as the light   Of heaven, to one immersed in deepest night;   The Champion, wild with joy, fits on the rein,   And girds the saddle on his back again;   Then mounts, and leaving sire and wife behind,   Onward to Sístán rushes like the wind.

  But when returned to Zábul's friendly shade,   None knew what joys the Warrior had delayed;   Still, fond remembrance, with endearing thought,   Oft to his mind the scene of rapture brought.

  When nine slow-circling months had roll'd away,   Sweet-smiling pleasure hailed the brightening day--   A wondrous boy Tahmíneh's tears supprest,   And lull'd the sorrows of her heart to rest;   To him, predestined to be great and brave,   The name Sohráb his tender mother gave;   And as he grew, amazed, the gathering throng,   View'd his large limbs, his sinews firm and strong;   His infant years no soft endearment claimed:   Athletic sports his eager soul inflamed;   Broad at the chest and taper round the loins,   Where to the rising hip the body joins;   Hunter and wrestler; and so great his speed,   He could overtake, and hold the swiftest steed.   His noble aspect, and majestic grace,   Betrayed the offspring of a glorious race.   How, with a mother's ever anxious love,   Still to retain him near her heart she strove!   For when the father's fond inquiry came,   Cautious, she still concealed his birth and name,   And feign'd a daughter born, the evil fraught   With misery to avert--but vain the thought;   Not many years had passed, with downy flight,   Ere he, Tahmíneh's wonder and delight,   With glistening eye, and youthful ardour warm,   Filled her foreboding bosom with alarm.   "O now relieve my heart!" he said, "declare,   From whom I sprang and breathe the vital air.   Since, from my childhood I have ever been,   Amidst my play-mates of superior mien;   Should friend or foe demand my father's name,   Let not my silence testify my shame!   If still concealed, you falter, still delay,   A mother's blood shall wash the crime away."

  "This wrath forego," the mother answering cried,   "And joyful hear to whom thou art allied.   A glorious line precedes thy destined birth,   The mightiest heroes of the sons of earth.   The deeds of Sám remotest realms admire,   And Zál, and Rustem thy illustrious sire!"

  In private, then, she Rustem's letter placed   Before his view, and brought with eager haste   Three sparkling rubies, wedges three of gold,   From Persia sent--"Behold," she said, "behold   Thy father's gifts, will these thy doubts remove   The costly pledges of paternal love!   Behold this bracelet charm, of sovereign power   To baffle fate in danger's awful hour;   But thou must still the perilous secret keep,   Nor ask the harvest of renown to reap;   For when, by this peculiar signet known,   Thy glorious father shall demand his son,   Doomed from her only joy in life to part,   O think what pangs will rend thy mother's heart!--   Seek not the fame which only teems with woe;   Afrásiyáb is Rustem's deadliest foe!   And if by him discovered, him I dread,   Revenge will fail upon thy guiltless head."

  The youth replied: "In vain thy sighs and tears,   The secret breathes and mocks thy idle fears.   No human power can fate's decrees control,   Or check the kindled ardour of my soul.   Then why from me the bursting truth conceal?   My father's foes even now my vengeance feel;   Even now in wrath my native legions rise,   And sounds of desolation strike the skies;   Káús himself, hurled from his ivory throne,   Shall yield to Rustem the imperial crown,   And thou, my mother, still in triumph seen,   Of lovely Persia hailed the honoured queen!   Then shall Túrán unite beneath my hand,   And drive this proud oppressor from the land!   Father and Son, in virtuous league combined,   No savage despot shall enslave mankind;   When Sun and Moon o'er heaven refulgent blaze,   Shall little stars obtrude their feeble rays?"[15]

  He paused, and then: "O mother, I must now   My father seek, and see his lofty brow;   Be mine a horse, such as a prince demands,   Fit for the dusty field, a warrior's hands;   Strong as an elephant his form should be,   And chested like the stag, in motion free,   And swift as bird, or fish; it would disgrace   A warrior bold on foot to show his face."

  The mother, seeing how his heart was bent,   His day-star rising in the firmament,   Commands the stables to be searched to find   Among the steeds one suited to his mind;   Pressing their backs he tries their strength and nerve,   Bent double to the ground their bellies curve;   Not one, from neighbouring plain and mountain brought,   Equals the wish with which his soul is fraught;   Fruitless on every side he anxious turns,   Fruitless, his brain with wild impatience burns,   But when at length they bring the destined steed,   From Rakush bred, of lightning's winged speed,   Fleet, as the arrow from the bow-string flies,   Fleet, as the eagle darting through the skies,   Rejoiced he springs, and, with a nimble bound,   Vaults in his seat, and wheels the courser round;   "With such a horse--thus mounted, what remains?   Káús, the Persian King, no longer reigns!"   High flushed he speaks--with youthful pride elate,   Eager to crush the Monarch's glittering state;   He grasps his javelin with a hero's might,   And pants with ardour for the field of fight.

  Soon o'er the realm his fame expanding spread,   And gathering thousands hasten'd to his aid.   His Grand-sire, pleased, beheld the warrior-train   Successive throng and darken all the plain;   And bounteously his treasures he supplied,   Camels, and steeds, and gold.--In martial pride,   Sohráb was seen--a Grecian helmet graced   His brow--and costliest mail his limbs embraced.

  Afrásiyáb now hears with ardent joy,   The bold ambition of the warrior-boy,   Of him who, perfumed with the milky breath   Of infancy, was threatening war and death,   And bursting sudden from his mother's side,   Had launched his bark upon the perilous tide.

  The insidious King sees well the tempting hour,   Favouring his arms against the Persian power,   And thence, in haste, the enterprise to share,   Twelve thousand veterans selects with care;   To Húmán and Bármán the charge consigns,   And thus his force with Samengán combines;   But treacherous first his martial chiefs he prest,   To keep the secret fast within their breast:--   "For this bold youth must not his father know,   Each must confront the other as his foe--   Such is my vengeance! With unhallowed rage,   Father and Son shall dreadful battle wage!   Unknown the youth shall Rustem's force withstand,   And soon o'erwhelm the bulwark of the land.   Rustem removed, the Persian throne is ours,   An easy conquest to confederate powers;   And then, secured by some propitious snare,   Sohráb himself our galling bonds shall wear.   Or should the Son by Rustem's falchion bleed,   The father's horror at that fatal deed,   Will rend his soul, and 'midst his sacred grief,   Káús in vain will supplicate relief."

  The tutored chiefs advance with speed, and bring   Imperial presents to the future king;   In stately pomp the embassy proceeds;   Ten loaded camels, ten unrivalled steeds,   A golden crown, and throne, whose jewels bright   Gleam in the sun, and shed a sparkling light,   A letter too the crafty tyrant sends,   And fraudful thus the glorious aim commends.--   "If Persia's spoils invite thee to the field,   Accept the aid my conquering legions yield;   Led by two Chiefs of valour and renown,   Upon thy head to place the kingly crown."

  Elate with promised fame, the youth surveys   The regal vest, the throne's irradiant blaze,   The golden crown, the steeds, the sumptuous load   Of ten strong camels, craftily bestowed;   Salutes the Chiefs, and views on every side,   The lengthening ranks with various arms supplied.   The march begins--the brazen drums resound,[16]   His moving thousands hide the trembling ground;   For Persia's verdant land he wields the spear,   And blood and havoc mark his groaning rear.[17]

  To check the Invader's horror-spreading course,   The barrier-fort opposed unequal force;   That fort whose walls, extending wide, contained   The stay of Persia, men to battle trained.   Soon as Hujír the dusky crowd descried,   He on his own presumptuous arm relied,   And left the fort; in mail with shield and spear,   Vaunting he spoke--"What hostile force is here?   What Chieftain dares our war-like realms invade?"   "And who art thou?" Sohráb indignant said,   Rushing towards him with undaunted look--   "Hast thou, audacious! nerve and soul to brook   The crocodile in fight, that to the strife   Singly thou comest, reckless of thy life?"

  To this the foe replied--"A Turk and I   Have never yet been bound in friendly tie;   And soon thy head shall, severed by my sword,   Gladden the sight of Persia's mighty lord,   While thy torn limbs to vultures shall be given,   Or bleach beneath the parching blast of heaven."

  The youthful hero laughing hears the boast,   And now by each continual spears are tost,   Mingling together; like a flood of fire   The boaster meets his adversary's ire;   The horse on which he rides, with thundering pace,   Seems like a mountain moving from its base;   Sternly he seeks the stripling's loins to wound,   But the lance hurtless drops upon the ground;   Sohráb, advancing, hurls his steady spear   Full on the middle of the vain Hujír,   Who staggers in his seat. With proud disdain   The youth now flings him headlong on the plain,   And quick dismounting, on his heaving breast   Triumphant stands, his Khunjer firmly prest,   To strike the head off--but the blow was stayed--Trembling,   for life, the craven boaster prayed.   That mercy granted eased his coward mind,   Though, dire disgrace, in captive bonds confined,   And sent to Húmán, who amazed beheld   How soon Sohráb his daring soul had quelled.

  When Gúrd-afríd, a peerless warrior-dame,   Heard of the conflict, and the hero's shame,   Groans heaved her breast, and tears of anger flowed,   Her tulip cheek with deeper crimson glowed;   Speedful, in arms magnificent arrayed,   A foaming palfrey bore the martial maid;   The burnished mail her tender limbs embraced,   Beneath her helm her clustering locks she placed;   Poised in her hand an iron javelin gleamed,   And o'er the ground its sparkling lustre streamed;   Accoutred thus in manly guise, no eye   However piercing could her sex descry;   Now, like a lion, from the fort she bends,   And 'midst the foe impetuously descends;   Fearless of soul, demands with haughty tone,   The bravest chief, for war-like valour known,   To try the chance of fight. In shining arms,   Again Sohráb the glow of battle warms;   With scornful smiles, "Another deer!" he cries,   "Come to my victor-toils, another prize!"   The damsel saw his noose insidious spread,   And soon her arrows whizzed around his head;   With steady skill the twanging bow she drew,   And still her pointed darts unerring flew;   For when in forest sports she touched the string,   Never escaped even bird upon the wing;   Furious he burned, and high his buckler held,   To ward the storm, by growing force impell'd;   And tilted forward with augmented wrath,   But Gúrd-áfríd aspires to cross his path;   Now o'er her back the slacken'd bow resounds;   She grasps her lance, her goaded courser bounds,   Driven on the youth with persevering might--   Unconquer'd courage still prolongs the fight;   The stripling Chief shields off the threaten'd blow,   Reins in his steed, then rushes on the foe;   With outstretch'd arm, he bending backwards hung,   And, gathering strength, his pointed javelin flung;   Firm through her girdle belt the weapon went,   And glancing down the polish'd armour rent.   Staggering, and stunned by his superior force,   She almost tumbled from her foaming horse,   Yet unsubdued, she cut the spear in two,   And from her side the quivering fragment drew,   Then gain'd her seat, and onward urged her steed,   But strong and fleet Sohráb arrests her speed:   Strikes off her helm, and sees--a woman's face,   Radiant with blushes and commanding grace!   Thus undeceived, in admiration lost,   He cries, "A woman, from the Persian host!   If Persian damsels thus in arms engage,   Who shall repel their warrior's fiercer rage?"   Then from his saddle thong--his noose he drew,   And round her waist the twisted loop he threw--   "Now seek not to escape," he sharply said,   "Such is the fate of war, unthinking maid!   And, as such beauty seldom swells our pride,   Vain thy attempt to cast my toils aside."

  In this extreme, but one resource remained,   Only one remedy her hope sustained--   Expert in wiles each siren-art she knew,   And thence exposed her blooming face to view;   Raising her full black orbs, serenely bright,   In all her charms she blazed before his sight;   And thus addressed Sohráb--"O warrior brave,   Hear me, and thy imperilled honour save,   These curling tresses seen by either host,   A woman conquered, whence the glorious boast?   Thy startled troops will know, with inward grief,   A woman's arm resists their towering chief,   Better preserve a warrior's fair renown,   And let our struggle still remain unknown,   For who with wanton folly would expose   A helpless maid, to aggravate her woes;   The fort, the treasure, shall thy toils repay,   The chief, and garrison, thy will obey,   And thine the honours of this dreadful day."

  Raptured he gazed, her smiles resistless move   The wildest transports of ungoverned love.   Her face disclosed a paradise to view,   Eyes like the fawn, and cheeks of rosy hue--   Thus vanquished, lost, unconscious of her aim,   And only struggling with his amorous flame,   He rode behind, as if compelled by fate,   And heedless saw her gain the castle-gate.

  Safe with her friends, escaped from brand and spear,   Smiling she stands, as if unknown to fear.   --The father now, with tearful pleasure wild,   Clasps to his heart his fondly-foster'd child;   The crowding warriors round her eager bend,   And grateful prayers to favouring heaven ascend.

  Now from the walls, she, with majestic air,   Exclaims: "Thou warrior of Túrán! forbear,   Why vex thy soul, and useless strife demand!   Go, and in peace enjoy thy native land."   Stern he rejoins: "Thou beauteous tyrant! say,   Though crown'd with charms, devoted to betray,   When these proud walls, in dust and ruins laid,   Yield no defence, and thou a captive maid,   Will not repentance through thy bosom dart,   And sorrow soften that disdainful heart?"

  Quick she replied: "O'er Persia's fertile fields   The savage Turk in vain his falchion wields;   When King Káús this bold invasion hears,   And mighty Rustem clad in arms appears!   Destruction wide will glut the slippery plain,   And not one man of all thy host remain.   Alas! that bravery, high as thine, should meet   Amidst such promise, with a sure defeat,   But not a gleam of hope remains for thee,   Thy wondrous valour cannot keep thee free.   Avert the fate which o'er thy head impends,   Return, return, and save thy martial friends!"

  Thus to be scorned, defrauded of his prey,   With victory in his grasp--to lose the day!   Shame and revenge alternate filled his mind;   The suburb-town to pillage he consigned,   And devastation--not a dwelling spared;   The very owl was from her covert scared;   Then thus: "Though luckless in my aim to-day,   To-morrow shall behold a sterner fray;   This fort, in ashes, scattered o'er the plain."   He ceased--and turned towards his troops again;   There, at a distance from the hostile power,   He brooding waits the slaughter-breathing hour.

  Meanwhile the sire of Gúrd-afríd, who now   Governed the fort, and feared the warrior's vow;   Mournful and pale, with gathering woes opprest,   His distant Monarch trembling thus addrest.   But first invoked the heavenly power to shed   Its choicest blessings o'er his royal head.   "Against our realm with numerous foot and horse,   A stripling warrior holds his ruthless course.   His lion-breast unequalled strength betrays,   And o'er his mien the sun's effulgence plays:   Sohráb his name; like Sám Suwár he shows,   Or Rustem terrible amidst his foes.   The bold Hujír lies vanquished on the plain,   And drags a captive's ignominious chain;   Myriads of troops besiege our tottering wall,   And vain the effort to suspend its fall.   Haste, arm for fight, this Tartar-power withstand,   Let sweeping Vengeance lift her flickering brand;   Rustem alone may stem the roaring wave,   And, prompt as bold, his groaning country save.   Meanwhile in flight we place our only trust,   Ere the proud ramparts crumble in the dust."

  Swift flies the messenger through secret ways,   And to the King the dreadful tale conveys,   Then passed, unseen, in night's concealing shade,   The mournful heroes and the warrior maid.

  Soon as the sun with vivifying ray,   Gleams o'er the landscape, and renews the day;   The flaming troops the lofty walls surround,   With thundering crash the bursting gates resound.   Already are the captives bound, in thought,   And like a herd before the conqueror brought;   Sohráb, terrific o'er the ruin, views   His hopes deceived, but restless still pursues.   An empty fortress mocks his searching eye,   No steel-clad chiefs his burning wrath defy;   No warrior-maid reviving passion warms,   And soothes his soul with fondly-valued charms.   Deep in his breast he feels the amorous smart,   And hugs her image closer to his heart.   "Alas! that Fate should thus invidious shroud   The moon's soft radiance in a gloomy cloud;   Should to my eyes such winning grace display,   Then snatch the enchanter of my soul away!   A beauteous roe my toils enclosed in vain,   Now I, her victim, drag the captive's chain;   Strange the effects that from her charms proceed,   I gave the wound, and I afflicted bleed!   Vanquished by her, I mourn the luckless strife;   Dark, dark, and bitter, frowns my morn of life.   A fair unknown my tortured bosom rends,   Withers each joy, and every hope suspends."

  Impassioned thus Sohráb in secret sighed,   And sought, in vain, o'er-mastering grief to hide.   Can the heart bleed and throb from day to day,   And yet no trace its inmost pangs betray?   Love scorns control, and prompts the labouring sigh,   Pales the red lip, and dims the lucid eye;   His look alarmed the stern Túránian Chief,   Closely he mark'd his heart-corroding grief;--   And though he knew not that the martial dame,   Had in his bosom lit the tender flame[18];   Full well he knew such deep repinings prove,   The hapless thraldom of disastrous love.   Full well he knew some idol's musky hair,   Had to his youthful heart become a snare,   But still unnoted was the gushing tear,   Till haply he had gained his private ear:--   "In ancient times, no hero known to fame,   Not dead to glory e'er indulged the flame;   Though beauty's smiles might charm a fleeting hour,   The heart, unsway'd, repelled their lasting power.   A warrior Chief to trembling love a prey?   What! weep for woman one inglorious day?   Canst thou for love's effeminate control,   Barter the glory of a warrior's soul?   Although a hundred damsels might be gained,   The hero's heart shall still be free, unchained.   Thou art our leader, and thy place the field   Where soldiers love to fight with spear and shield;   And what hast thou to do with tears and smiles,   The silly victim to a woman's wiles?   Our progress, mark! from far Túrán we came,   Through seas of blood to gain immortal fame;   And wilt thou now the tempting conquest shun,   When our brave arms this Barrier-fort have won?   Why linger here, and trickling sorrows shed,   Till mighty Káús thunders o'er thy head!   Till Tús, and Gíw, and Gúdarz, and Báhrám,   And Rustem brave, Ferámurz, and Rehám,   Shall aid the war! A great emprise is thine,   At once, then, every other thought resign;   For know the task which first inspired thy zeal,   Transcends in glory all that love can feel.   Rise, lead the war, prodigious toils require   Unyielding strength, and unextinguished fire;   Pursue the triumph with tempestuous rage,   Against the world in glorious strife engage,   And when an empire sinks beneath thy sway   (O quickly may we hail the prosperous day),   The fickle sex will then with blooming charms,   Adoring throng to bless thy circling arms!"

  Húmán's warm speech, the spirit-stirring theme,   Awoke Sohráb from his inglorious dream.   No more the tear his faded cheek bedewed,   Again ambition all his hopes renewed:   Swell'd his bold heart with unforgotten zeal,   The noble wrath which heroes only feel;   Fiercely he vowed at one tremendous stroke,   To bow the world beneath the tyrant's yoke!   "Afrásiyáb," he cried, "shall reign alone,   The mighty lord of Persia's gorgeous throne!"

  Burning, himself, to rule this nether sphere,   These welcome tidings charmed the despot's ear.   Meantime Káús, this dire invasion known,   Had called his chiefs around his ivory throne:   There stood Gurgín, and Báhrám, and Gushwád,   And Tús, and Gíw, and Gúdárz, and Ferhád;   To them he read the melancholy tale,   Gust'hem had written of the rising bale;   Besought their aid and prudent choice, to form   Some sure defence against the threatening storm.   With one consent they urge the strong request,   To summon Rustem from his rural rest.--   Instant a warrior-delegate they send,   And thus the King invites his patriot-friend,

  "To thee all praise, whose mighty arm alone,   Preserves the glory of the Persian throne!   Lo! Tartar hordes our happy realms invade;   The tottering state requires thy powerful aid;   A youthful Champion leads the ruthless host,   His savage country's widely-rumoured boast.   The Barrier-fortress sinks beneath his sway,   Hujír is vanquished, ruin tracks his way;   Strong as a raging elephant in fight,   No arm but thine can match his furious might.   Mázinderán thy conquering prowess knew;   The Demon-king thy trenchant falchion slew,   The rolling heavens, abash'd with fear, behold   Thy biting sword, thy mace adorned with gold!   Fly to the succour of a King distress'd,   Proud of thy love, with thy protection blest.   When o'er the nation dread misfortunes lower,   Thou art the refuge, thou the saving power.   The chiefs assembled claim thy patriot vows,   Give to thy glory all that life allows;   And while no whisper breathes the direful tale,   O, let thy Monarch's anxious prayers prevail."

  Closing the fragrant page[19] o'ercome with dread,   The afflicted King to Gíw, the warrior, said:--   "Go, bind the saddle on thy fleetest horse,   Outstrip the tempest in thy rapid course,   To Rustem swift his country's woes convey,   Too true art thou to linger on the way;   Speed, day and night--and not one instant wait,   Whatever hour may bring thee to his gate."

  Followed no pause--to Gíw enough was said,   Nor rest, nor taste of food, his speed delayed.   And when arrived, where Zábul's bowers exhale   Ambrosial sweets and scent the balmy gale,   The sentinel's loud voice in Rustem's ear,   Announced a messenger from Persia, near;   The Chief himself amidst his warriors stood,   Dispensing honours to the brave and good,   And soon as Gíw had joined the martial ring,   (The sacred envoy of the Persian King),   He, with becoming loyalty inspired,   Asked what the monarch, what the state required;   But Gíw, apart, his secret mission told--   The written page was speedily unrolled.

  Struck with amazement, Rustem--"Now on earth   A warrior-knight of Sám's excelling worth?   Whence comes this hero of the prosperous star?   I know no Turk renowned, like him, in war;   He bears the port of Rustem too, 'tis said,   Like Sám, like Narímán, a warrior bred!   He cannot be my son, unknown to me;   Reason forbids the thought--it cannot be!   At Samengán, where once affection smiled,   To me Tahmíneh bore her only child,   That was a daughter?" Pondering thus he spoke,   And then aloud--"Why fear the invader's yoke?   Why trembling shrink, by coward thoughts dismayed,   Must we not all in dust, at length, be laid?   But come, to Nírum's palace, haste with me,   And there partake the feast--from sorrow free;   Breathe, but awhile--ere we our toils renew,   And moisten the parched lip with needful dew.   Let plans of war another day decide,   We soon shall quell this youthful hero's pride.   The force of fire soon flutters and decays   When ocean, swelled by storms, its wrath displays.   What danger threatens! whence the dastard fear!   Rest, and at leisure share a warrior's cheer."

  In vain the Envoy prest the Monarch's grief;   The matchless prowess of the stripling chief;   How brave Hujír had felt his furious hand;   What thickening woes beset the shuddering land.   But Rustem, still, delayed the parting day,   And mirth and feasting rolled the hours away;   Morn following morn beheld the banquet bright,   Music and wine prolonged the genial rite;   Rapt by the witchery of the melting strain,   No thought of Káús touch'd his swimming brain.[20]

  The trumpet's clang, on fragrant breezes borne,   Now loud salutes the fifth revolving morn;   The softer tones which charm'd the jocund feast,   And all the noise of revelry, had ceased,   The generous horse, with rich embroidery deckt,   Whose gilded trappings sparkling light reflect,   Bears with majestic port the Champion brave,   And high in air the victor-banners wave.   Prompt at the martial call, Zúára leads   His veteran troops from Zábul's verdant meads.[21]

  Ere Rustem had approached his journey's end,   Tús, Gúdarz, Gushwád, met their champion-friend   With customary honours; pleased to bring   The shield of Persia to the anxious King.   But foaming wrath the senseless monarch swayed;   His friendship scorned, his mandate disobeyed,   Beneath dark brows o'er-shadowing deep, his eye   Red gleaming shone, like lightning through the sky   And when the warriors met his sullen view,   Frowning revenge, still more enraged he grew:--   Loud to the Envoy thus he fiercely cried:--   "Since Rustem has my royal power defied,   Had I a sword, this instant should his head   Roll on the ground; but let him now be led   Hence, and impaled alive."[22] Astounded Gíw   Shrunk from such treatment of a knight so true;   But this resistance added to the flame,   And both were branded with revolt and shame;   Both were condemned, and Tús, the stern decree   Received, to break them on the felon-tree.   Could daring insult, thus deliberate given,   Escape the rage of one to frenzy driven?   No, from his side the nerveless Chief was flung,   Bent to the ground. Away the Champion sprung;   Mounted his foaming horse, and looking round--   His boiling wrath thus rapid utterance found:--   "Ungrateful King, thy tyrant acts disgrace   The sacred throne, and more, the human race;   Midst clashing swords thy recreant life I saved,   And am I now by Tús contemptuous braved?[23]   On me shall Tús, shall Káús dare to frown?   On me, the bulwark of the regal crown?   Wherefore should fear in Rustem's breast have birth,   Káús, to me, a worthless clod of earth!   Go, and thyself Sohráb's invasion stay,   Go, seize the plunderers growling o'er their prey!   Wherefore to others give the base command?   Go, break him on the tree with thine own hand.   Know, thou hast roused a warrior, great and free,   Who never bends to tyrant Kings like thee!   Was not this untired arm triumphant seen,   In Misser, Rúm, Mázinderán, and Chín!   And must I shrink at thy imperious nod!   Slave to no Prince, I only bow to God.   Whatever wrath from thee, proud King! may fall,   For thee I fought, and I deserve it all.   The regal sceptre might have graced my hand,   I kept the laws, and scorned supreme command.   When Kai-kobád and Alberz mountain strayed,   I drew him thence, and gave a warrior's aid;   Placed on his brows the long-contested crown,   Worn by his sires, by sacred right his own;   Strong in the cause, my conquering arms prevailed,   Wouldst thou have reign'd had Rustem's valour failed   When the White Demon raged in battle-fray,   Wouldst thou have lived had Rustem lost the day?"   Then to his friends: "Be wise, and shun your fate,   Fly the wide ruin which o'erwhelms the state;   The conqueror comes--the scourge of great and small,   And vultures, following fast, will gorge on all.   Persia no more its injured Chief shall view"--   He said, and sternly from the court withdrew.

  The warriors now, with sad forebodings wrung,   Torn from that hope to which they proudly clung,   On Gúdarz rest, to soothe with gentle sway,   The frantic King, and Rustem's wrath allay.   With bitter grief they wail misfortune's shock,   No shepherd now to guard the timorous flock.   Gúdarz at length, with boding cares imprest,   Thus soothed the anger in the royal breast.   "Say, what has Rustem done, that he should be   Impaled upon the ignominious tree?   Degrading thought, unworthy to be bred   Within a royal heart, a royal head.   Hast thou forgot when near the Caspian-wave,   Defeat and ruin had appalled the brave,   When mighty Rustem struck the dreadful blow,   And nobly freed thee from the savage foe?   Did Demons huge escape his flaming brand?   Their reeking limbs bestrew'd the slippery strand.   Shall he for this resign his vital breath?   What! shall the hero's recompense be death?   But who will dare a threatening step advance,   What earthly power can bear his withering glance?   Should he to Zábul fired with wrongs return,   The plunder'd land will long in sorrow mourn!   This direful presage all our warriors feel,   For who can now oppose the invader's steel;   Thus is it wise thy champion to offend,   To urge to this extreme thy warrior-friend?   Remember, passion ever scorns control,   And wisdom's mild decrees should rule a Monarch's soul."[24]   Káús, relenting, heard with anxious ear,   And groundless wrath gave place to shame and fear;   "Go then," he cried, "his generous aid implore,   And to your King the mighty Chief restore!"

  When Gúdarz rose, and seized his courser's rein,   A crowd of heroes followed in his train.   To Rustem, now (respectful homage paid),   The royal prayer he anxious thus conveyed.   "The King, repentant, seeks thy aid again,   Grieved to the heart that he has given thee pain;   But though his anger was unjust and strong,   Thy country still is guiltless of the wrong,   And, therefore, why abandoned thus by thee?   Thy help the King himself implores through me."   Rustem rejoined: "Unworthy the pretence,   And scorn and insult all my recompense?   Must I be galled by his capricious mood?   I, who have still his firmest champion stood?   But all is past, to heaven alone resigned,   No human cares shall more disturb my mind!"   Then Gúdarz thus (consummate art inspired   His prudent tongue, with all that zeal required);   "When Rustem dreads Sohráb's resistless power,   Well may inferiors fly the trying hour!   The dire suspicion now pervades us all,   Thus, unavenged, shall beauteous Persia fall!   Yet, generous still, avert the lasting shame,   O, still preserve thy country's glorious fame!   Or wilt thou, deaf to all our fears excite,   Forsake thy friends, and shun the pending fight?   And worse, O grief! in thy declining days,   Forfeit the honours of thy country's praise?"   This artful censure set his soul on fire,   But patriot firmness calm'd his burning ire;   And thus he said--"Inured to war's alarms,   Did ever Rustem shun the din of arms?   Though frowns from Káús I disdain to bear,   My threatened country claims a warrior's care."   He ceased, and prudent joined the circling throng,   And in the public good forgot the private wrong.

  From far the King the generous Champion viewed,   And rising, mildly thus his speech pursued:--   "Since various tempers govern all mankind,   Me, nature fashioned of a froward mind;[25]   And what the heavens spontaneously bestow,   Sown by their bounty must for ever grow.   The fit of wrath which burst within me, soon   Shrunk up my heart as thin as the new moon;[26]   Else had I deemed thee still my army's boast,   Source of my regal power, beloved the most,   Unequalled. Every day, remembering thee,   I drain the wine cup, thou art all to me;   I wished thee to perform that lofty part,   Claimed by thy valour, sanctioned by my heart;   Hence thy delay my better thoughts supprest,   And boisterous passions revelled in my breast;   But when I saw thee from my Court retire   In wrath, repentance quenched my burning ire.   O, let me now my keen contrition prove,   Again enjoy thy fellowship and love:   And while to thee my gratitude is known,   Still be the pride and glory of my throne."

  Rustem, thus answering said:--"Thou art the King,   Source of command, pure honour's sacred spring;   And here I stand to follow thy behest,   Obedient ever--be thy will expressed,   And services required--Old age shall see   My loins still bound in fealty to thee."

  To this the King:--"Rejoice we then to-day,   And on the morrow marshal our array."   The monarch quick commands the feast of joy,   And social cares his buoyant mind employ,   Within a bower, beside a crystal spring,[27]   Where opening flowers, refreshing odours fling,   Cheerful he sits, and forms the banquet scene,   In regal splendour on the crowded green;   And as around he greets his valiant bands,   Showers golden presents from his bounteous hands;[28]   Voluptuous damsels trill the sportive lay,   Whose sparkling glances beam celestial day;   Fill'd with delight the heroes closer join,   And quaff till midnight cups of generous wine.

  Soon as the Sun had pierced the veil of night,   And o'er the prospect shed his earliest light,   Káús, impatient, bids the clarions sound,   The sprightly notes from hills and rocks rebound;   His treasure gates are opened:--and to all   A largess given; obedient to the call,   His subjects gathering crowd the mountain's brow,   And following thousands shade the vales below;   With shields, in armor, numerous legions bend;   And troops of horse the threatening lines extend.   Beneath the tread of heroes fierce and strong,   By war's tumultuous fury borne along,   The firm earth shook: the dust, in eddies driven,   Whirled high in air, obscured the face of heaven;   Nor earth, nor sky appeared--all, seeming lost,   And swallowed up by that wide-spreading host.   The steely armour glitter'd o'er the fields,[29]   And lightnings flash'd from gold emblazoned shields;   Thou wouldst have said, the clouds had burst in showers,   Of sparkling amber o'er the martial powers.[30]   Thus, close embodied, they pursued their way,   And reached the Barrier-fort in terrible array.

  The legions of Túrán, with dread surprise,   Saw o'er the plain successive myriads rise;   And showed them to Sohráb; he, mounting high   The fort, surveyed them with a fearless eye;   To Húmán, who, with withering terror pale,   Had marked their progress through the distant vale,   He pointed out the sight, and ardent said:--   "Dispel these woe-fraught broodings from thy head,   I wage the war, Afrásiyáb! for thee,   And make this desert seem a rolling sea."   Thus, while amazement every bosom quell'd,   Sohráb, unmoved, the coming storm beheld,   And boldly gazing on the camp around,   Raised high the cup with wine nectareous crowned:   O'er him no dreams of woe insidious stole,   No thought but joy engaged his ardent soul.

  The Persian legions had restrained their course,   Tents and pavilions, countless foot and horse,   Clothed all the spacious plain, and gleaming threw   Terrific splendours on the gazer's view.   But when the Sun had faded in the west,   And night assumed her ebon-coloured vest,   The mighty Chief approached the sacred throne,   And generous thus made danger all his own:   "The rules of war demand a previous task,   To watch this dreadful foe I boldly ask;   With wary step the wondrous youth to view,   And mark the heroes who his path pursue."   The King assents: "The task is justly thine,   Favourite of heaven, inspired by power divine."   In Turkish habit, secretly arrayed,   The lurking Champion wandered through the shade   And, cautious, standing near the palace gate,   Saw how the chiefs were ranged in princely state.

  What time Sohráb his thoughts to battle turned,   And for the first proud fruits of conquest burned,   His mother called a warrior to his aid,   And Zinda-ruzm his sister's call obeyed.   To him Tahmineh gave her only joy,   And bade him shield the bold adventurous boy:   "But, in the dreadful strife, should danger rise,   Present my child before his father's eyes!   By him protected, war may rage in vain,   Though he may never bless these arms again!"   This guardian prince sat on the stripling's right,   Viewing the imperial banquet with delight.   Húmán and Bármán, near the hero placed,   In joyous pomp the full assembly graced;   A hundred valiant Chiefs begirt the throne,   And, all elate, were chaunting his renown.   Closely concealed, the gay and splendid scene,   Rustem contemplates with astonished mien;   When Zind, retiring, marks the listener nigh,   Watching the festal train with curious eye;   And well he knew, amongst his Tartar host,   Such towering stature not a Chief could boast--   "What spy is here, close shrouded by the night?   Art thou afraid to face the beams of light?"   But scarcely from his lips these words had past,   Ere, fell'd to earth, he groaning breathed his last;   Unseen he perish'd, fate decreed the blow,   To add fresh keenness to a parent's woe.

  Meantime Sohráb, perceiving the delay   In Zind's return, looked round him with dismay;   The seat still vacant--but the bitter truth,   Full soon was known to the distracted youth;   Full soon he found that Zinda-ruzm was gone,   His day of feasting and of glory done;   Speedful towards the fatal spot he ran,   Where slept in bloody vest the slaughtered man.

  The lighted torches now displayed the dead,   Stiff on the ground his graceful limbs were spread;   Sad sight to him who knew his guardian care,   Now doom'd a kinsman's early loss to bear;   Anguish and rage devour his breast by turns,   He vows revenge, then o'er the warrior mourns:   And thus exclaims to each afflicted Chief:--   "No time, to-night, my friends, for useless grief;   The ravenous wolf has watched his helpless prey,   Sprung o'er the fold, and borne its flower away;   But if the heavens my lifted arm befriend,   Upon the guilty shall my wrath descend--   Unsheathed, this sword shall dire revenge pursue,   And Persian blood the thirsty land bedew."   Frowning he paused, and check'd the spreading woe,   Resumed the feast, and bid the wine-cup flow!

  The valiant Gíw was sentinel that night,   And marking dimly by the dubious light,   A warrior form approach, he claps his hands,   With naked sword and lifted shield he stands,   To front the foe; but Rustem now appears,   And Gíw the secret tale astonished hears;   From thence the Champion on the Monarch waits.   The power and splendour of Sohráb relates:   "Circled by Chiefs this glorious youth was seen,   Of lofty stature and majestic mien;   No Tartar region gave the hero birth:   Some happier portion of the spacious earth;   Tall, as the graceful cypress he appears;   Like Sám, the brave, his warrior-front he rears!"   Then having told how, while the banquet shone,   Unhappy Zind had sunk, without a groan;   He forms his conquering bands in close array,   And, cheer'd by wine, awaits the coming day.

  When now the Sun his golden buckler raised,   And genial light through heaven diffusive blazed,   Sohráb in mail his nervous limbs attired,   For dreadful wrath his soul to vengeance fired;   With anxious haste he bent the yielding cord,   Ring within ring, more fateful than the sword;   Around his brows a regal helm he bound;   His dappled steed impatient stampt the ground.   Thus armed, ascending where the eye could trace   The hostile force, and mark each leader's place,   He called Hujír, the captive Chief addressed,   And anxious thus, his soul's desire expressed:   "A prisoner thou, if freedom's voice can charm,   And dungeon darkness fill thee with alarm,   That freedom merit, shun severest woe,   And truly answer what I ask to know!   If rigid truth thy ready speech attend,   Honours and wealth shall dignify my friend."

  "Obedient to thy wish," Hujír replied,   "Truth thou shalt hear, whatever chance betide;   For what on earth to praise has better claim?   Falsehood but leads to sorrow and to shame!"

  "Then say, what heroes lead the adverse host,   Where they command, what dignities they boast;   Say, where does Káús hold his kingly state,   Where Tús, and Gúdarz, on his bidding wait;   Gíw, Gust'hem, and Báhrám--all known to thee,   And where is mighty Rustem, where is he?   Look round with care, their names and power display   Or instant death shall end thy vital day."

  "Where yonder splendid tapestries extend,   And o'er pavilions bright infolding bend,   A throne triumphal shines with sapphire rays,   And golden suns upon the banners blaze;   Full in the centre of the hosts--and round   The tent a hundred elephants are bound,   As if, in pomp, he mocked the power of fate;   There royal Káús holds his kingly state.

  "In yonder tent which numerous guards protect,   Where front and rear illustrious Chiefs collect;   Where horsemen wheeling seem prepared for fight,   Their golden armour glittering in the light;   Tús lifts his banners, deck'd with royal pride,   Feared by the brave, the soldier's friend and guide.[31]

  "That crimson tent where spear-men frowning stand,   And steel-clad veterans form a threatening band,   Holds mighty Gúdarz, famed for martial fire,   Of eighty valiant sons the valiant sire;   Yet strong in arms, he shuns inglorious ease,   His lion-banners floating in the breeze.

  "But mark, that green pavilion; girt around   By Persian nobles, speaks the Chief renowned;   Fierce on the standard, worked with curious art,   A hideous dragon writhing seems to start;   Throned in his tent the warrior's form is seen,   Towering above the assembled host between!   A generous horse before him snorts and neighs,   The trembling earth the echoing sound conveys.   Like him no Champion ever met my eyes,   No horse like that for majesty and size;   What Chief illustrious bears a port so high?   Mark, how his standard flickers through the sky!"

  Thus ardent spoke Sohráb. Hujír dismayed,   Paused ere reply the dangerous truth betrayed.   Trembling for Rustem's life the captive groaned;   Basely his country's glorious boast disowned,   And said the Chief from distant China came--   Sohráb abrupt demands the hero's name;   The name unknown, grief wrings his aching heart,   And yearning anguish speeds her venom'd dart;   To him his mother gave the tokens true,   He sees them all, and all but mock his view.   When gloomy fate descends in evil hour,   Can human wisdom bribe her favouring power?   Yet, gathering hope, again with restless mien   He marks the Chiefs who crowd the warlike scene.

  "Where numerous heroes, horse and foot, appear,   And brazen trumpets thrill the listening ear,   Behold the proud pavilion of the brave!   With wolves emboss'd the silken banners wave.   The throne's bright gems with radiant lustre glow,   Slaves rank'd around with duteous homage bow.   What mighty Chieftain rules his cohorts there?   His name and lineage, free from guile, declare!"

  "Gíw, son of Gúdarz, long a glorious name,   Whose prowess even transcends his father's fame."[32]

  "Mark yonder tent of pure and dazzling white,   Whose rich brocade reflects a quivering light;   An ebon seat surmounts the ivory throne;   There frowns in state a warrior of renown.   The crowding slaves his awful nod obey,   And silver moons around his banners play;   What Chief, or Prince, has grasped the hostile sword?   Fríburz, the son of Persia's mighty lord."   Again: "These standards show one champion more,   Upon their centre flames the savage boar;[33]   The saffron-hued pavilion bright ascends,   Whence many a fold of tasselled fringe depends;   Who there presides?"

                       "Guráz, from heroes sprung,   Whose praise exceeds the power of mortal tongue."

  Thus, anxious, he explored the crowded field,   Nor once the secret of his birth revealed;[34]   Heaven will'd it so. Pressed down by silent grief,   Surrounding objects promised no relief.   This world to mortals still denies repose,   And life is still the scene of many woes.   Again his eye, instinctive turned, descried   The green pavilion, and the warrior's pride.   Again he cries: "O tell his glorious name;   Yon gallant horse declares the hero's fame!"   But false Hujír the aspiring hope repelled,   Crushed the fond wish, the soothing balm withheld,   "And why should I conceal his name from thee?   His name and title are unknown to me."

  Then thus Sohráb--"In all that thou hast said,   No sign of Rustem have thy words conveyed;   Thou sayest he leads the Persian host to arms,   With him has battle lost its boisterous charms?   Of him no trace thy guiding hand has shown;   Can power supreme remain unmark'd, unknown?"

  "Perhaps returned to Zábul's verdant bowers,   He undisturbed enjoys his peaceful hours,   The vernal banquets may constrain his stay,   And rural sports invite prolonged delay."

  "Ah! say not thus; the Champion of the world,   Shrink from the kindling war with banners furled!   It cannot be! Say where his lightnings dart,   Show me the warrior, all thou know'st impart;   Treasures uncounted shall be thy reward,   Death changed to life, my friendship more than shared.   Dost thou not know what, in the royal ear,   The Múbid said--befitting Kings to hear?   'Untold, a secret is a jewel bright,   Yet profitless whilst hidden from the light;   But when revealed, in words distinctly given,   It shines refulgent as the sun through heaven.'"[35]

  To him, Hujír evasive thus replies:   "Through all the extended earth his glory flies!   Whenever dangers round the nation close,   Rustem approaches, and repels its foes;   And shouldst thou see him mix in mortal strife,   Thou'dst think 'twere easier to escape with life   From tiger fell, or demon--or the fold   Of the chafed dragon, than his dreadful hold--   When fiercest battle clothes the fields with fire,   Before his rage embodied hosts retire!"

  "And where didst thou encountering armies see?   Why Rustem's praise so proudly urge to me?   Let us but meet and thou shalt trembling know,   How fierce that wrath which bids my bosom glow:   If living flames express his boundless ire,   O'erwhelming waters quench consuming fire!   And deepest darkness, glooms of ten-fold night,   Fly from the piercing beams of radiant light."

  Hujír shrunk back with undissembled dread,   And thus communing with himself, he said--   "Shall I, regardless of my country, guide   To Rustem's tent this furious homicide?   And witness there destruction to our host?   The bulwark of the land for ever lost!   What Chief can then the Tartar power restrain!   Káús dethroned, the mighty Rustem slain!   Better a thousand deaths should lay me low,   Than, living, yield such triumph to the foe.   For in this struggle should my blood be shed,   No foul dishonour can pursue me, dead;   No lasting shame my father's age oppress,   Whom eighty sons of martial courage bless![36]   They for their brother slain, incensed will rise,   And pour their vengeance on my enemies."   Then thus aloud--"Can idle words avail?   Why still of Rustem urge the frequent tale?   Why for the elephant-bodied hero ask?   Thee, he will find--no uncongenial task.   Why seek pretences to destroy my life?   Strike, for no Rustem views th' unequal strife!"

  Sohráb confused, with hopeless anguish mourned,   Back from the lofty walls he quick returned,   And stood amazed.

                    Now war and vengeance claim,   Collected thought and deeds of mighty name;   The jointed mail his vigorous body clasps,   His sinewy hand the shining javelin grasps;   Like a mad elephant he meets the foe,   His steed a moving mountain--deeply glow   His cheeks with passionate ardour, as he flies   Resistless onwards, and with sparkling eyes,   Full on the centre drives his daring horse--[37]   The yielding Persians fly his furious course;   As the wild ass impetuous springs away,   When the fierce lion thunders on his prey.   By every sign of strength and martial power,   They think him Rustem in his direst hour;   On Káús now his proud defiance falls,   Scornful to him the stripling warrior calls:   "And why art thou misnamed of royal strain?   What work of thine befits the tented plain?   This thirsty javelin seeks thy coward breast;   Thou and thy thousands doomed to endless rest.   True to my oath, which time can never change,   On thee, proud King! I hurl my just revenge.   The blood of Zind inspires my burning hate,   And dire resentment hurries on thy fate;   Whom canst thou send to try the desperate strife?   What valiant Chief, regardless of his life?   Where now can Fríburz, Tús, Gíw, Gúdarz, be,   And the world-conquering Rustem, where is he?"

  No prompt reply from Persian lip ensued--   Then rushing on, with demon-strength endued,   Sohráb elate his javelin waved around,   And hurled the bright pavilion to the ground;   With horror Káús feels destruction nigh,   And cries: "For Rustem's needful succour fly!     This frantic Turk, triumphant on the plain,     Withers the souls of all my warrior train."   That instant Tús the mighty Champion sought,   And told the deeds the Tartar Chief had wrought;   "'Tis ever thus, the brainless Monarch's due!   Shame and disaster still his steps pursue!"   This saying, from his tent he soon descried,   The wild confusion spreading far and wide;   And saddled Rakush--whilst, in deep dismay,   Girgín incessant cried--"Speed, speed, away."   Rehám bound on the mace, Tús promptly ran,   And buckled on the broad Burgustuwán.   Rustem, meanwhile, the thickening tumult hears   And in his heart, untouched by human fears,   Says: "What is this, that feeling seems to stun!   This battle must be led by Ahirmun,[38]   The awful day of doom must have begun."   In haste he arms, and mounts his bounding steed,   The growing rage demands redoubled speed;   The leopard's skin he o'er his shoulders throws,   The regal girdle round his middle glows.[39]   High wave his glorious banners; broad revealed,   The pictured dragons glare along the field   Borne by Zúára. When, surprised, he views   Sohráb, endued with ample breast and thews,   Like Sám Suwár, he beckons him apart;   The youth advances with a gallant heart,   Willing to prove his adversary's might,   By single combat to decide the fight;   And eagerly, "Together brought," he cries,   "Remote from us be foemen, and allies,   And though at once by either host surveyed,   Ours be the strife which asks no mortal aid."

  Rustem, considerate, view'd him o'er and o'er,   So wondrous graceful was the form he bore,   And frankly said: "Experience flows with age,   And many a foe has felt my conquering rage;   Much have I seen, superior strength and art   Have borne my spear thro' many a demon's heart;   Only behold me on the battle plain,   Wait till thou see'st this hand the war sustain,   And if on thee should changeful fortune smile,   Thou needst not fear the monster of the Nile![40]   But soft compassion melts my soul to save,   A youth so blooming with a mind so brave!"

  The generous speech Sohráb attentive heard,   His heart expanding glowed at every word:   "One question answer, and in answering show,   That truth should ever from a warrior flow;   Art thou not Rustem, whose exploits sublime,   Endear his name thro' every distant clime?"

  "I boast no station of exalted birth,   No proud pretensions to distinguished worth;   To him inferior, no such powers are mine,   No offspring I of Nírum's glorious line!"[41]

  The prompt denial dampt his filial joy,   All hope at once forsook the Warrior-boy,   His opening day of pleasure, and the bloom   Of cherished life, immersed in shadowy gloom.   Perplexed with what his mother's words implied;--   A narrow space is now prepared, aside,   For single combat. With disdainful glance   Each boldly shakes his death-devoting lance,   And rushes forward to the dubious fight;   Thoughts high and brave their burning souls excite;   Now sword to sword; continuous strokes resound,   Till glittering fragments strew the dusty ground.   Each grasps his massive club with added force,[42]   The folding mail is rent from either horse;   It seemed as if the fearful day of doom   Had, clothed in all its withering terrors, come.   Their shattered corslets yield defence no more--   At length they breathe, defiled with dust and gore;   Their gasping throats with parching thirst are dry,   Gloomy and fierce they roll the lowering eye,   And frown defiance. Son and Father driven   To mortal strife! are these the ways of Heaven?   The various swarms which boundless ocean breeds,   The countless tribes which crop the flowery meads,   All know their kind, but hapless man alone   Has no instinctive feeling for his own!   Compell'd to pause, by every eye surveyed,   Rustem, with shame, his wearied strength betrayed;   Foil'd by a youth in battle's mid career,   His groaning spirit almost sunk with fear;   Recovering strength, again they fiercely meet;   Again they struggle with redoubled heat;   With bended bows they furious now contend;   And feather'd shafts in rattling showers descend;   Thick as autumnal leaves they strew the plain,   Harmless their points, and all their fury vain.   And now they seize each other's girdle-band;   Rustem, who, if he moved his iron hand,   Could shake a mountain, and to whom a rock   Seemed soft as wax, tried, with one mighty stroke,   To hurl him thundering from his fiery steed,   But Fate forbids the gallant youth should bleed;   Finding his wonted nerves relaxed, amazed   That hand he drops which never had been raised   Uncrowned with victory, even when demons fought,   And pauses, wildered with despairing thought.   Sohráb again springs with terrific grace,   And lifts, from saddle-bow, his ponderous mace;   With gather'd strength the quick-descending blow   Wounds in its fall, and stuns the unwary foe;   Then thus contemptuous: "All thy power is gone;   Thy charger's strength exhausted as thy own;   Thy bleeding wounds with pity I behold;   O seek no more the combat of the bold!"

  Rustem to this reproach made no reply,   But stood confused--meanwhile, tumultuously   The legions closed; with soul-appalling force,   Troop rushed on troop, o'erwhelming man and horse;   Sohráb, incensed, the Persian host engaged,   Furious along the scattered lines he raged;   Fierce as a wolf he rode on every side,   The thirsty earth with streaming gore was dyed.   Midst the Túránians, then, the Champion sped,   And like a tiger heaped the fields with dead.   But when the Monarch's danger struck his thought,   Returning swift, the stripling youth he sought;   Grieved to the soul, the mighty Champion view'd   His hands and mail with Persian blood imbrued;   And thus exclaimed with lion-voice--"O say,   Why with the Persians dost thou war to-day?   Why not with me alone decide the fight,   Thou'rt like a wolf that seek'st the fold by night."

  To this Sohráb his proud assent expressed--   And Rustem, answering, thus the youth addressed.   "Night-shadows now are thickening o'er the plain,   The morrow's sun must see our strife again;   In wrestling let us then exert our might!"   He said, and eve's last glimmer sunk in night

  Thus as the skies a deeper gloom displayed,   The stripling's life was hastening into shade!

  The gallant heroes to their tents retired,   The sweets of rest their wearied limbs required:   Sohráb, delighted with his brave career,   Describes the fight in Húmán's anxious ear:   Tells how he forced unnumbered Chiefs to yield,   And stood himself the victor of the field!   "But let the morrow's dawn," he cried, "arrive,   And not one Persian shall the day survive;   Meanwhile let wine its strengthening balm impart,   And add new zeal to every drooping heart."   The valiant Gíw with Rustem pondering stood,   And, sad, recalled the scene of death and blood;   Grief and amazement heaved the frequent sigh,   And almost froze the crimson current dry.   Rustem, oppressed by Gíw's desponding thought,   Amidst his Chiefs the mournful Monarch sought;   To him he told Sohráb's tremendous sway,   The dire misfortunes of this luckless day;   Told with what grasping force he tried, in vain,   To hurl the wondrous stripling to the plain:   "The whispering zephyr might as well aspire   To shake a mountain--such his strength and fire.   But night came on--and, by agreement, we   Must meet again to-morrow--who shall be   Victorious, Heaven knows only:--for by Heaven,   Victory or death to man is ever given."   This said, the King, o'erwhelmed in deep despair,   Passed the dread night in agony and prayer.

  The Champion, silent, joined his bands at rest,   And spurned at length despondence from his breast;   Removed from all, he cheered Zúára's heart,   And nerved his soul to bear a trying part:--   "Ere early morning gilds the ethereal plain,   In martial order range my warrior-train;   And when I meet in all his glorious pride,   This valiant Turk whom late my rage defied,   Should fortune's smiles my arduous task requite,   Bring them to share the triumph of my might;   But should success the stripling's arm attend,   And dire defeat and death my glories end,   To their loved homes my brave associates guide;   Let bowery Zábul all their sorrows hide--   Comfort my venerable father's heart;   In gentlest words my heavy fate impart.   The dreadful tidings to my mother bear,   And soothe her anguish with the tenderest care;   Say, that the will of righteous Heaven decreed,   That thus in arms her mighty son should bleed.   Enough of fame my various toils acquired,   When warring demons, bathed in blood, expired.   Were life prolonged a thousand lingering years,   Death comes at last and ends our mortal fears;   Kirshásp, and Sám, and Narímán, the best   And bravest heroes, who have ever blest   This fleeting world, were not endued with power,   To stay the march of fate one single hour;   The world for them possessed no fixed abode,   The path to death's cold regions must be trod;   Then, why lament the doom ordained for all?   Thus Jemshíd fell, and thus must Rustem fall."

  When the bright dawn proclaimed the rising day,   The warriors armed, impatient of delay;   But first Sohráb, his proud confederate nigh,   Thus wistful spoke, as swelled the boding sigh--   "Now, mark my great antagonist in arms!   His noble form my filial bosom warms;   My mother's tokens shine conspicuous here,   And all the proofs my heart demands, appear;   Sure this is Rustem, whom my eyes engage!   Shall I, O grief! provoke my Father's rage?   Offended Nature then would curse my name,   And shuddering nations echo with my shame."   He ceased, then Húmán: "Vain, fantastic thought,   Oft have I been where Persia's Champion fought;   And thou hast heard, what wonders he performed,   When, in his prime, Mázinderán was stormed;   That horse resembles Rustem's, it is true,   But not so strong, nor beautiful to view."

  Sohráb now buckles on his war attire,   His heart all softness, and his brain all fire;   Around his lips such smiles benignant played,   He seemed to greet a friend, as thus he said:--   "Here let us sit together on the plain,   Here, social sit, and from the fight refrain;   Ask we from heaven forgiveness of the past,   And bind our souls in friendship that may last;   Ours be the feast--let us be warm and free,   For powerful instinct draws me still to thee;   Fain would my heart in bland affection join,   Then let thy generous ardour equal mine;   And kindly say, with whom I now contend--   What name distinguished boasts my warrior-friend!   Thy name unfit for champion brave to hide,   Thy name so long, long sought, and still denied;   Say, art thou Rustem, whom I burn to know?   Ingenuous say, and cease to be my foe!"

  Sternly the mighty Champion cried, "Away--   Hence with thy wiles--now practised to delay;   The promised struggle, resolute, I claim,   Then cease to move me to an act of shame."   Sohráb rejoined--"Old man! thou wilt not hear   The words of prudence uttered in thine ear;   Then, Heaven! look on."

                           Preparing for the shock,   Each binds his charger to a neighbouring rock;   And girds his loins, and rubs his wrists, and tries   Their suppleness and force, with angry eyes;   And now they meet--now rise, and now descend,   And strong and fierce their sinewy arms extend;   Wrestling with all their strength they grasp and strain,   And blood and sweat flow copious on the plain;   Like raging elephants they furious close;   Commutual wounds are given, and wrenching blows.   Sohráb now clasps his hands, and forward springs   Impatiently, and round the Champion clings;   Seizes his girdle belt, with power to tear   The very earth asunder; in despair   Rustem, defeated, feels his nerves give way,   And thundering falls. Sohráb bestrides his prey:   Grim as the lion, prowling through the wood,   Upon a wild ass springs, and pants for blood.   His lifted sword had lopt the gory head,   But Rustem, quick, with crafty ardour said:--   "One moment, hold! what, are our laws unknown?   A Chief may fight till he is twice o'erthrown;   The second fall, his recreant blood is spilt,   These are our laws, avoid the menaced guilt."

  Proud of his strength, and easily deceived,   The wondering youth the artful tale believed;   Released his prey, and, wild as wind or wave,   Neglecting all the prudence of the brave,   Turned from the place, nor once the strife renewed,   But bounded o'er the plain and other cares pursued,   As if all memory of the war had died,   All thoughts of him with whom his strength was tried.

  Húmán, confounded at the stripling's stay,   Went forth, and heard the fortune of the day;   Amazed to find the mighty Rustem freed,   With deepest grief he wailed the luckless deed.   "What! loose a raging lion from the snare,   And let him growling hasten to his lair?   Bethink thee well; in war, from this unwise,   This thoughtless act what countless woes may rise;   Never again suspend the final blow,   Nor trust the seeming weakness of a foe!"[43]   "Hence with complaint," the dauntless youth replied,   "To-morrow's contest shall his fate decide."

  When Rustem was released, in altered mood   He sought the coolness of the murmuring flood;   There quenched his thirst; and bathed his limbs, and prayed,   Beseeching Heaven to yield its strengthening aid.   His pious prayer indulgent Heaven approved,   And growing strength through all his sinews moved;[44]   Such as erewhile his towering structure knew,   When his bold arm unconquered demons slew.   Yet in his mien no confidence appeared,   No ardent hope his wounded spirits cheered.

  Again they met. A glow of youthful grace,   Diffused its radiance o'er the stripling's face,   And when he saw in renovated guise,   The foe so lately mastered; with surprise,   He cried--"What! rescued from my power, again   Dost thou confront me on the battle plain?   Or, dost thou, wearied, draw thy vital breath,   And seek, from warrior bold, the shaft of death?   Truth has no charms for thee, old man; even now,   Some further cheat may lurk upon thy brow;   Twice have I shown thee mercy, twice thy age   Hath been thy safety--twice it soothed my rage."   Then mild the Champion: "Youth is proud and vain!   The idle boast a warrior would disdain;   This aged arm perhaps may yet control,   The wanton fury that inflames thy soul!"

  Again, dismounting, each the other viewed   With sullen glance, and swift the fight renewed;   Clenched front to front, again they tug and bend,   Twist their broad limbs as every nerve would rend;   With rage convulsive Rustem grasps him round;   Bends his strong back, and hurls him to the ground;   Him, who had deemed the triumph all his own;   But dubious of his power to keep him down,   Like lightning quick he gives the deadly thrust,   And spurns the Stripling weltering in the dust.   --Thus as his blood that shining steel imbrues,   Thine too shall flow, when Destiny pursues;[45]   For when she marks the victim of her power,   A thousand daggers speed the dying hour.   Writhing with pain Sohráb in murmurs sighed--   And thus to Rustem--"Vaunt not, in thy pride;   Upon myself this sorrow have I brought,   Thou but the instrument of fate--which wrought   My downfall; thou are guiltless--guiltless quite;   O! had I seen my father in the fight,   My glorious father! Life will soon be o'er,   And his great deeds enchant my soul no more!   Of him my mother gave the mark and sign,   For him I sought, and what an end is mine!   My only wish on earth, my constant sigh,   Him to behold, and with that wish I die.   But hope not to elude his piercing sight,   In vain for thee the deepest glooms of night;   Couldst thou through Ocean's depths for refuge fly,   Or midst the star-beams track the upper sky!   Rustem, with vengeance armed, will reach thee there,   His soul the prey of anguish and despair."

  An icy horror chills the Champion's heart,   His brain whirls round with agonizing smart;   O'er his wan cheek no gushing sorrows flow,   Senseless he sinks beneath the weight of woe;   Relieved at length, with frenzied look, he cries:   "Prove thou art mine, confirm my doubting eyes!   For I am Rustem!" Piercing was the groan,   Which burst from his torn heart--as wild and lone,   He gazed upon him. Dire amazement shook   The dying youth, and mournful thus he spoke:   "If thou art Rustem, cruel is thy part,   No warmth paternal seems to fill thy heart;   Else hadst thou known me when, with strong desire,   I fondly claimed thee for my valiant sire;   Now from my body strip the shining mail,   Untie these bands, ere life and feeling fail;   And on my arm the direful proof behold!   Thy sacred bracelet of refulgent gold!   When the loud brazen drums were heard afar,   And, echoing round, proclaimed the pending war,   Whilst parting tears my mother's eyes o'erflowed,   This mystic gift her bursting heart bestowed:   'Take this,' she said, 'thy father's token wear,   And promised glory will reward thy care.'   The hour is come, but fraught with bitterest woe,   We meet in blood to wail the fatal blow."

  The loosened mail unfolds the bracelet bright,   Unhappy gift! to Rustem's wildered sight,   Prostrate he falls--"By my unnatural hand,   My son, my son is slain--and from the land   Uprooted."--Frantic, in the dust his hair   He rends in agony and deep despair;   The western sun had disappeared in gloom,   And still, the Champion wept his cruel doom;   His wondering legions marked the long delay,   And, seeing Rakush riderless astray,   The rumour quick to Persia's Monarch spread,   And there described the mighty Rustem dead.   Káús, alarmed, the fatal tidings hears;   His bosom quivers with increasing fears.   "Speed, speed, and see what has befallen to-day   To cause these groans and tears--what fatal fray!   If he be lost, if breathless on the ground,   And this young warrior, with the conquest crowned--   Then must I, humbled, from my kingdom torn,   Wander like Jemshíd, through the world forlorn."[46]

  The army roused, rushed o'er the dusty plain,   Urged by the Monarch to revenge the slain;   Wild consternation saddened every face,   Tús winged with horror sought the fatal place,   And there beheld the agonizing sight--   The murderous end of that unnatural fight.   Sohráb, still breathing, hears the shrill alarms,   His gentle speech suspends the clang of arms:   "My light of life now fluttering sinks in shade,   Let vengeance sleep, and peaceful vows be made.   Beseech the King to spare this Tartar host,   For they are guiltless, all to them is lost;   I led them on, their souls with glory fired,   While mad ambition all my thoughts inspired.   In search of thee, the world before my eyes,   War was my choice, and thou the sacred prize;   With thee, my sire! in virtuous league combined,   No tyrant King should persecute mankind.   That hope is past--the storm has ceased to rave--   My ripening honours wither in the grave;   Then let no vengeance on my comrades fall,   Mine was the guilt, and mine the sorrow, all;   How often have I sought thee--oft my mind   Figured thee to my sight--o'erjoyed to find   My mother's token; disappointment came,   When thou denied thy lineage and thy name;   Oh! still o'er thee my soul impassioned hung,   Still to my father fond affection clung!   But fate, remorseless, all my hopes withstood,   And stained thy reeking hands in kindred blood."

  His faltering breath protracted speech denied:   Still from his eye-lids flowed a gushing tide;   Through Rustem's soul redoubled horror ran,   Heart-rending thoughts subdued the mighty man,   And now, at last, with joy-illumined eye,   The Zábul bands their glorious Chief descry;   But when they saw his pale and haggard look,   Knew from what mournful cause he gazed and shook,   With downcast mien they moaned and wept aloud;   While Rustem thus addressed the weeping crowd   "Here ends the war! let gentle peace succeed,   Enough of death, I--I have done the deed!"   Then to his brother, groaning deep, he said--   "O what a curse upon a parent's head!   But go--and to the Tartar say--no more,   Let war between us steep the earth with gore."   Zúára flew and wildly spoke his grief,   To crafty Húmán, the Túránian Chief,   Who, with dissembled sorrow, heard him tell   The dismal tidings which he knew too well;   "And who," he said, "has caused these tears to flow?   Who, but Hujír? He might have stayed the blow,   But when Sohráb his Father's banners sought;   He still denied that here the Champion fought;   He spread the ruin, he the secret knew,   Hence should his crime receive the vengeance due!"   Zúára, frantic, breathed in Rustem's ear,   The treachery of the captive Chief, Hujír;   Whose headless trunk had weltered on the strand,   But prayers and force withheld the lifted hand.   Then to his dying son the Champion turned,   Remorse more deep within his bosom burned;   A burst of frenzy fired his throbbing brain;   He clenched his sword, but found his fury vain;   The Persian Chiefs the desperate act represt,   And tried to calm the tumult in his breast:   Thus Gúdarz spoke--"Alas! wert thou to give   Thyself a thousand wounds, and cease to live;   What would it be to him thou sorrowest o'er?   It would not save one pang--then weep no more;   For if removed by death, O say, to whom   Has ever been vouchsafed a different doom?   All are the prey of death--the crowned, the low,   And man, through life, the victim still of woe."   Then Rustem: "Fly! and to the King relate,   The pressing horrors which involve my fate;   And if the memory of my deeds e'er swayed   His mind, O supplicate his generous aid;   A sovereign balm he has whose wondrous power,   All wounds can heal, and fleeting life restore;[47]   Swift from his tent the potent medicine bring."   --But mark the malice of the brainless King!   Hard as the flinty rock, he stern denies   The healthful draught, and gloomy thus replies:   "Can I forgive his foul and slanderous tongue?   The sharp disdain on me contemptuous flung?   Scorned 'midst my army by a shameless boy,   Who sought my throne, my sceptre to destroy!   Nothing but mischief from his heart can flow,   Is it, then, wise to cherish such a foe?   The fool who warms his enemy to life,   Only prepares for scenes of future strife."

  Gúdarz, returning, told the hopeless tale--   And thinking Rustem's presence might prevail;   The Champion rose, but ere he reached the throne,   Sohráb had breathed the last expiring groan.

  Now keener anguish rack'd the father's mind,   Reft of his son, a murderer of his kind;   His guilty sword distained with filial gore,   He beat his burning breast, his hair he tore;   The breathless corse before his shuddering view,   A shower of ashes o'er his head he threw;   "In my old age," he cried, "what have I done?   Why have I slain my son, my innocent son!   Why o'er his splendid dawning did I roll   The clouds of death--and plunge my burthened soul   In agony? My son! from heroes sprung;   Better these hands were from my body wrung;   And solitude and darkness, deep and drear,   Fold me from sight than hated linger here.   But when his mother hears, with horror wild,   That I have shed the life-blood of her child,   So nobly brave, so dearly loved, in vain,   How can her heart that rending shock sustain?"

  Now on a bier the Persian warriors place   The breathless Youth, and shade his pallid face;   And turning from that fatal field away,   Move towards the Champion's home in long array.   Then Rustem, sick of martial pomp and show,   Himself the spring of all this scene of woe,   Doomed to the flames the pageantry he loved,   Shield, spear, and mace, so oft in battle proved;   Now lost to all, encompassed by despair;   His bright pavilion crackling blazed in air;   The sparkling throne the ascending column fed;   In smoking fragments fell the golden bed;   The raging fire red glimmering died away,   And all the Warrior's pride in dust and ashes lay.

  Káús, the King, now joins the mournful Chief,   And tries to soothe his deep and settled grief;   For soon or late we yield our vital breath,   And all our worldly troubles end in death!   "When first I saw him, graceful in his might,   He looked far other than a Tartar knight;   Wondering I gazed--now Destiny has thrown   Him on thy sword--he fought, and he is gone;   And should even Heaven against the earth be hurled,   Or fire inwrap in crackling flames the world,   That which is past--we never can restore,   His soul has travelled to some happier shore.   Alas! no good from sorrow canst thou reap,   Then wherefore thus in gloom and misery weep?"

  But Rustem's mighty woes disdained his aid,   His heart was drowned in grief, and thus he said:   "Yes, he is gone! to me for ever lost!   O then protect his brave unguided host;   From war removed and this detested place,   Let them, unharmed, their mountain-wilds retrace;   Bid them secure my brother's will obey,   The careful guardian of their weary way,[48]   To where the Jihún's distant waters stray."   To this the King: "My soul is sad to see   Thy hopeless grief--but, since approved by thee,   The war shall cease--though the Túránian brand   Has spread dismay and terror through the land."

  The King, appeased, no more with vengeance burned,   The Tartar legions to their homes returned;   The Persian warriors, gathering round the dead,   Grovelled in dust, and tears of sorrow shed;   Then back to loved Irán their steps the monarch led.

  But Rustem, midst his native bands, remained,   And further rites of sacrifice maintained;   A thousand horses bled at his command,   And the torn drums were scattered o'er the sand;   And now through Zábul's deep and bowery groves,   In mournful pomp the sad procession moves.   The mighty Chief on foot precedes the bier;   His Warrior-friends, in grief assembled near:   The dismal cadence rose upon the gale,   And Zál astonished heard the piercing wail;   He and his kindred joined the solemn train;   Hung round the bier and wondering viewed the slain.   "There gaze, and weep!" the sorrowing Father said,   "For there, behold my glorious offspring dead!"   The hoary Sire shrunk backward with surprise,   And tears of blood o'erflowed his aged eyes;   And now the Champion's rural palace gate   Receives the funeral group in gloomy state;   Rúdábeh loud bemoaned the Stripling's doom;   Sweet flower, all drooping in the hour of bloom,   His tender youth in distant bowers had past,   Sheltered at home he felt no withering blast;   In the soft prison of his mother's arms,   Secure from danger and the world's alarms.   O ruthless Fortune! flushed with generous pride,   He sought his sire, and thus unhappy, died.

  Rustem again the sacred bier unclosed;   Again Sohráb to public view exposed;   Husbands, and wives, and warriors, old and young,   Struck with amaze, around the body hung,   With garments rent and loosely flowing hair;   Their shrieks and clamours filled the echoing air;   Frequent they cried: "Thus Sám the Champion slept!   Thus sleeps Sohráb!" Again they groaned, and wept.

  Now o'er the corpse a yellow robe is spread,   The aloes bier is closed upon the dead;   And, to preserve the hapless hero's name,   Fragrant and fresh, that his unblemished fame   Might live and bloom through all succeeding days,   A mound sepulchral on the spot they raise,   Formed like a charger's hoof.

                                 In every ear   The story has been told--and many a tear,   Shed at the sad recital. Through Túrán,   Afrásiyáb's wide realm, and Samengán,   Deep sunk the tidings--nuptial bower, and bed,   And all that promised happiness, had fled!

  But when Tahmíneh heard this tale of woe,   Think how a mother bore the mortal blow!   Distracted, wild, she sprang from place to place;   With frenzied hands deformed her beauteous face;   The musky locks her polished temples crowned.   Furious she tore, and flung upon the ground;   Starting, in agony of grief, she gazed--   Her swimming eyes to Heaven imploring raised;   And groaning cried: "Sole comfort of my life!   Doomed the sad victim of unnatural strife,   Where art thou now with dust and blood defiled?   Thou darling boy, my lost, my murdered child!   When thou wert gone--how, night and lingering day,   Did thy fond mother watch the time away;   For hope still pictured all I wished to see,   Thy father found, and thou returned to me,   Yes--thou, exulting in thy father's fame!   And yet, nor sire nor son, nor tidings, came:   How could I dream of this? ye met--but how?   That noble aspect--that ingenuous brow,   Moved not a nerve in him--ye met--to part,   Alas! the life-blood issuing from the heart   Short was the day which gave to me delight,   Soon, soon, succeeds a long and dismal night;   On whom shall now devolve my tender care?   Who, loved like thee, my bosom-sorrows share?   Whom shall I take to fill thy vacant place,   To whom extend a mother's soft embrace?   Sad fate! for one so young, so fair, so brave,   Seeking thy father thus to find a grave.   These arms no more shall fold thee to my breast,   No more with thee my soul be doubly blest;   No, drowned in blood thy lifeless body lies,   For ever torn from these desiring eyes;   Friendless, alone, beneath a foreign sky,   Thy mail thy death-clothes--and thy father, by;   Why did not I conduct thee on the way,   And point where Rustem's bright pavilion lay?   Thou hadst the tokens--why didst thou withhold   Those dear remembrances--that pledge of gold?   Hadst thou the bracelet to his view restored,   Thy precious blood had never stained his sword."

  The strong emotion choked her panting breath,   Her veins seemed withered by the cold of death:   The trembling matrons hastening round her mourned,   With piercing cries, till fluttering life returned;   Then gazing up, distraught, she wept again,   And frantic, seeing 'midst her pitying train,   The favourite steed--now more than ever dear,   The hoofs she kissed, and bathed with many a tear;   Clasping the mail Sohráb in battle wore,   With burning lips she kissed it o'er and o'er;   His martial robes she in her arms comprest,   And like an infant strained them to her breast;   The reins, and trappings, club, and spear, were brought,   The sword, and shield, with which the Stripling fought,   These she embraced with melancholy joy,   In sad remembrance of her darling boy.   And still she beat her face, and o'er them hung,   As in a trance--or to them wildly clung--   Day after day she thus indulged her grief,   Night after night, disdaining all relief;   At length worn out--from earthly anguish riven,   The mother's spirit joined her child in Heaven.



THE STORY OF SAIÁWUSH

Early one morning as the cock crew, Tús arose, and accompanied by Gíw and Gúdarz and a company of horsemen, proceeded on a hunting excursion, not far from the banks of the Jihún, where, after ranging about the forest for some time, they happened to fall in with a damsel of extreme beauty, with smiling lips, blooming cheeks, and fascinating mien. They said to her:

  "Never was seen so sweet a flower,   In garden, vale, or fairy bower;   The moon is on thy lovely face,   Thy cypress-form is full of grace;   But why, with charms so soft and meek,   Dost thou the lonely forest seek?"

She replied that her father was a violent man, and that she had left her home to escape his anger. She had crossed the river Jihún, and had travelled several leagues on foot, in consequence of her horse being too much fatigued to bear her farther. She had at that time been three days in the forest. On being questioned respecting her parentage, she said her father's name was Shíwer, of the race of Feridún. Many sovereigns had been suitors for her hand, but she did not approve of one of them. At last he wanted to marry her to Poshang, the ruler of Túrán, but she refused him on account of his ugliness and bad temper! This she said was the cause of her father's violence, and of her flight from home.

  "But when his angry mood is o'er,   He'll love his daughter as before;   And send his horsemen far and near,   To take me to my mother dear;   Therefore, I would not further stray,   But here, without a murmur, stay."

The hearts of both Tús and Gíw were equally inflamed with love for the damsel, and each was equally determined to support his own pretensions, in consequence of which a quarrel arose between them. At length it was agreed to refer the matter to the king, and to abide by his decision. When, however, the king beheld the lovely object of contention, he was not disposed to give her to either claimant, but without hesitation took her to himself, after having first ascertained that she was of distinguished family and connection. In due time a son was born to him, who was, according to the calculations of the astrologers, of wonderful promise, and named Saiáwush. The prophecies about his surprising virtues, and his future renown, made Káús anxious that justice should be done to his opening talents, and he was highly gratified when Rustem agreed to take him to Zábulistán, and there instruct him in all the accomplishments which were suitable to his illustrious rank. He was accordingly taught horsemanship and archery, how to conduct himself at banquets, how to hunt with the falcon and the leopard, and made familiar with the manners and duty of kings, and the hardy chivalry of the age. His progress in the attainment of every species of knowledge and science was surprising, and in hunting he never stooped to the pursuit of animals inferior to the lion or the tiger. It was not long before the youth felt anxious to pay a visit to his father, and Rustem willingly complying with his wishes, accompanied his accomplished pupil to the royal court, where they were both received with becoming distinction, Saiáwush having fulfilled Káús's expectations in the highest degree, and the king's gratitude to the champion being in proportion to the eminent merit of his services on the interesting occasion. After this, however, preceptors were continued to enlighten his mind seven years longer, and then he was emancipated from further application and study.

One day Súdáveh, the daughter of the Sháh of Hámáverán, happening to see Saiáwush sitting with his father, the beauty of his person made an instantaneous impression on her heart,

  The fire of love consumed her breast,   The thoughts of him denied her rest.   For him alone she pined in grief,   From him alone she sought relief,   And called him to her secret bower,   To while away the passing hour:   But Saiáwush refused the call,   He would not shame his father's hall.

The enamoured Súdáveh, however, was not to be disappointed without further effort, and on a subsequent day she boldly went to the king, and praising the character and attainments of his son, proposed that he should be united in marriage to one of the damsels of royal lineage under her care. For the pretended purpose therefore of making his choice, she requested he might be sent to the harem, to see all the ladies and fix on one the most suited to his taste. The king approved of the proposal, and intimated it to Saiáwush; but Saiáwush was modest, timid, and bashful, and mentally suspected in this overture some artifice of Súdáveh. He accordingly hesitated, but the king overcame his scruples, and the youth at length repaired to the shubistán, as the retired apartments of the women are called, with fear and trembling. When he entered within the precincts of the sacred place, he was surprised by the richness and magnificence of everything that struck his sight. He was delighted with the company of beautiful women, and he observed Súdáveh sitting on a splendid throne in an interior chamber, like Heaven in beauty and loveliness, with a coronet on her head, and her hair floating round her in musky ringlets. Seeing him she descended gracefully, and clasping him in her arms, kissed his eyes and face with such ardor and enthusiasm that he thought proper to retire from her endearments and mix among the other damsels, who placed him on a golden chair and kept him in agreeable conversation for some time. After this pleasing interview he returned to the king, and gave him a very favorable account of his reception, and the heavenly splendor of the retirement, worthy of Jemshíd, Feridún, or Húsheng, which gladdened his father's heart. Káús repeated to him his wish that he would at once choose one of the lights of the harem for his wife, as the astrologers had prophesied on his marriage the birth of a prince. But Saiáwush endeavored to excuse himself from going again to Súdáveh's apartments. The king smiled at his weakness, and assured him that Súdáveh was alone anxious for his happiness, upon which the youth found himself again in her power. She was surrounded by the damsels as before, but, whilst his eyes were cast down, they shortly disappeared, leaving him and the enamoured Súdáveh together. She soon approached him, and lovingly said:--

  "O why the secret keep from one,   Whose heart is fixed on thee alone!   Say who thou art, from whom descended,   Some Peri with a mortal blended.   For every maid who sees that face,   That cypress-form replete with grace,   Becomes a victim to the wiles   Which nestle in those dimpled smiles;   Becomes thy own adoring slave,   Whom nothing but thy love can save."

To this Saiáwush made no reply. The history of the adventure of Káús at Hámáverán, and what the king and his warriors endured in consequence of the treachery of the father of Súdáveh, flashed upon his mind. He therefore was full of apprehension, and breathed not a word in answer to her fondness. Súdáveh observing his silence and reluctance, threw away from herself the veil of modesty,

  And said: "O be my own, for I am thine,   And clasp me in thy arms!" And then she sprang   To the astonished boy, and eagerly   Kissed his deep crimsoned cheek, which filled his soul   With strange confusion. "When the king is dead,   O take me to thyself; see how I stand,   Body and soul devoted unto thee."   In his heart he said: "This never can be:   This is a demon's work--shall I be treacherous?   What! to my own dear father? Never, never;   I will not thus be tempted by the devil;   Yet must I not be cold to this wild woman,   For fear of further folly."

Saiáwush then expressed his readiness to be united in marriage to her daughter, and to no other; and when this intelligence was conveyed to Káús by Súdáveh herself, His Majesty was extremely pleased, and munificently opened his treasury on the happy occasion. But Súdáveh still kept in view her own design, and still laboring for its success, sedulously read her own incantations to prevent disappointment, at any rate to punish the uncomplying youth if she failed. On another day she sent for him, and exclaimed:--

  "I cannot now dissemble; since I saw thee   I seem to be as dead--my heart all withered.   Seven years have passed in unrequited love--   Seven long, long years. O! be not still obdurate,   But with the generous impulse of affection,   Oh, bless my anxious spirit, or, refusing,   Thy life will be in peril; thou shalt die!"   "Never," replied the youth; "O, never, never;   Oh, ask me not, for this can never be."

Saiáwush then rose to depart precipitately, but Súdáveh observing him, endeavored to cling round him and arrest his flight. The endeavor, however, was fruitless; and finding at length her situation desperate, she determined to turn the adventure into her own favor, by accusing Saiáwush of an atrocious outrage on her own person and virtue. She accordingly tore her dress, screamed aloud, and rushed out of her apartment to inform Káús of the indignity she had suffered. Among her women the most clamorous lamentations arose, and echoed on every side. The king, on hearing that Saiáwush had preferred Súdáveh to her daughter, and that he had meditated so abominable an offence, thought that death alone could expiate his crime. He therefore summoned him to his presence; but satisfied that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain the truth of the case from either party concerned, he had recourse to a test which he thought would be infallible and conclusive. He first smelt the hands of Saiáwush, and then his garments, which had the scent of rose-water; and then he took the garments of Súdáveh, which, on the contrary, had a strong flavor of wine and musk. Upon this discovery, the king resolved on the death of Súdáveh, being convinced of the falsehood of the accusation she had made against his son. But when his indignation subsided, he was induced on various accounts to forego that resolution. Yet he said to her, "I am sure that Saiáwush is innocent, but let that remain concealed."--Súdáveh, however, persisted in asserting his guilt, and continually urged him to punish the reputed offender, but without being attended to.

At length he resolved to ascertain the innocence of Saiáwush by the ordeal of fire; and the fearless youth prepared to undergo the terrible trial to which he was sentenced, telling his father to be under no alarm.

  "The truth (and its reward I claim),   Will bear me safe through fiercest flame."

A tremendous fire was accordingly lighted on the adjacent plain, which blazed to an immense distance. The youth was attired in his golden helmet and a white robe, and mounted on a black horse. He put up a prayer to the Almighty for protection, and then rushed amidst the conflagration, as collectedly as if the act had been entirely free from peril. When Súdáveh heard the confused exclamations that were uttered at that moment, she hurried upon the terrace of the palace and witnessed the appalling sight, and in the fondness of her heart, wished even that she could share his fate, the fate of him of whom she was so deeply enamoured. The king himself fell from his throne in horror on seeing him surrounded and enveloped in the flames, from which there seemed no chance of extrication; but the gallant youth soon rose up, like the moon from the bursting element, and went through the ordeal unharmed and untouched by the fire. Káús, on coming to his senses, rejoiced exceedingly on the happy occasion, and his severest anger was directed against Súdáveh, whom he now determined to put to death, not only for her own guilt, but for exposing his son to such imminent danger. The noble youth, however, interceded for her. Súdáveh, notwithstanding, still continued to practise her charms and incantations in secret, to the end that Saiáwush might be put out of the way; and in this pursuit she was indeed indefatigable.

Suddenly intelligence was received that Afrásiyáb had assembled another army, for the purpose of making an irruption into Irán; and Káús, seeing that a Tartar could neither be bound by promise nor oath, resolved that he would on this occasion take the field himself, penetrate as far as Balkh, and seizing the country, make an example of the inhabitants. But Saiáwush perceiving in this prospect of affairs an opportunity of becoming free from the machinations and witchery of Súdáveh, earnestly requested to be employed, adding that, with the advice and bravery of Rustem, he would be sure of success. The king referred the matter to Rustem, who candidly declared that there was no necessity whatever for His Majesty proceeding personally to the war; and upon this assurance he threw open his treasury, and supplied all the resources of the empire to equip the troops appointed to accompany them. After one month the army marched toward Balkh, the point of attack.

On the other side Gersíwaz, the ruler of Balghar, joined the Tartar legions at Balkh, commanded by Bármán, who both sallied forth to oppose the Persian host, and after a conflict of three days were defeated, and obliged to abandon the fort. When the accounts of this calamity reached Afrásiyáb, he was seized with the utmost terror, which was increased by a dreadful dream. He thought he was in a forest abounding with serpents, and that the air was darkened by the appearance of countless eagles. The ground was parched up with heat, and a whirlwind hurled down his tent and overthrew his banners. On every side flowed a river of blood, and the whole of his army had been defeated and butchered in his sight. He was afterwards taken prisoner, and ignominiously conducted to Káús, in whose company he beheld a gallant youth, not more than fourteen years of age, who, the moment he saw him, plunged a dagger in his loins, and with the scream of agony produced by the wound, he awoke. Gersíwaz had in the meantime returned with the remnant of his force; and being informed of these particulars, endeavored to console Afrásiyáb, by assuring him that the true interpretation of dreams was the reverse of appearances. But Afrásiyáb was not to be consoled in this manner. He referred to his astrologers, who, however, hesitated, and were unwilling to afford an explanation of the mysterious vision. At length one of them, upon the solicited promise that the king would not punish him for divulging the truth, described the nature of the warning implied in what had been witnessed.

  "And now I throw aside the veil,   Which hides the darkly shadowed tale.   Led by a prince of prosperous star,   The Persian legions speed to war,   And in his horoscope we scan   The lordly victor of Túrán.   If thou shouldst to the conflict rush,   Opposed to conquering Saiáwush,   Thy Turkish cohorts will be slain,   And all thy saving efforts vain.   For if he, in the threatened strife,   Should haply chance to lose his life;   Thy country's fate will be the same,   Stripped of its throne and diadem."

Afrásiyáb was satisfied with this interpretation, and felt the prudence of avoiding a war so pregnant with evil consequences to himself and his kingdom. He therefore deputed Gersíwaz to the headquarters of Saiáwush, with splendid presents, consisting of horses richly caparisoned, armor, swords, and other costly articles, and a written dispatch, proposing a termination to hostilities.

In the meantime Saiáwush was anxious to pursue the enemy across the Jihún, but was dissuaded by his friends. When Gersíwaz arrived on his embassy he was received with distinction, and the object of his mission being understood, a secret council was held upon what answer should be given. It was then deemed proper to demand: first, one hundred distinguished heroes as hostages; and secondly, the restoration of all the provinces which the Túránians had taken from Irán. Gersíwaz sent immediately to Afrásiyáb to inform him of the conditions required, and without the least delay they were approved. A hundred warriors were soon on their way; and Bokhára, and Samerkánd, and Haj, and the Punjáb, were faithfully delivered over to Saiáwush. Afrásiyáb himself retired towards Gungduz, saying, "I have had a terrible dream, and I will surrender whatever may be required from me, rather than go to war."

The negotiations being concluded, Saiáwush sent a letter to his father by the hands of Rustem. Rumor, however, had already told Káús of Afrásiyáb's dream, and the terror he had been thrown into in consequence. The astrologers in his service having prognosticated from it the certain ruin of the Túránian king, the object of Rustem's mission was directly contrary to the wishes of Káús; but Rustem contended that the policy was good, and the terms were good, and he thereby incurred His Majesty's displeasure. On this account Káús appointed Tús the leader of the Persian army, and commanded him to march against Afrásiyáb, ordering Saiáwush at the same time to return, and bring with him his hundred hostages. At this command Saiáwush was grievously offended, and consulted with his chieftains, Báhrám, and Zinga, and Sháwerán, on the fittest course to be pursued, saying, "I have pledged my word to the fulfilment of the terms, and what will the world say if I do not keep my faith?" The chiefs tried to quiet his mind, and recommended him to write again to Káús, expressing his readiness to renew the war, and return the hundred hostages. But Saiáwush was in a different humor, and thought as Tús had been actually appointed to the command of the Persian army, it would be most advisable for him to abandon his country and join Afrásiyáb. The chiefs, upon hearing this singular resolution, unanimously attempted to dissuade him from pursuing so wild a course as throwing himself into the power of his enemy; but he was deaf to their entreaties, and in the stubbornness of his spirit, wrote to Afrásiyáb, informing him that Káús had refused to ratify the treaty of peace, that he was compelled to return the hostages, and even himself to seek protection in Túrán from the resentment of his father, the warrior Tús having been already entrusted with the charge of the army. This unexpected intelligence excited considerable surprise in the mind of Afrásiyáb, but he had no hesitation in selecting the course to be followed. The ambassadors, Zinga and Sháwerán, were soon furnished with a reply, which was to this effect:--"I settled the terms of peace with thee, not with thy father. With him I have nothing to do. If thy choice be retirement and tranquillity, thou shalt have a peaceful and independent province allotted to thee; but if war be thy object, I will furnish thee with a large army: thy father is old and infirm, and with the aid of Rustem, Persia will be an easy conquest." Having thus obtained the promised favor and support of Afrásiyáb, Saiáwush gave in charge to Báhrám the city of Balkh, the army and treasure, in order that they might be delivered over to Tús on his arrival; and taking with him three hundred chosen horsemen, passed the Jihún, in progress to the court of Afrásiyáb. On taking this decisive step, he again wrote to Káús, saying:--

  "From my youth upward I have suffered wrong.   At first Súdáveh, false and treacherous,   Sought to destroy my happiness and fame;   And thou hadst nearly sacrificed my life   To glut her vengeance. The astrologers   Were all unheeded, who pronounced me innocent,   And I was doomed to brave devouring fire,   To testify that I was free from guilt;   But God was my deliverer! Victory now   Has marked my progress. Balkh, and all its spoils,   Are mine, and so reduced the enemy,   That I have gained a hundred hostages,   To guarantee the peace which I have made;   And what my recompense! a father's anger,   Which takes me from my glory. Thus deprived   Of thy affection, whither can I fly?   Be it to friend or foe, the will of fate   Must be my only guide--condemned by thee."

The reception of Saiáwush by Afrásiyáb was warm and flattering. From the gates of the city to the palace, gold and incense were scattered over his head in the customary manner, and exclamations of welcome uttered on every side.

  "Thy presence gives joy to the land,   Which awaits thy command;     It is thine! it is thine!   All the chiefs of the state have assembled to meet thee,   All the flowers of the land are in blossom to greet thee!"

The youth was placed on a golden throne next to Afrásiyáb, and a magnificent banquet prepared in honor of the stranger, and music and the songs of beautiful women enlivened the festive scene. They chanted the praises of Saiáwush, distinguished, as they said, among men for three things: first, for being of the line of Kai-kobád; secondly, for his faith and honor; and, thirdly, for the wonderful beauty of his person, which had gained universal love and admiration. The favorable sentiments which characterized the first introduction of Saiáwush to Afrásiyáb continued to prevail, and indeed the king of Túrán seemed to regard him with increased attachment and friendship, as the time passed away, and showed him all the respect and honor to which his royal birth would have entitled him in his own country. After the lapse of a year, Pírán-wísah, one of Afrásiyáb's generals, said to him: "Young prince, thou art now high in the favor of the king, and at a great distance from Persia, and thy father is old; would it not therefore be better for thee to marry and take up thy residence among us for life?" The suggestion was a rational one, and Saiáwush readily expressed his acquiescence; accordingly, the lovely Gúlshaher, who was also named Jaríra, having been introduced to him, he was delighted with her person, and both consenting to a union, the marriage ceremony was immediately performed.

  And many a warm delicious kiss,   Told how he loved the wedded bliss.

Some time after this union, Pírán suggested another alliance, for the purpose of strengthening his political interest and power, and this was with Ferangís, the daughter of Afrásiyáb. But Saiáwush was so devoted to Gúlshaher that he first consulted with her on the subject, although the hospitality and affection of the king constituted such strong claims on his gratitude that refusal was impossible. Gúlshaher, however, was a heroine, and willingly sacrificed her own feelings for the good of Saiáwush, saying she would rather condescend to be the very handmaid of Ferangís than that the happiness and prosperity of her lord should be compromised. The second marriage accordingly took place, and Afrásiyáb was so pleased with the match that he bestowed on the bride and her husband the sovereignty of Khoten, together with countless treasure in gold, and a great number of horses, camels, and elephants. In a short time they proceeded to the seat of the new government.

Meanwhile Káús suffered the keenest distress and sorrow when he heard of the flight of Saiáwush into Túrán, and Rustem felt such strong indignation at the conduct of the king that he abruptly quitted the court, without permission, and retired to Sístán. Káús thus found himself in an embarrassed condition, and deemed it prudent to recall both Tús and the army from Balkh, and relinquish further hostile measures against Afrásiyáb.

The first thing that Saiáwush undertook after his arrival at Khoten, was to order the selection of a beautiful site for his residence, and Pírán devoted his services to fulfil that object, exploring all the provinces, hills, and dales, on every side. At last he discovered a beautiful spot, at the distance of about a month's journey, which combined all the qualities and advantages required by the anxious prince. It was situated on a mountain, and surrounded by scenery of exquisite richness and variety. The trees were fresh and green, birds warbled on every spray, transparent rivulets murmured through the meadows, the air was neither oppressively hot in summer, nor cold in winter, so that the temperature, and the attractive objects which presented themselves at every glance, seemed to realize the imagined charms and fascinations of Paradise. The inhabitants enjoyed perpetual health, and every breeze was laden with music and perfume. So lovely a place could not fail to yield pleasure to Saiáwush, who immediately set about building a palace there, and garden-temples, in which he had pictures painted of the most remarkable persons of his time, and also the portraits of ancient kings. The walls were decorated with the likenesses of Kai-kobád, of Kai-káús, Poshang, Afrásiyáb, and Sám, and Zál, and Rustem, and other champions of Persia and Túrán. When completed, it was a gorgeous retreat, and the sight of it sufficient to give youthful vigor to the withered faculties of age. And yet Saiáwush was not happy! Tears started into his eyes and sorrow weighed upon his heart, whenever he thought upon his own estrangement from home!

It happened that the lovely Gúlshaher, who had been left in the house of her father, was delivered of a son in due time, and he was named Ferúd.

Afrásiyáb, on being informed of the proceedings of Saiáwush, and of the heart-expanding residence he had chosen, was highly gratified; and to show his affectionate regard, despatched to him with the intelligence of the birth of a son, presents of great value and variety. Gersíwaz, the brother of Afrásiyáb, and who had from the first looked upon Saiáwush with a jealous and malignant eye, being afraid of his interfering with his own prospects in Túrán, was the person sent on this occasion. But he hid his secret thoughts under the veil of outward praise and approbation. Saiáwush was pleased with the intelligence and the presents, but failed to pay the customary respect to Gersíwaz on his arrival, and, in consequence, the lurking indignation and hatred formerly felt by the latter were considerably augmented. The attention of Saiáwush respecting his army and the concerns of the state, was unremitting, and noted by the visitor with a jealous and scrutinizing eye, so that Gersíwaz, on his return to the court of Afrásiyáb, artfully talked much of the pomp and splendor of the prince, and added: "Saiáwush is far from being the amiable character thou hast supposed; he is artful and ambitious, and he has collected an immense army; he is in fact dissatisfied. As a proof of his haughtiness, he paid me but little attention, and doubtless very heavy calamity will soon befall Túrán, should he break out, as I apprehend he will, into open rebellion:--

 "For he is proud, and thou has yet to learn   The temper of thy daughter Ferangís,   Now bound to him in duty and affection;   Their purpose is the same, to overthrow   The kingdom of Túrán, and thy dominion;   To merge the glory of this happy realm   Into the Persian empire!"

But plausible and persuasive as were the observations and positive declarations of Gersíwaz, Afrásiyáb would not believe the imputed ingratitude and hostility of Saiáwush. "He has sought my protection," said he; "he has thrown himself upon my generosity, and I cannot think him treacherous. But if he has meditated anything unmerited by me, and unworthy of himself, it will be better to send him back to Kai-káús, his father." The artful Gersíwaz, however, was not to be diverted from his object: he said that Saiáwush had become personally acquainted with Túrán, its position, its weakness, its strength, and resources, and aided by Rustem, would soon be able to overrun the country if he was suffered to return, and therefore he recommended Afrásiyáb to bring him from Khoten by some artifice, and secure him. In conformity with this suggestion, Gersíwaz was again deputed to the young prince, and a letter of a friendly nature written for the purpose of blinding him to the real intentions of his father-in-law. The letter was no sooner read than Saiáwush expressed his desire to comply with the request contained in it, saying that Afrásiyáb had been a father to him, and that he would lose no time in fulfilling in all respects the wishes he had received.

This compliance and promptitude, however, was not in harmony with the sinister views of Gersíwaz, for he foresaw that the very fact of answering the call immediately would show that some misrepresentation had been practised, and consequently it was his business now to promote procrastination, and an appearance of evasive delay. He therefore said to him privately that it would be advisable for him to wait a little, and not manifest such implicit obedience to the will of Afrásiyáb; but Saiáwush replied, that both his duty and affection urged him to a ready compliance. Then Gersíwaz pressed him more warmly, and represented how inconsistent, how unworthy of his illustrious lineage it would be to betray so meek a spirit, especially as he had a considerable army at his command, and could vindicate his dignity and his rights. And he addressed to him these specious arguments so incessantly and with such earnestness, that the deluded prince was at last induced to put off his departure, on account of his wife Ferangís pretending that she was ill, and saying that the moment she was better he would return to Túrán. This was quite enough for treachery to work upon; and as soon as the dispatch was sealed, Gersíwaz conveyed it with the utmost expedition to Afrásiyáb. Appearances, at least, were thus made strong against Saiáwush, and the tyrant of Túrán, now easily convinced of his falsehood, and feeling in consequence his former enmity renewed, forthwith assembled an army to punish his refractory son-in-law. Gersíwaz was appointed the leader of that army, which was put in motion without delay against the unoffending youth. The news of Afrásiyáb's warlike preparations satisfied the mind of Saiáwush that Gersíwaz had given him good advice, and that he had been a faithful monitor, for immediate compliance, he now concluded, would have been his utter ruin. When he communicated this unwelcome intelligence to Ferangís, she was thrown into the greatest alarm and agitation; but ever fruitful in expedients, suggested the course that it seemed necessary he should instantly adopt, which was to fly by a circuitous route back to Irán. To this he expressed no dissent, provided she would accompany him; but she said it was impossible to do so on account of the condition she was in. "Leave me," she added, "and save thy own life!" He therefore called together his three hundred Iránians, and requesting Ferangís, if she happened to be delivered of a son, to call him Kai-khosráu, set off on his journey.

  "I go, surrounded by my enemies;   The hand of merciless Afrásiyáb   Lifted against me."

It was not the fortune of Saiáwush, however, to escape so easily as had been anticipated by Ferangís. Gersíwaz was soon at his heels, and in the battle that ensued, all the Iránians were killed, and also the horse upon which the unfortunate prince rode, so that on foot he could make but little progress. In the meantime Afrásiyáb came up, and surrounding him, wanted to shoot him with an arrow, but he was restrained from the violent act by the intercession of his people, who recommended his being taken alive, and only kept in prison. Accordingly he was again attacked and secured, and still Afrásiyáb wished to put him to death; but Pílsam, one of his warriors, and the brother of Pírán, induced him to relinquish that diabolical intention, and to convey him back to his own palace. Saiáwush was then ignominiously fettered and conducted to the royal residence, which he had himself erected and ornamented with such richness and magnificence. The sight of the city and its splendid buildings filled every one with wonder and admiration. Upon the arrival of Afrásiyáb, Ferangís hastened to him in a state of the deepest distress, and implored his clemency and compassion in favor of Saiáwush.

  "O father, he is not to blame,   Still pure and spotless is his name;   Faithful and generous still to me,   And never--never false to thee.   This hate to Gersíwaz he owes,   The worst, the bitterest of his foes;   Did he not thy protection seek,   And wilt thou overpower the weak?   Spill royal blood thou shouldest bless,   In cruel sport and wantonness?   And earn the curses of mankind,     Living, in this precarious state,   And dead, the torments of the mind,     Which hell inflicts upon the great   Who revel in a murderous course,   And rule by cruelty and force.

  "It scarce becomes me now to tell,   What the accursed Zohák befel,   Or what the punishment which hurled   Sílim and Túr from out the world.   And is not Káús living now,   With rightful vengeance on his brow?   And Rustem, who alone can make   Thy kingdom to its centre quake?   Gúdarz, Zúára, and Fríburz,   And Tús, and Girgín, and Frámurz;   And others too of fearless might,   To challenge thee to mortal fight?   O, from this peril turn away,   Close not in gloom so bright a day;   Some heed to thy poor daughter give,   And let thy guiltless captive live."

The effect of this appeal, solemnly and urgently delivered, was only transitory. Afrasiyáb felt a little compunction at the moment, but soon resumed his ferocious spirit, and to ensure, without interruption, the accomplishment of his purpose, confined Ferangís in one of the remotest parts of the palace:--

  And thus to Gersíwaz unfeeling spoke:   "Off with his head, down with the enemy;   But take especial notice that his blood   Stains not the earth, lest it should cry aloud   For vengeance on us. Take good care of that!"

Gersíwaz, who was but too ready an instrument, immediately directed Karú-zíra, a kinsman of Afrásiyáb, who had been also one of the most zealous in promoting the ruin of the Persian prince, to inflict the deadly blow; and Saiáwush, whilst under the grasp of the executioner, had but time to put up a prayer to Heaven, in which he hoped that a son might be born to him to vindicate his good name, and be revenged on his murderer. The executioner then seized him by the hair, and throwing him on the ground, severed the head from the body. A golden vessel was ready to receive the blood, as commanded by Afrásiyáb; but a few drops happened to be spilt on the soil, and upon that spot a tree grew up, which was afterwards called Saiáwush, and believed to possess many wonderful virtues! The blood was carefully conveyed to Afrásiyáb, the head fixed on the point of a javelin, and the body was buried with respect and affection by his friend Pílsam, who had witnessed the melancholy catastrophe. It is also related that a tremendous tempest occurred at the time this amiable prince was murdered, and that a total darkness covered the face of the earth, so that the people could not distinguish each other's faces. Then was the name of Afrásiyáb truly execrated and abhorred for the cruel act he had committed, and all the inhabitants of Khoten long cherished the memory of Saiáwush.

Ferangís was frantic with grief when she was told of the sad fate of her husband, and all her household uttered the loudest lamentations. Pílsam gave the intelligence to Pírán and the proverb was then remembered: "It is better to be in hell, than under the rule of Afrásiyáb!" When the deep sorrow of Ferangís reached the ears of her father, he determined on a summary procedure, and ordered Gersíwaz to have her privately made away with, so that there might be no issue of her marriage with Saiáwush.

  Pírán with horror heard this stern command,   And hasten'd to the king, and thus addressed him:   "What! wouldst thou hurl thy vengeance on a woman,   That woman, too, thy daughter? Is it wise,   Or natural, thus to sport with human life?   Already hast thou taken from her arms   Her unoffending husband--that was cruel;   But thus to shed an innocent woman's blood,   And kill her unborn infant--that would be   Too dreadful to imagine! Is she not   Thy own fair daughter, given in happier time   To him who won thy favour and affection?   Think but of that, and from thy heart root out   This demon wish, which leads thee to a crime,   Mocking concealment; vain were the endeavour   To keep the murder secret, and when known,   The world's opprobrium would pursue thy name.   And after death, what would thy portion be!   No more of this--honour me with the charge,   And I will keep her with a father's care,   In my own mansion." Then Afrásiyáb   Readily answered: "Take her to thy home,   But when the child is born, let it be brought   Promptly to me--my will must be obeyed."

Pírán rejoiced at his success; and assenting to the command of Afrásiyáb, took Ferangís with him to Khoten, where in due time a child was born, and being a son, was called Kai-khosráu. As soon as he was born, Pírán took measures to prevent his being carried off to Afrásiyáb, and committed him to the care of some peasants on the mountain Kalún. On the same night Afrásiyáb had a dream, in which he received intimation of the birth of Kai-khosráu; and upon this intimation he sent for Pírán to know why his commands had not been complied with. Pírán replied, that he had cast away the child in the wilderness. "And why was he not sent to me?" inquired the despot. "Because," said Pírán, "I considered thy own future happiness; thou hast unjustly killed the father, and God forbid that thou shouldst also kill the son!" Afrásiyáb was abashed, and it is said that ever after the atrocious murder of Saiáwush, he had been tormented with the most terrible and harrowing dreams. Gersíwaz now became hateful to his sight, and he began at last deeply to repent of his violence and inhumanity.

Kai-khosráu grew up under the fostering protection of the peasants, and showed early marks of surprising talent and activity. He excelled in manly exercises; and hunting ferocious animals was his peculiar delight. Instructors had been provided to initiate him in all the arts and pursuits cultivated by the warriors of those days, and even in his twelfth year accounts were forwarded to Pírán of several wonderful feats which he had performed.

  Then smiled the good old man, and joyful said:   "'Tis ever thus--the youth of royal blood   Will not disgrace his lineage, but betray   By his superior mien and gallant deeds   From whence he sprung. 'Tis by the luscious fruit   We know the tree, and glory in its ripeness!"

Pírán could not resist paying a visit to the youth in his mountainous retreat, and, happy to find him, beyond all expectation, distinguished for the elegance of his external appearance, and the superior qualities of his mind, related to him the circumstances under which he had been exposed, and the rank and misfortunes of his father. An artifice then occurred to him which promised to be of ultimate advantage. He afterwards told Afrásiyáb that the offspring of Ferangís, thrown by him into the wilderness to perish, had been found by a peasant and brought up, but that he understood the boy was little better than an idiot. Afrásiyáb, upon this information, desired that he might be sent for, and in the meantime Pírán took especial care to instruct Kai-khosráu how he should act; which was to seem in all respects insane, and he accordingly appeared before the king in the dress of a prince with a golden crown on his head, and the royal girdle round his loins. Kai-khosráu proceeded on horseback to the court of Afrásiyáb, and having performed the usual salutations, was suitably received, though with strong feelings of shame and remorse on the part of the tyrant. Afrásiyáb put several questions to him, which were answered in a wild and incoherent manner, entirely at variance with the subject proposed. The king could not help smiling, and supposing him to be totally deranged, allowed him to be sent with presents to his mother, for no harm, he thought, could possibly be apprehended from one so forlorn in mind. Pírán triumphed in the success of his scheme, and lost no time in taking Kai-khosráu to his mother. All the people of Khoten poured blessings on the head of the youth, and imprecations on the merciless spirit of Afrásiyáb. The city built by Saiáwush had been razed to the ground by the exterminating fury of his enemies, and wild animals and reptiles occupied the place on which it stood. The mother and son visited the spot where Saiáwush was barbarously killed, and the tree, which grew up from the soil enriched by his blood, was found verdant and flourishing, and continued to possess in perfection its marvellous virtues.

  The tale of Saiáwush is told;   And now the pages bright unfold,   Rustem's revenge--Súdáveh's fate--   Afrásiyáb's degraded state,   And that terrific curse and ban   Which fell at last upon Túrán!

When Kai-káús heard of the fate of his son, and all its horrible details were pictured to his mind, he was thrown into the deepest affliction. His warriors, Tús, and Gúdarz, and Báhrám, and Fríburz, and Ferhád, felt with equal keenness the loss of the amiable prince, and Rustem, as soon as the dreadful intelligence reached Sístán, set off with his troops to the court of the king, still full of indignation at the conduct of Káús, and oppressed with sorrow respecting the calamity which had occurred. On his arrival he thus addressed the weeping and disconsolate father of Saiáwush, himself at the same time drowned in tears:--

  "How has thy temper turned to nought, the seed   Which might have grown, and cast a glorious shadow;   How is it scattered to the barren winds!   Thy love for false Súdáveh was the cause   Of all this misery; she, the Sorceress,   O'er whom thou hast so oft in rapture hung,   Enchanted by her charms; she was the cause   Of this destruction. Thou art woman's slave!   Woman, the bane of man's felicity!   Who ever trusted woman? Death were better   Than being under woman's influence;   She places man upon the foamy ridge   Of the tempestuous wave, which rolls to ruin,   Who ever trusted woman?--Woman! woman!"   Káús looked down with melancholy mien,   And, half consenting, thus to Rustem said:--   "Súdáveh's blandishments absorbed my soul,   And she has brought this wretchedness upon me."   Rustem rejoined--"The world must be revenged   Upon this false Súdáveh;--she must die."   Káús was silent; but his tears flowed fast,   And shame withheld resistance. Rustem rushed   Without a pause towards the shubistán;   Impatient, nothing could obstruct his speed   To slay Súdáveh;--her he quickly found,   And rapidly his sanguinary sword   Performed its office. Thus the Sorceress died.   Such was the punishment her crimes received.

Having thus accomplished the first part of his vengeance, he proceeded with the Persian army against Afrásiyáb, and all the Iránian warriors followed his example. When he had penetrated as far as Túrán, the enemy sent forward thirty thousand men to oppose his progress; and in the conflict which ensued, Ferámurz took Sarkhá, the son of Afrásiyáb, prisoner. Rustem delivered him over to Tús to be put to death precisely in the same manner as Saiáwush; but the captive represented himself as the particular friend of Saiáwush, and begged to be pardoned on that account. Rustem, however, had sworn that he would take his revenge, without pity or remorse, and accordingly death was inflicted upon the unhappy prisoner, whose blood was received in a dish, and sent to Káús, and the severed head suspended over the gates of the king's palace. Afrásiyáb hearing of this catastrophe, which sealed the fate of his favorite son, immediately collected together the whole of the Túránian army, and hastened himself to resist the conquering career of the enemy.

  As on they moved; with loud and dissonant clang;   His numerous troops shut out the prospect round;   No sun was visible by day; no moon,   Nor stars by night. The tramp of men and steeds,   And rattling drums, and shouts, were only heard,   And the bright gleams of armour only seen.

Ere long the two armies met, when Pílsam, the brother of Pírán, was ambitious of opposing his single arm against Rustem, upon which Afrásiyáb said:--"Subdue Rustem, and thy reward shall be my daughter, and half my kingdom." Pírán, however, observed that he was too young to be a fit match for the experience and valor of the Persian champion, and would have dissuaded him from the unequal contest, but the choice was his own, and he was consequently permitted by Afrásiyáb to put his bravery to the test. Pílsam accordingly went forth and summoned Rustem to the fight; but Gíw, hearing the call, accepted the challenge himself, and had nearly been thrown from his horse by the superior activity of his opponent. Ferámurz luckily saw him at the perilous moment, and darting forward, with one stroke of his sword shattered Pílsam's javelin to pieces, and then a new strife began. Pílsam and Ferámurz fought together with desperation, till both were almost exhausted, and Rustem himself was surprised to see the display of so much valor. Perceiving the wearied state of the two warriors he pushed forward Rakush, and called aloud to Pílsam:--"Am I not the person challenged?" and immediately the Túránian chief proceeded to encounter him, striking with all his might at the head of the champion; but though the sword was broken by the blow, not a hair of his head was disordered.

  Then Rustem urging on his gallant steed,   Fixed his long javelin in the girdle band   Of his ambitious foe, and quick unhorsed him;   Then dragged him on towards Afrásiyáb,   And, scoffing, cast him at the despot's feet.   "Here comes the glorious conqueror," he said;   "Now give to him thy daughter and thy treasure,   Thy kingdom and thy soldiers; has he not   Done honour to thy country?--Is he not   A jewel in thy crown of sovereignty?   What arrogance inspired the fruitless hope!   Think of thy treachery to Saiáwush;   Thy savage cruelty, and never look   For aught but deadly hatred from mankind;   And in the field of fight defeat and ruin."   Thus scornfully he spoke, and not a man,   Though in the presence of Afrásiyáb,   Had soul to meet him; fear o'ercame them all   Monarch and warriors, for a time. At length   Shame was awakened, and the king appeared   In arms against the champion. Fiercely they   Hurled their sharp javelins--Rustem's struck the head   Of his opponent's horse, which floundering fell,   And overturned his rider. Anxious then   The champion sprang to seize the royal prize;   But Húmán rushed between, and saved his master,   Who vaulted on another horse and fled.

Having thus rescued Afrásiyáb, the wary chief exercised all his cunning and adroitness to escape himself, and at last succeeded. Rustem pursued him, and the Túránian troops, who had followed the example of the king; but though thousands were slain in the chase which continued for many farsangs, no further advantage was obtained on that day. Next morning, however, Rustem resumed his pursuit; and the enemy hearing of his approach, retreated into Chinese Tartary, to secure, among other advantages, the person of Kai-khosráu; leaving the kingdom of Túrán at the mercy of the invader, who mounted the throne, and ruled there, it is said, about seven years, with memorable severity, proscribing and putting to death every person who mentioned the name of Afrásiyáb. In the meantime he made splendid presents to Tús and Gúdarz, suitable to their rank and services; and Zúára, in revenge for the monstrous outrage committed upon Saiáwush, burnt and destroyed everything that came in his way; his wrath being exasperated by the sight of the places in which the young prince had resided, and recreated himself with hunting and other sports of the field. The whole realm, in fact, was delivered over to plunder and devastation; and every individual of the army was enriched by the appropriation of public and private wealth. The companions of Rustem, however, grew weary of residing in Túrán, and they strongly represented to him the neglect which Kai-káús had suffered for so many years, recommending his return to Persia, as being more honorable than the exile they endured in an ungenial climate. Rustem's abandonment of the kingdom was at length carried into effect; and he and his warriors did not fail to take away with them all the immense property that remained in jewels and gold; part of which was conveyed by the champion to Zábul and Sístán, and a goodly proportion to the king of kings in Persia.

  When to Afrásiyáb was known   The plunder of his realm and throne,   That the destroyer's reckless hand   With fire and sword had scathed the land,   Sorrow and anguish filled his soul,   And passion raged beyond control;   And thus he to his warriors said:--   "At such a time, is valour dead?   The man who hears the mournful tale,   And is not by his country's bale   Urged on to vengeance, cannot be   Of woman born; accursed is he!   The time will come when I shall reap   The harvest of resentment deep;   And till arrives that fated hour,   Farewell to joy in hall or bower."

Rustem, in taking revenge for the murder of Saiáwush, had not been unmindful of Kai-khosráu, and had actually sent to the remote parts of Tartary in quest of him.

It is said that Gúdarz beheld in a dream the young prince, who pointed out to him his actual residence, and intimated that of all the warriors of Káús, Gíw was the only one destined to restore him to the world and his birth-right. The old man immediately requested his son Gíw to go to the place where the stranger would be found. Gíw readily complied, and in his progress provided himself at every stage successively with a guide, whom he afterwards slew to prevent discovery, and in this manner he proceeded till he reached the boundary of Chín, enjoying no comfort by day, or sleep by night. His only food was the flesh of the wild ass, and his only covering the skin of the same animal. He went on traversing mountain and forest, enduring every privation, and often did he hesitate, often did he think of returning, but honor urged him forward in spite of the trouble and impediments with which he was continually assailed. Arriving in a desert one day, he happened to meet with several persons, who upon being interrogated, said that they were sent by Pírán-wísah in search of Kai-káús. Gíw kept his own secret, saying that he was amusing himself with hunting the wild ass, but took care to ascertain from them the direction in which they were going. During the night the parties separated, and in the morning Gíw proceeded rapidly on his route, and after some time discovered a youth sitting by the side of a fountain, with a cup in his hand, whom he supposed to be Kai-khosráu. The youth also spontaneously thought "This must be Gíw"; and when the traveller approached him, and said, "I am sure thou art the son of Saiáwush"; the youth observed, "I am equally sure that thou art Gíw the son of Gúdarz." At this Gíw was amazed, and falling to his feet, asked how, and from what circumstance, he recognized him. The youth replied that he knew all the warriors of Káús; Rustem, and Kishwád, and Tús, and Gúdarz, and the rest, from their portraits in his father's gallery, they being deeply impressed on his mind. He then asked in what way Gíw had discovered him to be Kai-khosráu, and Gíw answered, "Because I perceived something kingly in thy countenance. But let me again examine thee!" The youth, at this request, removed his garments, and Gíw beheld that mark on his body which was the heritage of the race of Kai-kobád. Upon this discovery he rejoiced, and congratulating himself and the young prince on the success of his mission, related to him the purpose for which he had come. Kai-khosráu was soon mounted on horseback, and Gíw accompanied him respectfully on foot. They, in the first instance, pursued their way towards the abode of Ferangís, his mother. The persons sent by Pírán-wísah did not arrive at the place where Kai-khosráu had been kept till long after Gíw and the prince departed; and then they were told that a Persian horseman had come and carried off the youth, upon which they immediately returned, and communicated to Pírán what had occurred. Ferangís, in recovering her son, mentioned to Gíw, with the fondness of a mother, the absolute necessity of going on without delay, and pointed out to him the meadow in which some of Afrásiyáb's horses were to be met with, particularly one called Behzád, which once belonged to Saiáwush, and which her father had kept in good condition for his own riding. Gíw, therefore, went to the meadow, and throwing his kamund, secured Behzád and another horse; and all three being thus accommodated, hastily proceeded on their journey towards Irán.

Tidings of the escape of Kai-khosráu having reached Afrásiyáb, he despatched Kulbád with three hundred horsemen after him; and so rapid were his movements that he overtook the fugitives in the vicinity of Bulgharia. Khosráu and his mother were asleep, but Gíw being awake, and seeing an armed force evidently in pursuit of his party, boldly put on his armor, mounted Behzád, and before the enemy came up, advanced to the charge. He attacked the horsemen furiously with sword, and mace, for he had heard the prophecy, which declared that Kai-khosráu was destined to be the king of kings, and therefore he braved the direst peril with confidence, and the certainty of success. It was this feeling which enabled him to perform such a prodigy of valor, in putting Kulbád and his three hundred horsemen to the rout. They all fled defeated, and dispersed precipitately before him. After this surprising victory, he returned to the halting place, and told Kai-khosráu what he had done. The prince was disappointed at not having been awakened to participate in the exploit, but Gíw said, "I did not wish to disturb thy sweet slumbers unnecessarily. It was thy good fortune and prosperous star, however, which made me triumph over the enemy." The three travellers then resuming their journey:

  Through dreary track, and