[LIS-lusiad  —  part 3 of 6, continuation of part 2]
============================================================

frequent sail,     And lordly vessels, tall as ours, appear'd,     Which, to the regions of the morning steer'd,     And, back returning, to the southmost land     Convey'd the treasures of the Indian strand;     Whose cheerful crews, resembling ours, display     The kindred face and colour of the day.[379]     Elate with joy we raise the glad acclaim,     And, "River of good signs,"[380] the port we name:     Then, sacred to the angel guide,[381] who led     The young Tobiah to the spousal bed,     And safe return'd him through the perilous way,     We rear a column[382] on the friendly bay.

      Our keels, that now had steer'd through many a clime,     By shell-fish roughen'd, and incased with slime,     Joyful we clean, while bleating from the field     The fleecy dams the smiling natives yield:     But while each face an honest welcome shows,     And, big with sprightly hope, each bosom glows,     (Alas! how vain the bloom of human joy!     How soon the blasts of woe that bloom destroy!)     A dread disease its rankling horrors shed,     And death's dire ravage through mine army spread.     Never mine eyes such dreary sight beheld,     Ghastly the mouth and gums enormous swell'd;[383]     And instant, putrid like a dead man's wound,     Poisoned with foetid steams the air around.     No sage physician's ever-watchful zeal,     No skilful surgeon's gentle hand to heal,     Were found: each dreary mournful hour we gave     Some brave companion to a foreign grave.     A grave, the awful gift of every shore!----     Alas! what weary toils with us they bore!     Long, long endear'd by fellowship in woe,     O'er their cold dust we give the tears to flow;     And, in their hapless lot forbode our own,     A foreign burial, and a grave unknown!

      Now, deeply yearning o'er our deathful fate,     With joyful hope of India's shore elate,     We loose the hawsers and the sail expand,     And, upward coast the Ethiopian strand.     What danger threaten'd at Quiloa's isle,     Mozambique's treason, and Mombassa's guile:     What miracles kind Heav'n our guardian wrought,     Loud fame already to thine ears has brought:     Kind Heaven again that guardian care display'd,     And, to thy port our weary fleet convey'd,     Where thou, O king, Heaven's regent power below,     Bidd'st thy full bounty and thy truth to flow;     Health to the sick, and to the weary rest,     And sprightly hope reviv'd in every breast,     Proclaim thy gifts, with grateful joy repaid,     The brave man's tribute for the brave man's aid.     And now, in honour of thy fond command,     The glorious annals of my native land;     And what the perils of a route so bold,     So dread as ours, my faithful lips have told.     Then judge, great monarch, if the world before     Ere saw the prow such length of seas explore!     Nor sage Ulysses,[384] nor the Trojan[385] pride     Such raging gulfs, such whirling storms defied;     Nor one poor tenth of my dread course explor'd,     Though by the muse as demigods ador'd.

      O thou whose breast all Helicon inflam'd,[386]     Whose birth seven vaunting cities proudly claim'd;     And thou whose mellow lute and rural song,[387]     In softest flow, led Mincio's waves along,     Whose warlike numbers, as a storm impell'd,     And Tiber's surges o'er his borders swell'd;     Let all Parnassus lend creative fire,     And all the Nine[388] with all their warmth inspire;     Your demigods conduct through every scene     Cold fear can paint, or wildest fancy feign;     The Syren's guileful lay, dire Circe's spell,[389]     And all the horrors of the Cyclop's cell;[390]     Bid Scylla's barking waves their mates o'erwhelm     And hurl the guardian pilot from the helm,[391]     Give sails and oars to fly the purple shore,     Where love of absent friend awakes no more;[392]     In all their charms display Calypso's smiles,     Her flow'ry arbours and her am'rous wiles;     In skins confin'd the blust'ring winds control,[393]     Or, o'er the feast bid loathsome harpies[394] prowl;     And lead your heroes through the dread abodes     Of tortur'd spectres and infernal[395] gods;     Give ev'ry flow'r that decks Aonia's hill     To grace your fables with divinest skill;     Beneath the wonders of my tale they fall,     Where truth, all unadorn'd and pure, exceeds them all.----

      While thus, illustrious GAMA charm'd their ears,     The look of wonder each Melindian wears,     And pleased attention witness'd the command     Of every movement of his lips, or hand.     The king, enraptur'd, own'd the glorious fame     Of Lisbon's monarchs and the Lusian name;     What warlike rage the victor-kings inspir'd!     Nor less their warriors' loyal faith admir'd.     Nor less his menial train, in wonder lost,     Repeat the gallant deeds that please them most,     Each to his mate; while, fix'd in fond amaze,     The Lusian features every eye surveys;     While, present to the view, by fancy brought,     Arise the wonders by the Lusians wrought,     And each bold feature to their wond'ring sight     Displays the raptur'd ardour of the fight.

      Apollo now withdrew the cheerful day,     And left the western sky to twilight grey;     Beneath the wave he sought fair Thetis' bed,     And, to the shore Melinda's sov'reign sped.

      What boundless joys are thine, O just Renown,     Thou hope of Virtue, and her noblest crown!     By thee the seeds of conscious worth are fir'd,     Hero by hero, fame by fame inspir'd:     Without thine aid how soon the hero dies!     By thee upborne, his name ascends the skies.     This Ammon[396] knew, and own'd his Homer's lyre     The noblest glory of Pelides' ire.[397]     This knew Augustus, and from Mantua's shade     To courtly ease the Roman bard convey'd;[398]     And soon exulting flow'd the song divine,     The noblest glory of the Roman line.     Dear was the Muse to Julius; ever dear     To Scipio, though the pond'rous, conquering spear     Roughen'd his hand, th' immortal pen he knew,     And, to the tented field the gentle Muses drew.     Each glorious chief of Greek or Latian line,     Or barb'rous race, adorn'd the Aonian shrine;     Each glorious name, e'er to the Muse endear'd.     Or woo'd the Muses, or, the Muse rever'd.     Alas, on Tago's hapless shores alone     The Muse is slighted, and her charms unknown;     For this, no Virgil here attunes the lyre,     No Homer here awakes the hero's fire.     On Tago's shores are Scipios, Cæsars born,     And Alexanders Lisbon's clime adorn;     But, Heaven has stamp'd them in a rougher mould,     Nor gave the polish to their genuine gold.     Careless and rude, or to be known or know,     In vain, to them, the sweetest numbers flow:     Unheard, in vain their native poet sings,     And cold neglect weighs down the Muse's wings,     Ev'n he whose veins the blood of GAMA warms,[399]     Walks by, unconscious of the Muse's charms:     For him no Muse shall leave her golden loom,     No palm shall blossom, and no wreath shall bloom:     Yet, shall my labours and my cares be paid     By fame immortal, and by GAMA'S shade:     Him shall the song on ev'ry shore proclaim,     The first of heroes, first of naval fame.     Rude, and ungrateful, though my country be,     This proud example shall be taught by me--     "Where'er the hero's worth demands the skies,     To crown that worth some gen'rous bard shall rise!"


END OF THE FIFTH BOOK.




BOOK VI.

THE ARGUMENT.

Gama's long recital being concluded, the poet resumes the thread of his story in his own person. The Portuguese admiral enters into an alliance with the King of Melinda, assures him that the vessels of his nation will always in future anchor on his shores. Gama receives from the monarch a faithful pilot to conduct him to India. Bacchus now has recourse to Neptune, at whose palace the divinities of the sea assemble. The gods of the sea consent to let loose the winds and waves against the daring navigators. During the night the sailors on the watch relate to each other amusing stories. Veloso urges them to relate some proud feats of war. The history of the contest of the twelve knights of England with the twelve of Portugal is then told. A violent tempest assails the fleet. Vivid picture of a storm at sea. Gama addresses his prayer to God; and Venus, with her nymphs so captivates the storm-gods that a calm ensues. The boy at the mast-head raises a joyful cry of Land! re-echoed by the whole crew. The pilot informs the Portuguese that they are now approaching the kingdom of Calicut. The poet's reflections.


    With heart sincere the royal pagan joy'd,     And hospitable rites each hour employ'd,     For much the king the Lusian band admir'd,     And, much their friendship and their aid desir'd;     Each hour the gay festivity prolongs,     Melindian dances, and Arabian songs;     Each hour in mirthful transport steals away,     By night the banquet, and the chase by day;     And now, the bosom of the deep invites,     And all the pride of Neptune's festive rites;     Their silken banners waving o'er the tide,     A jovial band, the painted galleys ride;     The net and angle various hands employ,     And Moorish timbrels sound the notes of joy.     Such was the pomp, when Egypt's beauteous[400] queen     Bade all the pride of naval show convene,     In pleasure's downy bosom, to beguile     Her love-sick warrior:[401] o'er the breast of Nile,     Dazzling with gold, the purple ensigns flow'd,     And to the lute the gilded barges row'd;     While from the wave, of many a shining hue,     The anglers' lines the panting fishes drew.

      Now, from the West the sounding breezes blow,     And far the hoary flood was yet to plough:     The fountain and the field bestow'd their store,     And friendly pilots from the friendly shore,     Train'd in the Indian deep, were now aboard,     When GAMA, parting from Melinda's lord,     The holy vows of lasting peace renew'd,     For, still the king for lasting friendship sued;     That Lusus' heroes in his port supplied,     And tasted rest, he own'd his dearest pride,     And vow'd, that ever while the seas they roam,     The Lusian fleets should find a bounteous home,     And, ever from the gen'rous shore receive     Whate'er his port, whate'er his land could give.[402]     Nor less his joy the grateful chief declar'd;     And now, to seize the valued hours prepar'd.     Full to the wind the swelling sails he gave,     And, his red prows divide the foamy wave:     Full to the rising sun the pilot steers,     And, far from shore through middle ocean bears.     The vaulted sky now widens o'er their heads,     Where first the infant morn his radiance sheds.     And now, with transport sparkling in his eyes,     Keen to behold the Indian mountains rise,     High on the decks each Lusian hero smiles,     And, proudly in his thoughts reviews his toils.     When the stern demon, burning with disdain,     Beheld the fleet triumphant plough the main:     The powers of heav'n, and heav'n's dread lord he knew,     Resolv'd in Lisbon glorious to renew     The Roman honours--raging with despair     From high Olympus' brow he cleaves the air,     On earth new hopes of vengeance to devise,     And sue that aid denied him in the skies;     Blaspheming Heav'n, he pierc'd the dread abode     Of ocean's lord, and sought the ocean's god.     Deep, where the bases of the hills extend,     And earth's huge ribs of rock enormous bend,     Where, roaring through the caverns, roll the waves     Responsive as the aërial tempest raves,     The ocean's monarch, by the Nereid train,     And wat'ry gods encircled, holds his reign.     Wide o'er the deep, which line could ne'er explore,     Shining with hoary sand of silver ore,     Extends the level, where the palace rears     Its crystal towers, and emulates the spheres;     So, starry bright, the lofty turrets blaze,     And, vie in lustre with the diamond's rays.     Adorn'd with pillars, and with roofs of gold,     The golden gates their massy leaves unfold:     Inwrought with pearl the lordly pillars shine,     The sculptur'd walls confess a hand divine.     Here, various colours in confusion lost,     Old Chaos' face and troubled image boast.     Here, rising from the mass, distinct and clear,     Apart, the four fair elements appear.     High o'er the rest ascends the blaze of fire,     Nor, fed by matter did the rays aspire,     But, glow'd ætherial, as the living flame,     Which, stol'n from heav'n, inspir'd the vital frame.     Next, all-embracing air was spread around,     Thin as the light, incapable of wound;     The subtle power the burning south pervades,     And penetrates the depth of polar shades.     Here, mother Earth, with mountains crown'd, is seen,     Her trees in blossom, and her lawns in green;     The lowing beeves adorn the clover vales,     The fleecy dams bespread the sloping dales;     Here, land from land the silver streams divide;     The sportive fishes through the crystal tide,     Bedropt with gold their shining sides display:     And here, old Ocean rolls his billows gray:     Beneath the moon's pale orb his current flows,     And, round the earth, his giant arms he throws.     Another scene display'd the dread alarms     Of war in heav'n, and mighty Jove in arms;     Here, Titan's race their swelling nerves distend     Like knotted oaks, and from their bases rend     And tower the mountains to the thund'ring sky,     While round their heads the forky lightnings fly;     Beneath huge Etna vanquish'd Typhon lies,[403]     And vomits smoke and fire against the darken'd skies.     Here, seems the pictur'd wall possess'd of life:     Two gods contending[404] in the noble strife,     The choicest boon to humankind to give,     Their toils to lighten, or their wants relieve:     While Pallas here appears to wave her hand,[405]     The peaceful olive's silver boughs expand:     Here, while the ocean's god indignant frown'd,     And rais'd his trident from the wounded ground,     As yet entangled in the earth, appears     The warrior horse; his ample chest he rears,     His wide red nostrils smoke, his eye-balls glare,     And his fore-hoofs, high pawing, smite the air.

      Though wide, and various, o'er the sculptur'd stone[406]     The feats of gods, and godlike heroes shone;     On speed the vengeful demon views no more:     Forward he rushes through the golden door,     Where ocean's king, enclos'd with nymphs divine,     In regal state receives the king of wine:[407]     "O Neptune!" instant as he came, he cries,     "Here let my presence wake no cold surprise.     A friend I come, your friendship to implore     Against the Fates unjust, and Fortune's power;     Beneath whose shafts the great Celestials bow,     Yet ere I more, if more you wish to know,     The wat'ry gods in awful senate call,     For all should hear the wrong that touches all."     Neptune alarm'd, with instant speed commands     From ev'ry shore to call the wat'ry bands:     Triton, who boasts his high Neptunian race,     Sprung from the god by Salacé's[408] embrace,     Attendant on his sire the trumpet sounds,     Or, through the yielding waves, his herald, bounds:     Huge is his bulk, deform'd, and dark his hue;     His bushy beard, and hairs that never knew     The smoothing comb, of seaweed rank and long,       }     Around his breast and shoulders dangling hung,      }     And, on the matted locks black mussels clung;       }     A shell of purple on his head he bore,[409]     Around his loins no tangling garb he wore,     But all was cover'd with the slimy brood,     The snaily offspring of the unctuous flood;     And now, obedient to his dreadful sire,     High o'er the wave his brawny arms aspire;     To his black mouth his crooked shell applied,     The blast rebellows o'er the ocean wide:     Wide o'er their shores, where'er their waters flow,     The wat'ry powers the awful summons know;     And instant, darting to the palace hall,     Attend the founder of the Dardan wall;[410]     Old Father Ocean, with his num'rous race     Of daughters and of sons, was first in place.     Nereus and Doris, from whose nuptials sprung     The lovely Nereid train, for ever young,     Who people ev'ry sea on ev'ry strand,     Appear'd, attended with their filial band;     And changeful Proteus, whose prophetic mind[411]     The secret cause of Bacchus' rage divin'd,     Attending, left the flocks, his scaly charge,     To graze the bitter, weedy foam at large.     In charms of power the raging waves to tame,     The lovely spouse of ocean's sov'reign came.[412]     From Heaven and Vesta sprung the birth divine,     Her snowy limbs bright through the vestments shine.     Here, with the dolphin, who persuasive led     Her modest steps to Neptune's spousal bed,     Fair Amphitrité mov'd, more sweet, more gay     Than vernal fragrance, and the flowers of May;     Together with her sister-spouse she came,     The same their wedded lord, their love the same;     The same the brightness of their sparkling eyes,     Bright as the sun, and azure as the skies.     She, who, the rage of Athamas to shun,[414]     Plung'd in the billows with her infant son;     A goddess now, a god the smiling boy,     Together sped; and Glaucus lost to joy,[415]     Curs'd in his love by vengeful Circé's hate,     Attending, wept his Scylla's hapless fate.

      And now, assembled in the hall divine,     The ocean gods in solemn council join;     The goddesses on pearl embroid'ry sat,     The gods, on sparkling crystal chairs of state,     And, proudly honour'd, on the regal throne,     Beside the ocean's lord, Thyoneus[416] shone.     High from the roof the living amber glows,[417]     High from the roof the stream of glory flows,     And, richer fragrance far around exhales     Than that which breathes on fair Arabia's gales.

      Attention now, in list'ning silence waits:     The power, whose bosom rag'd against the Fates,     Rising, casts round his vengeful eyes, while rage     Spread o'er his brows the wrinkled seams of age.     "O thou," he cries, "whose birthright sov'reign sway,     From pole to pole, the raging waves obey;     Of human race 'tis thine to fix the bounds,     And fence the nations with thy wat'ry mounds:     And thou, dread power, O Father Ocean, hear,     Thou, whose wide arms embrace the world's wide sphere,     'Tis thine the haughtiest victor to restrain,     And bind each nation in its own domain:     And you, ye gods, to whom the seas are giv'n,     Your just partition with the gods of heav'n;     You who, of old unpunish'd never bore     The daring trespass of a foreign oar;     You who beheld, when Earth's dread offspring strove[418]     To scale the vaulted sky, the seat of Jove:     Indignant Jove deep to the nether world     The rebel band in blazing thunders hurl'd.     Alas! the great monition lost on you,     Supine you slumber, while a roving crew,     With impious search, explore the wat'ry way,     And, unresisted, through your empire stray:     To seize the sacred treasures of the main,     Their fearless prows your ancient laws disdain:     Where, far from mortal sight his hoary head     Old Ocean hides, their daring sails they spread,     And their glad shouts are echo'd where the roar     Of mounting billows only howl'd before.     In wonder, silent, ready Boreas[419] sees     Your passive languor, and neglectful ease;     Ready, with force auxiliar, to restrain     The bold intruders on your awful reign;     Prepar'd to burst his tempests, as of old,     When his black whirlwinds o'er the ocean roll'd,     And rent the Mynian[420] sails, whose impious pride     First brav'd their fury, and your power defied.     Nor deem that, fraudful, I my hope deny;     My darken'd glory sped me from the sky.     How high my honours on the Indian shore!     How soon these honours must avail no more!     Unless these rovers, who with doubled shame     To stain my conquests, bear my vassal's[421] name,     Unless they perish on the billowy way.     Then rouse, ye gods, and vindicate your sway.     The powers of heaven, in vengeful anguish, see     The tyrant of the skies, and Fate's decree;     The dread decree, that to the Lusian train     Consigns, betrays your empire of the main:     Say, shall your wrong alarm the high abodes?     Are men exalted to the rank of gods?     O'er you exalted, while in careless ease     You yield the wrested trident of the seas,     Usurp'd your monarchy, your honours stain'd,     Your birthright ravish'd, and your waves profan'd!     Alike the daring wrong to me, to you,     And, shall my lips in vain your vengeance sue!     This, this to sue from high Olympus bore----"     More he attempts, but rage permits no more.     Fierce, bursting wrath the wat'ry gods inspires,     And, their red eye-balls burn with livid fires:     Heaving and panting struggles evr'y breast,     With the fierce billows of hot ire oppress'd.     Twice from his seat divining Proteus rose,     And twice he shook, enrag'd, his sedgy brows:     In vain; the mandate was already giv'n,     From Neptune sent, to loose the winds of heav'n:     In vain; though prophecy his lips inspir'd,     The ocean's queen his silent lips requir'd.     Nor less the storm of headlong rage denies,     Or counsel to debate, or thought to rise.     And now, the God of Tempests swift unbinds     From their dark caves the various rushing winds:     High o'er the storm the power impetuous rides,     His howling voice the roaring tempest guides;     Right to the dauntless fleet their rage he pours,     And, first their headlong outrage tears the shores:     A deeper night involves the darken'd air,     And livid flashes through the mountains glare:     Uprooted oaks, with all their leafy pride,     Roll thund'ring down the groaning mountain's side;     And men and herds in clam'rous uproar run,     The rocking towers and crashing woods to shun.

      While, thus, the council of the wat'ry state     Enrag'd, decreed the Lusian heroes' fate,     The weary fleet before the gentle gale     With joyful hope display'd the steady sail;     Thro' the smooth deep they plough'd the length'ning way;     Beneath the wave the purple car of day     To sable night the eastern sky resign'd,     And, o'er the decks cold breath'd the midnight wind.     All but the watch in warm pavilions slept,     The second watch the wonted vigils kept:     Supine their limbs, the mast supports the head,     And the broad yard-sail o'er their shoulders spread     A grateful cover from the chilly gale,     And sleep's soft dews their heavy eyes assail.     Languid against the languid power they strive,     And, sweet discourse preserves their thoughts alive.     When Leonardo, whose enamour'd thought     In every dream the plighted fair one sought--     "The dews of sleep what better to remove     Than the soft, woful, pleasing tales of love?"     "Ill-timed, alas!" the brave VELOSO cries,     "The tales of love, that melt the heart and eyes.     The dear enchantments of the fair I know,     The fearful transport, and the rapturous woe:     But, with our state ill suits the grief or joy;     Let war, let gallant war our thoughts employ:     With dangers threaten'd, let the tale inspire     The scorn of danger, and the hero's fire."     His mates with joy the brave VELOSO hear,     And, on the youth the speaker's toil confer.     The brave VELOSO takes the word with joy,     "And truth," he cries, "shall these slow hours decoy.     The warlike tale adorns our nation's fame,     The twelve of England give the noble theme.

      "When Pedro's gallant heir, the valiant John,     Gave war's full splendour to the Lusian throne,     In haughty England, where the winter spreads     His snowy mantle o'er the shining meads,[422]     The seeds of strife the fierce Erynnis sows;[423]     The baleful strife from court dissension rose.     With ev'ry charm adorn'd, and ev'ry grace,     That spreads its magic o'er the female face,     Twelve ladies shin'd the courtly train among,     The first, the fairest of the courtly throng;     But, Envy's breath revil'd their injur'd name,     And stain'd the honour of their virgin fame.     Twelve youthful barons own'd the foul report,     The charge at first, perhaps, a tale of sport.     Ah, base the sport that lightly dares defame     The sacred honour of a lady's name!     What knighthood asks the proud accusers yield,     And, dare the damsels' champions to the field.[424]     'There let the cause, as honour wills, be tried,     And, let the lance and ruthless sword decide.'     The lovely dames implore the courtly train,     With tears implore them, but implore in vain.     So fam'd, so dreaded tower'd each boastful knight,     The damsels' lovers shunn'd the proffer'd fight.     Of arm unable to repel the strong,     The heart's each feeling conscious of the wrong,     When, robb'd of all the female breast holds dear,     Ah Heaven, how bitter flows the female tear!     To Lancaster's bold duke the damsels sue;     Adown their cheeks, now paler than the hue     Of snowdrops trembling to the chilly gale,     The slow-pac'd crystal tears their wrongs bewail.     When down the beauteous face the dew-drop flows,     What manly bosom can its force oppose!     His hoary curls th' indignant hero shakes,     And, all his youthful rage restor'd, awakes:     'Though loth,' he cries, 'to plunge my bold compeers     In civil discord, yet, appease your tears:     From Lusitania'--for, on Lusian ground     Brave Lancaster had strode with laurel crown'd;     Had mark'd how bold the Lusian heroes shone,     What time he claim'd the proud Castilian throne,[425]     How matchless pour'd the tempest of their might,     When, thund'ring at his side, they rul'd the fight:     Nor less their ardent passion for the fair,     Gen'rous and brave, he view'd with wond'ring care,     When, crown'd with roses, to the nuptial bed     The warlike John his lovely daughter led--     'From Lusitania's clime,' the hero cries,     'The gallant champions of your fame shall rise.     Their hearts will burn (for well their hearts I know)     To pour your vengeance on the guilty foe.     Let courtly phrase the heroes' worth admire,     And, for your injur'd names, that worth require:     Let all the soft endearments of the fair,     And words that weep your wrongs, your wrongs declare.     Myself the heralds to the chiefs will send,     And to the king, my valiant son, commend.'     He spoke; and twelve of Lusian race he names     All noble youths, the champions of the dames.     The dames, by lot, their gallant champions choose,[426]     And each her hero's name, exulting, views.     Each in a various letter hails her chief,     And, earnest for his aid, relates her grief:     Each to the king her courtly homage sends,     And valiant Lancaster their cause commends.     Soon as to Tagus' shores the heralds came,     Swift through the palace pours the sprightly flame     Of high-soul'd chivalry; the monarch glows     First on the listed field to dare the foes;     But regal state withheld. Alike their fires,     Each courtly noble to the toil aspires:     High on his helm, the envy of his peers,     Each chosen knight the plume of combat wears.     In that proud port, half circled by the wave,     Which Portugallia to the nation gave,     A deathless name,[427] a speedy sloop receives     The sculptur'd bucklers, and the clasping greaves,     The swords of Ebro, spears of lofty size,     And breast-plates, flaming with a thousand dyes,     Helmets high plum'd, and, pawing for the fight,     Bold steeds, whose harness shone with silv'ry light     Dazzling the day. And now, the rising gale     Invites the heroes, and demands the sail,     When brave Magricio thus his peers address'd,     'Oh, friends in arms, of equal powers confess'd,     Long have I hop'd through foreign climes to stray,     Where other streams than Douro wind their way;     To note what various shares of bliss and woe     From various laws and various customs flow;     Nor deem that, artful, I the fight decline;     England shall know the combat shall be mine.     By land I speed, and, should dark fate prevent,     (For death alone shall blight my firm intent),     Small may the sorrow for my absence be,     For yours were conquest, though unshar'd by me.     Yet, something more than human warms my breast,     And sudden whispers,[428] In our fortunes blest,     Nor envious chance, nor rocks, nor whelmy tide,     Shall our glad meeting at the list divide.'

      "He said; and now, the rites of parting friends     Sufficed, through Leon and Castile he bends.     On many a field, enrapt, the hero stood,     And the proud scenes of Lusian conquest view'd.     Navarre he pass'd, and pass'd the dreary wild,     Where rocks on rocks o'er yawning glens are pil'd;     The wolf's dread range, where, to the ev'ning skies     In clouds involv'd, the cold Pyrenians rise.     Through Gallia's flow'ry vales, and wheaten plains     He strays, and Belgia now his steps detains.     There, as forgetful of his vow'd intent,     In various cares the fleeting days he spent:     His peers, the while, direct to England's strand,     Plough the chill northern wave; and now, at land,     Adorn'd in armour, and embroid'ry gay,     To lordly London hold the crowded way:     Bold Lancaster receives the knights with joy;     The feast, and warlike song each hour employ.     The beauteous dames, attending, wake their fire,     With tears enrage them, and with smiles inspire.     And now, with doubtful blushes rose the day,     Decreed the rites of wounded fame to pay.     The English monarch gives the listed bounds,     And, fix'd in rank, with shining spears surrounds.     Before their dames the gallant knights advance,     (Each like a Mars), and shake the beamy lance:     The dames, adorn'd in silk and gold, display     A thousand colours glitt'ring to the day:     Alone in tears, and doleful mourning, came,     Unhonour'd by her knight, Magricio's dame.     'Fear not our prowess,' cry the bold eleven,     'In numbers, not in might, we stand uneven.     More could we spare, secure of dauntless might,     When for the injur'd female name we fight.'

      "Beneath a canopy of regal state,     High on a throne, the English monarch sat,     All round, the ladies and the barons bold,     Shining in proud array, their stations hold.     Now, o'er the theatre the champions pour,     And facing three to three, and four to four,     Flourish their arms in prelude. From the bay     Where flows the Tagus to the Indian sea,     The sun beholds not, in his annual race,     A twelve more sightly, more of manly grace     Than tower'd the English knights. With frothing jaws,     Furious, each steed the bit restrictive gnaws,     And, rearing to approach the rearing foe,     Their wavy manes are dash'd with foamy snow:     Cross-darting to the sun a thousand rays,     The champions' helmets as the crystal blaze.     Ah now, the trembling ladies' cheeks how wan!     Cold crept their blood; when, through the tumult ran     A shout, loud gath'ring; turn'd was ev'ry eye     Where rose the shout, the sudden cause to spy.     And lo, in shining arms a warrior rode,     With conscious pride his snorting courser trod;     Low to the monarch, and the dames he bends,     And now, the great Magricio joins his friends.     With looks that glow'd, exulting rose the fair,     Whose wounded honour claim'd the hero's care.     Aside the doleful weeds of mourning thrown,     In dazzling purple, and in gold she shone.     Now, loud the signal of the fight rebounds,     Quiv'ring the air, the meeting shock resounds     Hoarse, crashing uproar; griding splinters spring     Far round, and bucklers dash'd on bucklers ring.     Their swords flash lightning; darkly reeking o'er     The shining mail-plates flows the purple gore.     Torn by the spur, the loosen'd reins at large,     Furious, the steeds in thund'ring plunges charge;     Trembles beneath their hoofs the solid ground,     And, thick the fiery sparkles flash around,     A dreadful blaze! With pleasing horror thrill'd,     The crowd behold the terrors of the field.     Here, stunn'd and stagg'ring with the forceful blow,     A bending champion grasps the saddle-bow;     Here, backward bent, a falling knight reclines,     His plumes, dishonour'd, lash the courser's loins.     So, tir'd and stagger'd toil'd the doubtful fight,     When great Magricio, kindling all his might,     Gave all his rage to burn: with headlong force,     Conscious of victory, his bounding horse     Wheels round and round the foe; the hero's spear     Now on the front, now flaming on the rear,     Mows down their firmest battle; groans the ground      }     Beneath his courser's smiting hoofs: far round         }     The cloven helms and splinter'd shields resound.       }     Here, torn and trail'd in dust the harness gay,     From the fall'n master springs the steed away;     Obscene with dust and gore, slow from the ground     Rising, the master rolls his eyes around,     Pale as a spectre on the Stygian coast,     In all the rage of shame confus'd, and lost:     Here, low on earth, and o'er the riders thrown,     The wallowing coursers and the riders groan:     Before their glimm'ring vision dies the light,     And, deep descends the gloom of death's eternal night.     They now who boasted, 'Let the sword decide,'     Alone in flight's ignoble aid confide:     Loud to the skies the shout of joy proclaims     The spotless honour of the ladies' names.

      "In painted halls of state, and rosy bowers,     The twelve brave Lusians crown the festive hours.     Bold Lancaster the princely feast bestows,     The goblet circles, and the music flows;     And ev'ry care, the transport of their joy,     To tend the knights the lovely dames employ;     The green-bough'd forests by the lawns of Thames     Behold the victor-champions, and the dames     Rouse the tall roe-buck o'er the dews of morn,     While, through the dales of Kent resounds the bugle-horn.     The sultry noon the princely banquet owns,     The minstrel's song of war the banquet crowns:     And, when the shades of gentle ev'ning fall,     Loud with the dance resounds the lordly hall:     The golden roofs, while Vesper shines, prolong     The trembling echoes of the harp and song.     Thus pass'd the days on England's happy strand,     Till the dear mem'ry of their natal land     Sigh'd for the banks of Tagus. Yet, the breast     Of brave Magricio spurns the thoughts of rest.     In Gaul's proud court he sought the listed plain,     In arms, an injur'd lady's knight again.     As Rome's Corvinus[429] o'er the field he strode,     And, on the foe's huge cuirass proudly trod.     No more by tyranny's proud tongue revil'd,     The Flandrian countess on her hero smil'd.[430]     The Rhine another pass'd, and prov'd his might,[431]     A fraudful German dar'd him to the fight.     Strain'd in his grasp, the fraudful boaster fell----"     Here sudden stopp'd the youth; the distant yell     Of gath'ring tempest sounded in his ears,     Unheard, unheeded by his list'ning peers.     Earnest, at full, they urge him to relate     Magricio's combat, and the German's fate.     When, shrilly whistling through the decks, resounds     The master's call, and loud his voice rebounds:     Instant from converse, and from slumber, start     Both bands, and instant to their toils they dart.     "Aloft, oh speed, down, down the topsails!" cries     The master: "sudden from my earnest eyes     Vanish'd the stars; slow rolls the hollow sigh,     The storm's dread herald." To the topsails fly     The bounding youths, and o'er the yardarms whirl     The whizzing ropes, and swift the canvas furl;     When, from their grasp the bursting tempests bore     The sheets half-gather'd, and in fragments tore.     "Strike, strike the mainsail!" loud again he rears     His echoing voice; when, roaring in their ears,     As if the starry vault, by thunders riv'n,     Rush'd downward to the deep the walls of heav'n,     With headlong weight a fiercer blast descends,     And, with sharp whirring crash, the mainsail rends;     Loud shrieks of horror through the fleet resound;     Bursts the torn cordage; rattle far around     The splinter'd yardarms; from each bending mast,     In many a shred, far streaming on the blast     The canvas floats; low sinks the leeward side,     O'er the broad vessels rolls the swelling tide:     "Oh strain each nerve!" the frantic pilot cries--     "Oh now!"--and instant every nerve applies,     Tugging what cumbrous lay, with strainful force;     Dash'd by the pond'rous loads, the surges hoarse     Roar in new whirls: the dauntless soldiers ran     To pump, yet, ere the groaning pump began     The wave to vomit, o'er the decks o'erthrown     In grovelling heaps, the stagger'd soldiers groan:     So rolls the vessel, not the boldest three,     Of arm robustest, and of firmest knee,     Can guide the starting rudder; from their hands     The helm bursts; scarce a cable's strength commands     The stagg'ring fury of its starting bounds,     While to the forceful, beating surge resounds     The hollow crazing hulk: with kindling rage     The adverse winds the adverse winds engage,     As, from its base of rock their banded power     Strove in the dust to strew some lordly tower,     Whose dented battlements in middle sky     Frown on the tempest and its rage defy;     So, roar'd the winds: high o'er the rest upborne     On the wide mountain-wave's slant ridge forlorn,     At times discover'd by the lightnings blue,     Hangs GAMA'S lofty vessel, to the view     Small as her boat; o'er Paulus' shatter'd prore     Falls the tall mainmast, prone, with crashing roar;     Their hands, yet grasping their uprooted hair,     The sailors lift to heaven in wild despair,     The Saviour-God each yelling voice implores.     Nor less from brave Coello's war-ship pours     The shriek, shrill rolling on the tempest's wings:     Dire as the bird of death at midnight sings     His dreary howlings in the sick man's ear,     The answ'ring shriek from ship to ship they hear.

      Now, on the mountain-billows upward driv'n,     The navy mingles with the clouds of heav'n;     Now, rushing downward with the sinking waves,     Bare they behold old Ocean's vaulty caves.     The eastern blast against the western pours,     Against the southern storm the northern roars:     From pole to pole the flashy lightnings glare,     One pale, blue, twinkling sheet enwraps the air;     In swift succession now the volleys fly,     Darted in pointed curvings o'er the sky;     And, through the horrors of the dreadful night,     O'er the torn waves they shed a ghastly light;     The breaking surges flame with burning red,     Wider, and louder still the thunders spread,     As if the solid heav'ns together crush'd,     Expiring worlds on worlds expiring rush'd,     And dim-brow'd Chaos struggled to regain     The wild confusion of his ancient reign.     Not such the volley when the arm of Jove     From heav'n's high gates the rebel Titans drove;     Not such fierce lightnings blaz'd athwart the flood,     When, sav'd by Heaven, Deucalion's vessel rode     High o'er the delug'd hills. Along the shore     The halcyons, mindful of their fate, deplore;[432]     As beating round, on trembling wings they fly,     Shrill through the storm their woful clamours die.     So, from the tomb, when midnight veils the plains,     With shrill, faint voice, th' untimely ghost complains.[433]     The am'rous dolphins to their deepest caves     In vain retreat, to fly the furious waves;     High o'er the mountain-capes the ocean flows,     And tears the aged forests from their brows:     The pine and oak's huge, sinewy roots uptorn,     And, from their beds the dusky sands upborne     On the rude whirlings of the billowy sweep,     Imbrown the surface of the boiling deep.     High to the poop the valiant GAMA springs,     And all the rage of grief his bosom wrings,     Grief to behold, the while fond hope enjoy'd     The meed of all his toils, that hope destroy'd.     In awful horror lost, the hero stands,     And rolls his eyes to heav'n, and spreads his hands,     While to the clouds his vessel rides the swell,     And now, her black keel strikes the gates of hell;     "O Thou," he cries, "whom trembling heav'n obeys,     Whose will the tempest's furious madness sways,     Who, through the wild waves, ledd'st Thy chosen race,     While the high billows stood like walls of brass:[434]     O Thou, while ocean bursting o'er the world     Roar'd o'er the hills, and from the sky down hurl'd     Rush'd other headlong oceans; oh, as then     The second father of the race of men[435]     Safe in Thy care the dreadful billows rode,     Oh! save us now, be now the Saviour-God!     Safe in Thy care, what dangers have we pass'd!     And shalt Thou leave us, leave us now at last     To perish here--our dangers and our toils     To spread Thy laws unworthy of Thy smiles;     Our vows unheard? Heavy with all thy weight,     Oh horror, come! and come, eternal night!"

      He paus'd;--then round his eyes and arms he threw     In gesture wild, and thus: "Oh happy you!     You, who in Afric fought for holy faith,     And, pierc'd with Moorish spears, in glorious death     Beheld the smiling heav'ns your toils reward,     By your brave mates beheld the conquest shar'd;     Oh happy you, on every shore renown'd!     Your vows respected, and your wishes crown'd."

      He spoke; redoubled rag'd the mingled blasts;     Through the torn cordage and the shatter'd masts     The winds loud whistled, fiercer lightnings blaz'd,     And louder roars the doubled thunders rais'd,     The sky and ocean blending, each on fire,     Seem'd as all Nature struggled to expire.     When now, the silver star of Love appear'd,[436]     Bright in the east her radiant front she rear'd;     Fair, through the horrid storm, the gentle ray     Announc'd the promise of the cheerful day;     From her bright throne Celestial Love beheld     The tempest burn, and blast on blast impell'd:     "And must the furious demon still," she cries,     "Still urge his rage, nor all the past suffice!     Yet, as the past, shall all his rage be vain----"     She spoke, and darted to the roaring main;     Her lovely nymphs she calls, the nymphs obey,     Her nymphs the virtues who confess her sway;     Round ev'ry brow she bids the rose-buds twine,     And ev'ry flower adown the locks to shine,     The snow-white lily, and the laurel green,     And pink and yellow as at strife be seen.     Instant, amid their golden ringlets strove     Each flow'ret, planted by the hand of Love;     At strife, who first th' enamour'd powers to gain,     Who rule the tempests and the waves restrain:     Bright as a starry band the Nereids shone,     Instant old Eolus' sons their presence[437] own;     The winds die faintly, and, in softest sighs,     Each at his fair one's feet desponding lies:     The bright Orithia, threatening, sternly chides     The furious Boreas, and his faith derides;     The furious Boreas owns her powerful bands:     Fair Galatea, with a smile commands     The raging Notus, for his love, how true,     His fervent passion and his faith she knew.     Thus, every nymph her various lover chides;     The silent winds are fetter'd by their brides;     And, to the goddess of celestial loves,     Mild as her look, and gentle as her doves,     In flow'ry bands are brought. Their am'rous flame     The queen approves, and "ever burn the same,"     She cries, and joyful on the nymphs' fair hands,     Th' Eolian race receive the queen's commands,     And vow, that henceforth her Armada's sails     Should gently swell with fair propitious gales.[438]

      Now, morn, serene, in dappled grey arose     O'er the fair lawns where murm'ring Ganges flows;     Pale shone the wave beneath the golden beam,     Blue, o'er the silver flood, Malabria's mountains gleam;     The sailors on the main-top's airy round,     "Land, land!" aloud with waving hands resound;     Aloud the pilot of Melinda cries,     "Behold, O chief, the shores of India rise!"     Elate, the joyful crew on tip-toe trod,     And every breast with swelling raptures glow'd;     GAMA's great soul confess'd the rushing swell,     Prone on his manly knees the hero fell;     "O bounteous heav'n!" he cries, and spreads his hands     To bounteous heav'n, while boundless joy commands     No further word to flow. In wonder lost,     As one in horrid dreams through whirlpools toss'd,     Now, snatch'd by demons, rides the flaming air,     And howls, and hears the howlings of despair;     Awak'd, amaz'd, confus'd with transport glows,     And, trembling still, with troubled joy o'erflows;     So, yet affected with the sickly weight     Left by the horrors of the dreadful night,     The hero wakes, in raptures to behold     The Indian shores before his prows unfold:     Bounding, he rises, and, with eyes on fire,     Surveys the limits of his proud desire.

      O glorious chief, while storms and oceans rav'd,     What hopeless toils thy dauntless valour brav'd!     By toils like thine the brave ascend to heav'n,     By toils like thine immortal fame is giv'n.     Not he, who daily moves in ermine gown,     Who nightly slumbers on the couch of down;     Who proudly boasts through heroes old to trace     The lordly lineage of his titled race;     Proud of the smiles of every courtier lord,     A welcome guest at every courtier's board;     Not he, the feeble son of ease, may claim     Thy wreath, O GAMA, or may hope thy fame.     'Tis he, who nurtur'd on the tented field,     From whose brown cheek each tint of fear expell'd,     With manly face unmov'd, secure, serene,     Amidst the thunders of the deathful scene,     From horror's mouth dares snatch the warrior's crown,     His own his honours, all his fame his own:     Who, proudly just to honour's stern commands,     The dogstar's rage on Afric's burning sands,     Or the keen air of midnight polar skies,     Long watchful by the helm, alike defies:     Who, on his front, the trophies of the wars,     Bears his proud knighthood's badge, his honest scars;     Who, cloth'd in steel, by thirst, by famine worn,     Through raging seas by bold ambition borne,     Scornful of gold, by noblest ardour fir'd,     Each wish by mental dignity inspir'd,     Prepar'd each ill to suffer, or to dare,     To bless mankind, his great, his only care;     Him whom her son mature Experience owns,     Him, him alone Heroic Glory crowns.

Once more the translator is tempted to confess his opinion, that the contrary practice of Homer and Virgil affords, in reality, no reasonable objection against the exclamatory exuberances of Camoëns. Homer, though the father of the epic poem, has his exuberances, which violently trespass against the first rule of the epopea, the unity of the action. A rule which, strictly speaking, is not outraged by the digressive exclamations of Camoëns. The one now before us, as the severest critic must allow, is happily adapted to the subject of the book. The great dangers which the hero had hitherto encountered are particularly described. He is afterwards brought in safety to the Indian shore, the object of his ambition, and of all his toils. The exclamation, therefore, on the grand hinge of the poem has its propriety, and discovers the warmth of its author's genius. It must also please, as it is strongly characteristic of the temper of our military poet. The manly contempt with which he speaks of the luxurious, inactive courtier, and the delight and honour with which he talks of the toils of the soldier, present his own active life to the reader of sensibility. His campaigns in Africa, where in a gallant attack he lost an eye, his dangerous life at sea, and the military fatigues, and the battles in which he bore an honourable share in India, rise to our idea, and possess us with an esteem and admiration of our martial poet, who thus could look back with a gallant enthusiasm (though his modesty does not mention himself) on all the hardships he had endured; who thus could bravely esteem the dangers to which he had been exposed, and by which he had severely suffered, as the most desirable occurrences of his life, and the ornament of his name.


END OF THE SIXTH BOOK.




BOOK VII.

THE ARGUMENT.

The poet, having expatiated on the glorious achievements of the Portuguese, describes the Germans, English, French, and Italians, reproaching them for their profane wars and luxury, while they ought to have been employed in opposing the enemies of the Christian faith. He then describes the western peninsula of India--the shores of Malabar--and Calicut, the capital of the Zamorim, where Gama had landed. Monsaide, a Moor of Barbary, is met with, who addresses Gama in Spanish, and offers to serve him as interpreter, Monsaide gives him a particular account of everything in India. The Zamorim invites Gama to an audience. The catual, or prime minister, with his officers, visits the ships, and embraces the opportunity of asking Gama to relate to him the history of Portugal.


    Hail glorious chief![439] where never chief before     Forc'd his bold way, all hail on India's shore!     And hail, Ye Lusian heroes, fair and wide     What groves of palm, to haughty Rome denied,     For you by Ganges' length'ning banks unfold!     What laurel-forests on the shores of gold     For you their honours ever verdant rear,     Proud, with their leaves, to twine the Lusian spear!

      Ah Heav'n! what fury Europe's sons controls!     What self-consuming discord fires their souls!     'Gainst her own breast her sword Germania turns,     Through all her states fraternal rancour burns;[440]     Some, blindly wand'ring, holy faith disclaim,[441]     And, fierce through all, wild rages civil flame.     High sound the titles of the English crown,     "King of Jerusalem,"[442] his old renown!     Alas, delighted with an airy name,     The thin, dim shadow of departed fame,     England's stern monarch, sunk in soft repose,     Luxurious riots mid his northern snows:     Or, if the starting burst of rage succeed,     His brethren are his foes, and Christians bleed;     While Hagar's brutal race his titles stain,                 }     In weeping Salem unmolested reign,                          }     And with their rites impure her holy shrines profane.       }     And thou, O Gaul,[443] with gaudy trophies plum'd.     "Most Christian" nam'd; alas, in vain assum'd!     What impious lust of empire steels thy breast[444]     From their just lords the Christian lands to wrest!     While holy faith's hereditary foes[445]     Possess the treasures where Cynifio flows;[446]     And all secure, behold their harvests smile     In waving gold along the banks of Nile.     And thou, O lost to glory, lost to fame,     Thou dark oblivion of thy ancient name,     By every vicious luxury debas'd,     Each noble passion from thy breast eras'd,     Nerveless in sloth, enfeebling arts thy boast,     O Italy, how fall'n, how low, how lost![447]     In vain, to thee, the call of glory sounds,     Thy sword alone thy own soft bosom wounds.

      Ah, Europe's sons, ye brother-powers, in you     The fables old of Cadmus[448] now are true;     Fierce rose the brothers from the dragon teeth,     And each fell, crimson'd with a brother's death.     So, fall the bravest of the Christian name,[449]     While dogs unclean[450] Messiah's lore blaspheme,     And howl their curses o'er the holy tomb,     While to the sword the Christian race they doom.     From age to age, from shore to distant shore,     By various princes led, their legions pour;     United all in one determin'd aim,     From ev'ry land to blot the Christian name.     Then wake, ye brother-powers, combin'd awake,     And, from the foe the great example take.     If empire tempt ye, lo, the East expands,     Fair and immense, her summer-garden lands:     There, boastful Wealth displays her radiant store;     Pactol and Hermus' streams, o'er golden ore,     Roll their long way; but, not for you they flow,     Their treasures blaze on the stern sultan's brow:     For him Assyria plies the loom of gold,     And Afric's sons their deepest mines unfold     To build his haughty throne. Ye western powers,     To throw the mimic bolt of Jove is yours,     Yours all the art to wield the arms of fire,     Then, bid the thunders of the dreadful tire     Against the walls of dread Byzantium[451] roar,     Till, headlong driven from Europe's ravish'd shore     To their cold Scythian wilds, and dreary dens,     By Caspian mountains, and uncultur'd fens,     (Their fathers' seats beyond the Wolgian Lake,[452])     The barb'rous race of Saracen betake.     And hark, to you the woful Greek exclaims;     The Georgian fathers and th' Armenian dames,     Their fairest offspring from their bosoms torn,     (A dreadful tribute!)[453] loud imploring mourn.     Alas, in vain! their offspring captive led,     In Hagar's[454] sons' unhallow'd temples bred,     To rapine train'd, arise a brutal host,     The Christian terror, and the Turkish boast.

      Yet sleep, ye powers of Europe, careless sleep,     To you in vain your eastern brethren weep;     Yet, not in vain their woe-wrung tears shall sue,     Though small the Lusian realms, her legions few,     The guardian oft by Heav'n ordain'd before,     The Lusian race shall guard Messiah's lore.     When Heav'n decreed to crush the Moorish foe     Heav'n gave the Lusian spear to strike the blow.     When Heav'n's own laws o'er Afric's shores were heard,     The sacred shrines the Lusian heroes rear'd;[455]     Nor shall their zeal in Asia's bounds expire,     Asia, subdu'd, shall fume with hallow'd fire.     When the red sun the Lusian shore forsakes,     And on the lap of deepest west[456] awakes,     O'er the wild plains, beneath unincens'd skies     The sun shall view the Lusian altars rise.     And, could new worlds by human step be trod,     Those worlds should tremble at the Lusian nod.[457]

      And now, their ensigns blazing o'er the tide,     On India's shore the Lusian heroes ride.     High to the fleecy clouds resplendent far     Appear the regal towers of Malabar,     Imperial Calicut,[458] the lordly seat     Of the first monarch of the Indian state.     Right to the port the valiant GAMA bonds,     With joyful shouts, a fleet of boats attends:     Joyful, their nets they leave and finny prey,     And, crowding round the Lusians, point the way.     A herald now, by VASCO'S high command     Sent to the monarch, treads the Indian strand;     The sacred staff he bears, in gold he shines,     And tells his office by majestic signs.     As, to and fro, recumbent to the gale,     The harvest waves along the yellow dale,     So, round the herald press the wond'ring throng,     Recumbent waving as they pour along,     And much his manly port and strange attire,     And much his fair and ruddy hue admire:     When, speeding through the crowd, with eager haste,     And honest smiles, a son of Afric press'd;     Enrapt with joy the wond'ring herald hears     Castilia's manly tongue salute his ears.[459]     "What friendly angel from thy Tago's shore     Has led thee hither?" cries the joyful Moor.     Then, hand in hand (the pledge of faith) conjoin'd--     "Oh joy beyond the dream of hope to find,     To hear a kindred voice," the Lusian cried,     "Beyond unmeasur'd gulfs and seas untried;     Untried, before our daring keels explor'd     Our fearless way! O Heav'n, what tempests roar'd,     While, round the vast of Afric's southmost land,     Our eastward bowsprits sought the Indian strand!"     Amaz'd, o'erpower'd, the friendly stranger stood--     "A path now open'd through the boundless flood!     The hope of ages, and the dread despair,     Accomplish'd now, and conquer'd!"--Stiff his hair     Rose thrilling, while his lab'ring thoughts pursued     The dreadful course by GAMA'S fate subdued.     Homeward, with gen'rous warmth o'erflow'd, he leads     The Lusian guest, and swift the feast succeeds;     The purple grape, and golden fruitage smile;     And each choice viand of the Indian soil     Heap'd o'er the board, the master's zeal declare;     The social feast the guest and master share:     The sacred pledge of eastern faith[460] approv'd,     By wrath unalter'd, and by wrong unmov'd.     Now, to the fleet the joyful herald bends,     With earnest pace the Heav'n-sent friend attends:     Now, down the river's sweepy stream they glide,     And now, their pinnace cuts the briny tide:     The Moor, with transport sparkling in his eyes,     The well-known make of GAMA'S navy spies,     The bending bowsprit, and the mast so tall,     The sides black, frowning as a castle wall,     The high-tower'd stern, the lordly nodding prore,     And the broad standard slowly waving o'er     The anchor's moony[461] fangs. The skiff he leaves,     Brave GAMA'S deck his bounding step receives;     And, "Hail!" he cries: in transport GAMA sprung,     And round his neck with friendly welcome hung;     Enrapt, so distant o'er the dreadful main,     To hear the music of the tongue of Spain.     And now, beneath a painted shade of state,     Beside the admiral, the stranger sat.     Of India's clime, the natives, and the laws,     What monarch sways them, what religion awes?     Why from the tombs devoted to his sires     The son so far? the valiant chief inquires.     In act to speak the stranger waves his hand,     The joyful crew in silent wonder stand,     Each gently pressing on, with greedy ear,     As erst the bending forests stoop'd to hear     In Rhodope,[462] when Orpheus' heavenly strain,     Deplor'd his lost Eurydice in vain;     While, with a mien that gen'rous friendship won     From ev'ry heart, the stranger thus began:--

      "Your glorious deeds, ye Lusians, well I know,     To neighb'ring earth the vital air I owe;     Yet--though my faith the Koran's lore revere;     So taught my sires; my birth at proud Tangier,     A hostile clime to Lisbon's awful name--     I glow, enraptur'd, o'er the Lusian fame;     Proud though your nation's warlike glories shine,     These proudest honours yield, O chief, to thine;     Beneath thy dread achievements low they fall,     And India's shore, discover'd, crowns them all.     Won by your fame, by fond affection sway'd,     A friend I come, and offer friendship's aid.     As, on my lips Castilia's language glows,     So, from my tongue the speech of India flows:     Mozaide my name, in India's court belov'd,     For honest deeds (but time shall speak) approv'd.     When India's monarch greets his court again,     (For now the banquet on the tented plain:     And sylvan chase his careless hours employ),[463]     When India's mighty lord, with wond'ring joy,     Shall hail you welcome on his spacious shore     Through oceans never plough'd by keel before,     Myself shall glad interpreter attend,     Mine ev'ry office of the faithful friend.     Ah! but a stream, the labour of the oar,     Divides my birthplace from your native shore;     On shores unknown, in distant worlds, how sweet     The kindred tongue, the kindred face, to greet!     Such now my joy; and such, O Heav'n, be yours!     Yes, bounteous Heav'n your glad success secures.     Till now impervious, Heav'n alone subdued     The various horrors of the trackless flood:     Heav'n sent you here for some great work divine,     And Heav'n inspires my breast your sacred toils to join.

      "Vast are the shores of India's wealthful soil;     Southward sea-girt she forms a demi-isle:     His cavern'd cliffs with dark-brow'd forests crown'd,     Hemodian Taurus[464] frowns her northern bound:     From Caspia's lake th' enormous mountain[464] spreads,     And, bending eastward, rears a thousand heads:     Far to extremest sea the ridges thrown,     By various names, through various tribes are known:     Here down the waste of Taurus' rocky side     Two infant rivers pour the crystal tide,     Indus the one, and one the Ganges nam'd,     Darkly of old through distant nations fam'd:     One eastward curving holds his crooked way,     One to the west gives his swoll'n tide to stray:     Declining southward many a land they lave,     And, widely swelling, roll the sea-like wave,     Till the twin offspring of the mountain sire     Both in the Indian deep engulf'd expire:     Between these streams, fair smiling to the day,     The Indian lands their wide domains display,     And many a league, far to the south they bend,     From the broad region where the rivers end,     Till, where the shores to Ceylon's isle oppose,     In conic form the Indian regions close.     To various laws the various tribes incline,     And various are the rites esteem'd divine:     Some, as from Heav'n, receive the Koran's lore,     Some the dread monsters of the wild adore;     Some bend to wood and stone the prostrate head,     And rear unhallow'd altars to the dead.     By Ganges' banks, as wild traditions tell,[465]     Of old the tribes liv'd healthful by the smell;     No food they knew, such fragrant vapours rose     Rich from the flow'ry lawns where Ganges flows:     Here now the Delhian, and the fierce Pathàn,     Feed their fair flocks; and here, a heathen clan,     Stern Dekhan's sons the fertile valleys till,     A clan, whose hope to shun eternal ill,     Whose trust from ev'ry stain of guilt to save,     Is fondly plac'd in Ganges' holy wave;[466]     If to the stream the breathless corpse be giv'n     They deem the spirit wings her way to heav'n.     Here by the mouths, where hallow'd Ganges ends,     Bengala's beauteous Eden wide extends,     Unrivall'd smile her fair luxurious vales:     And here Cambaya[467] spreads her palmy dales;     A warlike realm, where still the martial race     From Porus,[468] fam'd of yore, their lineage trace.     Narsinga[469] here displays her spacious line,     In native gold her sons and ruby shine:     Alas, how vain! these gaudy sons of fear,     Trembling, bow down before each hostile spear.     And now, behold!"--and while he spoke he rose,     Now, with extended arm, the prospect shows,--     "Behold these mountain tops of various size     Blend their dim ridges with the fleecy skies:     Nature's rude wall, against the fierce Canar[470]     They guard the fertile lawns of Malabar.     Here, from the mountain to the surgy main,     Fair as a garden, spreads the smiling plain:     And lo, the empress of the Indian powers,     Their lofty Calicut, resplendent towers;     Hers ev'ry fragrance of the spicy shore,     Hers ev'ry gem of India's countless store:     Great Samoreem, her lord's imperial style,     The mighty lord of India's utmost soil:     To him the kings their duteous tribute pay,     And, at his feet, confess their borrow'd sway.     Yet higher tower'd the monarchs ancients boast,     Of old one sov'reign rul'd the spacious coast.     A votive train, who brought the Koran's lore,     (What time great Perimal the sceptre bore),     From blest Arabia's groves to India came;     Life were their words, their eloquence a flame     Of holy zeal: fir'd by the powerful strain,     The lofty monarch joins the faithful train,     And vows, at fair Medina's[471] shrine, to close     His life's mild eve in prayer, and sweet repose.     Gifts he prepares to deck the prophet's tomb,     The glowing labours of the Indian loom,     Orissa's spices, and Golconda's gems;     Yet, e'er the fleet th' Arabian ocean stems,     His final care his potent regions claim,     Nor his the transport of a father's name:     His servants, now, the regal purple wear,     And, high enthron'd, the golden sceptres bear.     Proud Cochim one, and one fair Chalé sways,     The spicy isle another lord obeys;     Coulam and Cananoor's luxurious fields,     And Cranganore to various lords he yields.     While these, and others thus the monarch grac'd,     A noble youth his care unmindful pass'd:     Save Calicut, a city poor and small,     Though lordly now, no more remain'd to fall:     Griev'd to behold such merit thus repaid,     The sapient youth the 'king of kings' he made,     And, honour'd with the name, great Zamoreem,     The lordly, titled boast of power supreme.     And now, great Perimal[472] resigns his reign,     The blissful bowers of Paradise to gain:     Before the gale his gaudy navy flies,     And India sinks for ever from his eyes.     And soon to Calicut's commodious port     The fleets, deep-edging with the wave, resort:     Wide o'er the shore extend the warlike piles,     And all the landscape round luxurious smiles.     And now, her flag to ev'ry gale unfurl'd,     She towers, the empress of the eastern world:     Such are the blessings sapient kings bestow,     And from thy stream such gifts, O Commerce, flow.

      "From that sage youth, who first reign'd 'king of kings,'     He now who sways the tribes of India springs.     Various the tribes, all led by fables vain,     Their rites the dotage of the dreamful brain.     All, save where Nature whispers modest care,     Naked, they blacken in the sultry air.     The haughty nobles and the vulgar race     Never must join the conjugal embrace;     Nor may the stripling, nor the blooming maid,     (Oh, lost to joy, by cruel rites betray'd!)     To spouse of other than their father's art,     At Love's connubial shrine unite the heart:     Nor may their sons (the genius and the view     Confin'd and fetter'd) other art pursue.     Vile were the stain, and deep the foul disgrace,     Should other tribe touch one of noble race;     A thousand rites, and washings o'er and o'er,     Can scarce his tainted purity restore.     Poleas[473] the lab'ring lower clans are nam'd:     By the proud Nayres the noble rank is claim'd;     The toils of culture, and of art they scorn,     The warrior's plumes their haughty brows adorn;     The shining falchion brandish'd in the right,     Their left arm wields the target in the fight;     Of danger scornful, ever arm'd they stand     Around the king, a stern barbarian band.     Whate'er in India holds the sacred name     Of piety or lore, the Brahmins claim:     In wildest rituals, vain and painful, lost,     Brahma,[474] their founder, as a god they boast.[475]     To crown their meal no meanest life expires,     Pulse, fruit, and herbs alone their board requires:     Alone, in lewdness riotous and free,     No spousal ties withhold, and no degree:     Lost to the heart-ties, to his neighbour's arms,     The willing husband yields his spouse's charms:     In unendear'd embraces free they blend;     Yet, but the husband's kindred may ascend     The nuptial couch: alas, too blest, they know             }     Nor jealousy's suspense, nor burning woe;                 }     The bitter drops which oft from dear affection flow.      }     But, should my lips each wond'rous scene unfold,     Which your glad eyes will soon amaz'd behold,     Oh, long before the various tale could run,     Deep in the west would sink yon eastern sun.     In few, all wealth from China to the Nile,     All balsams, fruit, and gold on India's bosom smile."

      While thus, the Moor his faithful tale reveal'd,     Wide o'er the coast the voice of Rumour swell'd;     As, first some upland vapour seems to float     Small as the smoke of lonely shepherd cote,     Soon o'er the dales the rolling darkness spreads,     And wraps in hazy clouds the mountain heads,     The leafless forest and the utmost lea;     And wide its black wings hover o'er the sea:     The tear-dropp'd bough hangs weeping in the vale,     And distant navies rear the mist-wet sail.     So, Fame increasing, loud and louder grew,     And to the sylvan camp resounding flew:     "A lordly band," she cries, "of warlike mien,     Of face and garb in India never seen,     Of tongue unknown, through gulfs undar'd before,     Unknown their aim, have reach'd the Indian shore."     To hail their chief the Indian lord prepares,     And to the fleet he sends his banner'd Nayres:     As to the bay the nobles press along,     The wond'ring city pours th' unnumber'd throng.     And now brave GAMA, and his splendid train,     Himself adorn'd in all the pride of Spain,     In gilded barges slowly bend to shore,     While to the lute the gently falling oar     Now, breaks the surges of the briny tide,     And now, the strokes the cold fresh stream divide.     Pleas'd with the splendour of the Lusian band,     On every bank the crowded thousands stand.     Begirt with, high-plum'd nobles, by the flood     The first great minister of India stood,     The Catual[476] his name in India's tongue:     To GAMA swift the lordly regent sprung;     His open arms the valiant chief enfold,     And now he lands him on the shore of gold:     With pomp unwonted India's nobles greet     The fearless heroes of the warlike fleet.     A couch on shoulders borne, in India's mode,     (With gold the canopy and purple glow'd),     Receives the Lusian captain; equal rides     The lordly catual, and onward guides,     While GAMA'S train, and thousands of the throng     Of India's sons, encircling, pour along.     To hold discourse in various tongues they try;     In vain; the accents unremember'd die,     Instant as utter'd. Thus, on Babel's plain     Each builder heard his mate, and heard in vain.     GAMA the while, and India's second lord,     Hold glad responses, as the various word     The faithful Moor unfolds. The city gate     They pass'd, and onward, tower'd in sumptuous state,     Before them now the sacred temple rose;     The portals wide the sculptur'd shrines disclose.     The chiefs advance, and, enter'd now, behold     The gods of wood, cold stone, and shining gold;     Various of figure, and of various face,     As the foul demon will'd the likeness base.     Taught to behold the rays of godhead shine     Fair imag'd in the human face divine,     With sacred horror thrill'd, the Lusians view'd     The monster forms, Chimera-like, and rude.[477]     Here, spreading horns a human visage bore,     So, frown'd stern Jove in Lybia's fane of yore.     One body here two various faces rear'd;     So, ancient Janus o'er his shrine appear'd.     A hundred arms another brandish'd wide;     So, Titan's son[478] the race of heaven defied.     And here, a dog his snarling tusks display'd;     Anubis, thus in Memphis' hallow'd shade     Grinn'd horrible. With vile prostrations low     Before these shrines the blinded Indians bow.[479]     And now, again the splendid pomp proceeds;     To India's lord the haughty regent leads.     To view the glorious leader of the fleet     Increasing thousands swell o'er every street;     High o'er the roofs the struggling youths ascend,     The hoary fathers o'er the portals bend,     The windows sparkle with the glowing blaze     Of female eyes, and mingling diamond's rays.     And now, the train with solemn state and slow,     Approach the royal gate, through many a row     Of fragrant wood-walks, and of balmy bowers,     Radiant with fruitage, ever gay with flowers.     Spacious the dome its pillar'd grandeur spread,     Nor to the burning day high tower'd the head;     The citron groves around the windows glow'd,     And branching palms their grateful shade bestow'd;     The mellow light a pleasing radiance cast;     The marble walls Dædalian sculpture grac'd     Here India's fate,[480] from darkest times of old,     The wondrous artist on the stone enroll'd;     Here, o'er the meadows, by Hydaspes' stream,     In fair array the marshall'd legions seem:     A youth of gleeful eye the squadrons led,     Smooth was his cheek, and glow'd with purest red:     Around his spear the curling vine-leaves wav'd;     And, by a streamlet of the river lav'd,     Behind her founder, Nysa's walls were rear'd;[481]     So breathing life the ruddy god appear'd,     Had Semele beheld the smiling boy,[482]     The mother's heart had proudly heav'd with joy.     Unnumber'd here, were seen th' Assyrian throng,     That drank whole rivers as they march'd along:     Each eye seem'd earnest on their warrior queen,[483]     High was her port, and furious was her mien;     Her valour only equall'd by her lust;     Fast by her side her courser paw'd the dust,     Her son's vile rival; reeking to the plain     Fell the hot sweat-drops as he champ'd the rein.     And here display'd, most glorious to behold,     The Grecian banners, op'ning many a fold,     Seem'd trembling on the gale; at distance far     The Ganges lav'd the wide-extended war.     Here, the blue marble gives the helmets' gleam;     Here, from the cuirass shoots the golden beam.     A proud-eyed youth, with palms unnumber'd gay,     Of the bold veterans led the brown array;     Scornful of mortal birth enshrin'd he rode,     Call'd Jove his father,[484] and assum'd the god.

      While dauntless GAMA and his train survey'd     The sculptur'd walls, the lofty regent said:     "For nobler wars than these you wond'ring see     That ample space th' eternal fates decree:     Sacred to these th' unpictur'd wall remains,     Unconscious yet of vanquish'd India's chains.     Assur'd we know the awful day shall come,     Big with tremendous fate, and India's doom.     The sons of Brahma, by the god their sire     Taught to illume the dread divining fire,     From the drear mansions of the dark abodes     Awake the dead, or call th' infernal gods;     Then, round the flame, while glimm'ring ghastly blue,     Behold the future scene arise to view.     The sons of Brahma, in the magic hour,     Beheld the foreign foe tremendous lower;     Unknown their tongue, their face, and strange attire,     And their bold eye-balls burn'd with warlike ire:     They saw the chief o'er prostrate India rear     The glitt'ring terrors of his awful spear.     But, swift behind these wint'ry days of woe     A spring of joy arose in liveliest glow,     Such gentle manners, leagued with wisdom, reign'd     In the dread victors, and their rage restrain'd.     Beneath their sway majestic, wise, and mild,     Proud of her victors' laws, thrice happier India smil'd.     So, to the prophets of the Brahmin train     The visions rose, that never rose in vain."

      The regent ceas'd; and now, with solemn pace,     The chiefs approach the regal hall of grace.     The tap'stried walls with gold were pictur'd o'er,     And flow'ry velvet spread the marble floor.[485]     In all the grandeur of the Indian state,     High on a blazing couch, the monarch sat,     With starry gems the purple curtains shin'd,     And ruby flowers and golden foliage twin'd     Around the silver pillars: high o'er head     The golden canopy its radiance shed:     Of cloth of gold the sov'reign's mantle shone,     And, his high turban flam'd with precious stone     Sublime and awful was his sapient mien,     Lordly his posture, and his brow serene.     A hoary sire, submiss on bended knee,     (Low bow'd his head), in India's luxury,     A leaf,[486] all fragrance to the glowing taste,     Before the king each little while replac'd.     The patriarch Brahmin (soft and slow he rose),     Advancing now, to lordly GAMA bows,     And leads him to the throne; in silent state     The monarch's nod assigns the captain's seat;     The Lusian train in humbler distance stand:     Silent, the monarch eyes the foreign band     With awful mien; when valiant GAMA broke     The solemn pause, and thus majestic spoke:--

      "From where the crimson sun of ev'ning laves     His blazing chariot in the western waves,     I come, the herald of a mighty king,     And, holy vows of lasting friendship bring     To thee, O monarch, for resounding Fame     Far to the west has borne thy princely name;     All India's sov'reign thou! Nor deem I sue,     Great as thou art, the humble suppliant's due.     Whate'er from western Tagus to the Nile,     Inspires the monarch's wish, the merchant's toil,     From where the north-star gleams o'er seas of frost,     To Ethiopia's utmost burning coast,     Whate'er the sea, whate'er the land bestows,     In my great monarch's realm unbounded flows.     Pleas'd thy high grandeur and renown to hear,     My sov'reign offers friendship's bands sincere:     Mutual he asks them, naked of disguise,     Then, every bounty of the smiling skies     Shower'd on his shore and thine, in mutual flow,     Shall joyful Commerce on each shore bestow.     Our might in war, what vanquish'd nations fell     Beneath our spear, let trembling Afric tell;     Survey my floating towers, and let thine ear,     Dread as it roars, our battle-thunder hear.     If friendship then thy honest wish explore,     That dreadful thunder on thy foes shall roar.     Our banners o'er the crimson field shall sweep,     And our tall navies ride the foamy deep,     Till not a foe against thy land shall rear     Th' invading bowsprit, or the hostile spear:     My king, thy brother, thus thy wars shall join,     The glory his, the gainful harvest thine."

      Brave GAMA spake; the pagan king replies,     "From lands which now behold the morning rise,     While eve's dim clouds the Indian sky enfold,     Glorious to us an offer'd league we hold.     Yet shall our will in silence rest unknown,     Till what your land, and who the king you own,     Our council deeply weigh. Let joy the while,     And the glad feast, the fleeting hours beguile.     Ah! to the wearied mariner, long toss'd     O'er briny waves, how sweet the long-sought coast!     The night now darkens; on the friendly shore     Let soft repose your wearied strength restore,     Assur'd an answer from our lips to bear,     Which, not displeas'd, your sov'reign lord shall hear.     More now we add not."[487] From the hall of state     Withdrawn, they now approach the regent's gate;     The sumptuous banquet glows; all India's pride     Heap'd on the board the royal feast supplied.     Now, o'er the dew-drops of the eastern lawn     Gleam'd the pale radiance of the star of dawn,     The valiant GAMA on his couch repos'd,     And balmy rest each Lusian eye-lid clos'd:     When the high catual, watchful to fulfil     The cautious mandates of his sov'reign's will,     In secret converse with the Moor retires;     And, earnest, much of Lusus' sons inquires;     What laws, what holy rites, what monarch sway'd     The warlike race? When thus the just Mozaide:--

      "The land from whence these warriors well I know,     (To neighb'ring earth my hapless birth I owe)     Illustrious Spain, along whose western shores     Grey-dappled eve the dying twilight pours.--     A wondrous prophet gave their holy lore,     The godlike seer a virgin mother bore,     Th' Eternal Spirit on the human race     (So be they taught) bestow'd such awful grace.     In war unmatch'd, they rear the trophied crest:     What terrors oft have thrill'd my infant breast[488]     When their brave deeds my wond'ring fathers told;     How from the lawns, where, crystalline and cold,     The Guadiana rolls his murm'ring tide,     And those where, purple by the Tago's side,     The length'ning vineyards glisten o'er the field,     Their warlike sires my routed sires expell'd:     Nor paus'd their rage; the furious seas they brav'd,     Nor loftiest walls, nor castled mountains saved;     Round Afric's thousand bays their navies rode,     And their proud armies o'er our armies trod.     Nor less, let Spain through all her kingdoms own,     O'er other foes their dauntless valour shone:     Let Gaul confess, her mountain-ramparts wild,     Nature in vain the hoar Pyrenians pil'd.     No foreign lance could e'er their rage restrain,     Unconquer'd still the warrior race remain.     More would you hear, secure your care may trust     The answer of their lips, so nobly just,     Conscious of inward worth, of manners plain,     Their manly souls the gilded lie disdain.     Then, let thine eyes their lordly might admire,     And mark the thunder of their arms of fire:     The shore, with trembling, hears the dreadful sound,     And rampir'd walls lie smoking on the ground.     Speed to the fleet; their arts, their prudence weigh,     How wise in peace, in war how dread, survey."

      With keen desire the craftful pagan burn'd     Soon as the morn in orient blaze return'd,     To view the fleet his splendid train prepares;     And now, attended by the lordly Nayres,     The shore they cover, now the oarsmen sweep     The foamy surface of the azure deep:     And now, brave Paulus gives the friendly hand,     And high on GAMA'S lofty deck they stand.     Bright to the day the purple sail-cloths glow,     Wide to the gale the silken ensigns flow;     The pictur'd flags display the warlike strife;     Bold seem the heroes, as inspir'd by life.     Here, arm to arm, the single combat strains,     Here, burns the combat on the tented plains     General and fierce; the meeting lances thrust,     And the black blood seems smoking on the dust.     With earnest eyes the wond'ring regent views     The pictur'd warriors, and their history sues.     But now the ruddy juice, by Noah found,[489]     In foaming goblets circled swiftly round,     And o'er the deck swift rose the festive board;     Yet, smiling oft, refrains the Indian lord:     His faith forbade with other tribe to join     The sacred meal, esteem'd a rite divine.[490]     In bold vibrations, thrilling on the ear,     The battle sounds the Lusian trumpets rear;     Loud burst the thunders of the arms of fire,     Slow round the sails the clouds of smoke aspire,     And rolling their dark volumes o'er the day     The Lusian war, in dreadful pomp, display.     In deepest thought the careful regent weigh'd     The pomp and power at GAMA'S nod bewray'd;     Yet, seem'd alone in wonder to behold     The glorious heroes, and the wars half told     In silent poesy.--Swift from the board     High crown'd with wine, uprose the Indian lord;     Both the bold GAMAS, and their gen'rous peer,     The brave Coello, rose, prepar'd to hear     Or, ever courteous, give the meet reply:     Fix'd and inquiring was the regent's eye:     The warlike image of a hoary sire,     Whose name shall live till earth and time expire,     His wonder fix'd, and more than human glow'd     The hero's look; his robes of Grecian mode;     A bough, his ensign, in his right he wav'd,     A leafy bough.--But I, fond man depraved!     Where would I speed, as madd'ning in a dream,     Without your aid, ye Nymphs of Tago's stream!     Or yours, ye Dryads of Mondego's bowers!     Without your aid how vain my wearied powers!     Long yet, and various lies my arduous way     Through low'ring tempests and a boundless sea.     Oh then, propitious hear your son implore,     And guide my vessel to the happy shore.     Ah! see how long what perilous days, what woes     On many a foreign coast around me rose,     As, dragg'd by Fortune's chariot-wheels along,     I sooth'd my sorrows with the warlike song:[491]     Wide ocean's horrors length'ning now around,     And, now my footsteps trod the hostile ground;     Yet, mid each danger of tumultuous war     Your Lusian heroes ever claim'd my care:     As Canace[492] of old, ere self-destroy'd,     One hand the pen, and one the sword employ'd,     Degraded now, by poverty abhorr'd,     The guest dependent at the lordling's board:     Now blest with all the wealth fond hope could crave,     Soon I beheld that wealth beneath the wave     For ever lost;[493] myself escap'd alone,     On the wild shore all friendless, hopeless, thrown;     My life, like Judah's heaven-doom'd king of yore,[494]     By miracle prolong'd; yet not the more     To end my sorrows: woes succeeding woes     Belied my earnest hopes of sweet repose:     In place of bays around my brows to shed     Their sacred honours, o'er my destin'd head     Foul Calumny proclaim'd the fraudful tale,     And left me mourning in a dreary jail.[495]     Such was the meed, alas! on me bestow'd,                 }     Bestow'd by those for whom my numbers glow'd,            }     By those who to my toils their laurel honours ow'd.      }

      Ye gentle nymphs of Tago's rosy bowers,     Ah, see what letter'd patron-lords are yours!     Dull as the herds that graze their flow'ry dales,     To them in vain the injur'd muse bewails:     No fost'ring care their barb'rous hands bestow,     Though to the muse their fairest fame they owe.     Ah, cold may prove the future priest of fame     Taught by my fate: yet, will I not disclaim     Your smiles, ye muses of Mondego's shade;     Be still my dearest joy your happy aid!     And hear my vow: Nor king, nor loftiest peer     Shall e'er from me the song of flatt'ry hear;     Nor crafty tyrant, who in office reigns,     Smiles on his king, and binds the land in chains;     His king's worst foe: nor he whose raging ire,     And raging wants, to shape his course, conspire;     True to the clamours of the blinded crowd,     Their changeful Proteus, insolent and loud:     Nor he whose honest mien secures applause,     Grave though he seem, and father of the laws,     Who, but half-patriot, niggardly denies     Each other's merit, and withholds the prize:     Who spurns the muse,[496] nor feels the raptur'd strain,     Useless by him esteem'd, and idly vain:     For him, for these, no wreath my hand shall twine;     On other brows th' immortal rays shall shine:     He who the path of honour ever trod,     True to his king, his country, and his God,     On his blest head my hands shall fix the crown     Wove of the deathless laurels of renown.




END OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.




BOOK VIII.

THE ARGUMENT.

Description of the pictures, given by Paulus. The heroes of Portugal, from Lusus, one of the companions of Bacchus (who gave his name to Portugal), and Ulysses, the founder of Lisbon, down to Don Pedro and Don Henrique (Henry), the conquerors of Ceuta, are all represented in the portraits of Gama, and are characterized by appropriate verses. Meanwhile the zamorim has recourse to the oracles of his false gods, who make him acquainted with the future dominion of the Portuguese over India, and the consequent ruin of his empire. The Mohammedan Arabs conspire against the Portuguese. The zamorim questions the truth of Gama's statement, and charges him with being captain of a band of pirates. Gama is obliged to give up to the Indians the whole of his merchandise as ransom, when he obtains permission to re-embark. He seizes several merchants of Calicut, whom he detains on board his ship as hostages for his two factors, who were on land to sell his merchandise. He afterwards liberates the natives, whom he exchanges for his two companions. In Mickle's translation this portion of the original is omitted, and the factors are released in consequence of a victory gained by Gama.


    With eye unmov'd the silent CATUAL[497] view'd     The pictur'd sire[498] with seeming life endu'd;     A verdant vine-bough waving in his right,     Smooth flow'd his sweepy beard of glossy white,     When thus, as swift the Moor unfolds the word,     The valiant Paulus to the Indian lord:--

      "Bold though these figures frown, yet bolder far     These godlike heroes shin'd in ancient war.     In that hoar sire, of mien serene, august,     Lusus behold, no robber-chief unjust;     His cluster'd bough--the same which Bacchus bore[499]--     He waves, the emblem of his care of yore;     The friend of savage man, to Bacchus dear,     The son of Bacchus, or the bold compeer,     What time his yellow locks with vine-leaves curl'd,     The youthful god subdued the savage world,     Bade vineyards glisten o'er the dreary waste,     And humaniz'd the nations as he pass'd.     Lusus, the lov'd companion of the god,     In Spain's fair bosom fix'd his last abode,     Our kingdom founded, and illustrious reign'd     In those fair lawns, the bless'd Elysium feign'd,[500]     Where, winding oft, the Guadiana roves,     And Douro murmurs through, the flow'ry groves.     Here, with his bones, he left his deathless fame,     And Lusitania's clime shall ever bear his name.     That other chief th' embroider'd silk displays,     Toss'd o'er the deep whole years of weary days,     On Tago's banks, at last, his vows he paid:     To wisdom's godlike power, the Jove-born maid,[501]     Who fir'd his lips with eloquence divine,     On Tago's banks he rear'd the hallow'd shrine.     Ulysses he, though fated to destroy,     On Asian ground, the heav'n-built towers of Troy,[502]     On Europe's strand, more grateful to the skies,     He bade th' eternal walls of Lisbon rise."[503]

      "But who that godlike terror of the plain,     Who strews the smoking field with heaps of slain?     What num'rous legions fly in dire dismay,     Whose standards wide the eagle's wings display?"     The pagan asks: the brother chief[504] replies:--     "Unconquer'd deem'd, proud Rome's dread standard flies,     His crook thrown by, fir'd by his nation's woes,     The hero-shepherd Viriatus rose;     His country sav'd proclaim'd his warlike fame,     And Rome's wide empire trembled at his name.     That gen'rous pride which Rome to Pyrrhus bore,[505]     To him they show'd not; for they fear'd him more.     Not on the field o'ercome by manly force,     Peaceful he slept; and now, a murder'd corse,     By treason slain, he lay. How stern, behold,     That other hero, firm, erect, and bold:     The power by which he boasted he divin'd,     Beside him pictur'd stands, the milk-white hind:     Injur'd by Rome, the stern Sertorius fled     To Tago's shore, and Lusus' offspring led;     Their worth he knew; in scatter'd flight he drove     The standards painted with the birds of Jove.     And lo, the flag whose shining colours own     The glorious founder of the Lusian throne!     Some deem the warrior of Hungarian race,[506]     Some from Lorraine the godlike hero trace.     From Tagus' banks the haughty Moor expell'd,     Galicia's sons, and and Leon's warriors quell'd,     To weeping Salem's[507] ever-hallow'd meads,     His warlike bands the holy Henry leads;     By holy war to sanctify his crown,     And, to his latest race, auspicious waft it down."

      "And who this awful chief?" aloud exclaims     The wond'ring regent. "O'er the field he flames     In dazzling steel; where'er he bends his course     The battle sinks beneath his headlong force:     Against his troops, though few, the num'rous foes     In vain their spears and tow'ry walls oppose.     With smoking blood his armour sprinkled o'er,     High to the knees his courser paws in gore:     O'er crowns and blood-stain'd ensigns scatter'd round     He rides; his courser's brazen hoofs resound."     "In that great chief," the second GAMA cries,     "The first Alonzo[508] strikes thy wond'ring eyes.     From Lusus' realm the pagan Moors he drove;     Heav'n, whom he lov'd, bestow'd on him such love,     Beneath him, bleeding of its mortal wound,     The Moorish strength lay prostrate on the ground.     Nor Ammon's son, nor greater Julius dar'd     With troops so few, with hosts so num'rous warr'd:     Nor less shall Fame the subject heroes own:     Behold that hoary warrior's rageful frown!     On his young pupil's flight[509] his burning eyes     He darts, and, 'Turn thy flying host,' he cries,     'Back to the field!' The vet'ran and the boy     Back to the field exult with furious joy:     Their ranks mow'd down, the boastful foe recedes,     The vanquish'd triumph, and the victor bleeds.     Again, that mirror of unshaken faith,     Egaz behold, a chief self-doom'd to death.[510]     Beneath Castilia's sword his monarch lay;     Homage he vow'd his helpless king should pay;     His haughty king reliev'd, the treaty spurns,     With conscious pride the noble Egaz burns;     His comely spouse and infant race he leads,     Himself the same, in sentenced felons' weeds,     Around their necks the knotted halters bound,     With naked feet they tread the flinty ground;     And, prostrate now before Castilia's throne,     Their offer'd lives their monarch's pride atone.     Ah Rome! no more thy gen'rous consul boast.[511]     Whose 'lorn submission sav'd his ruin'd host:     No father's woes assail'd his stedfast mind;     The dearest ties the Lusian chief resign'd.

      "There, by the stream, a town besieged behold,     The Moorish tents the shatter'd walls enfold.     Fierce as the lion from the covert springs,     When hunger gives his rage the whirlwind's wings;     From ambush, lo, the valiant Fuaz pours,     And whelms in sudden rout th'astonish'd Moors.     The Moorish king[512] in captive chains he sends;     And, low at Lisbon's throne, the royal captive bends.     Fuaz again the artist's skill displays;     Far o'er the ocean shine his ensign's rays:     In crackling flames the Moorish galleys fly,     And the red blaze ascends the blushing sky:     O'er Avila's high steep the flames aspire,     And wrap the forests in a sheet of fire:     There seem the waves beneath the prows to boil;     And distant, far around for many a mile,     The glassy deep reflects the ruddy blaze;     Far on the edge the yellow light decays,     And blends with hov'ring blackness. Great and dread     Thus shone the day when first the combat bled,     The first our heroes battled on the main,     The glorious prelude of our naval reign,     Which, now the waves beyond the burning zone,     And northern Greenland's frost-bound billows own.     Again behold brave Fuaz dares the fight!     O'erpower'd he sinks beneath the Moorish might;     Smiling in death the martyr-hero lies,     And lo, his soul triumphant mounts the skies.     Here now, behold, in warlike pomp portray'd,     A foreign navy brings the pious aid.[513]     Lo, marching from the decks the squadrons spread,     Strange their attire, their aspect firm and dread.     The holy cross their ensigns bold display,     To Salem's aid they plough'd the wat'ry way:     Yet first, the cause the same, on Tago's shore     They dye their maiden swords in pagan gore.     Proud stood the Moor on Lisbon's warlike towers,     From Lisbon's walls they drive the Moorish powers:     Amid the thickest of the glorious fight,     Lo, Henry falls, a gallant German knight,     A martyr falls: that holy tomb behold,     There waves the blossom'd palm, the boughs of gold:     O'er Henry's grave the sacred plant arose,     And from the leaves,[514] Heav'n's gift, gay health redundant flows.

      "Aloft, unfurl!" the valiant Paulus cries.     Instant, new wars on new-spread ensigns rise     "In robes of white behold a priest advance![515]     His sword in splinters smites the Moorish lance:     Arronchez won revenges Lira's fall:     And lo, on fair Savilia's batter'd wall,     How boldly calm, amid the crashing spears,     That hero-form the Lusian standard rears.     There bleeds the war on fair Vandalia's plain:     Lo, rushing through the Moors, o'er hills of slain     The hero rides, and proves by genuine claim     The son of Egas,[516] and his worth the same.     Pierc'd by his dart the standard-bearer dies;     Beneath his feet the Moorish standard lies:     High o'er the field, behold the glorious blaze!     The victor-youth the Lusian flag displays.     Lo, while the moon through midnight azure rides,     From the high wall adown his spear-staff glides     The dauntless Gerald:[517] in his left he bears     Two watchmen's heads, his right the falchion rears:     The gate he opens, swift from ambush rise     His ready bands, the city falls his prize:     Evora still the grateful honour pays,     Her banner'd flag the mighty deed displays:     There frowns the hero; in his left he bears     The two cold heads, his right the falchion rears.     Wrong'd by his king,[518] and burning for revenge,     Behold his arms that proud Castilian change;     The Moorish buckler on his breast he bears,     And leads the fiercest of the pagan spears.     Abrantes falls beneath his raging force,     And now to Tagus bends his furious course.     Another fate he met on Tagus' shore,     Brave Lopez from his brows the laurels tore;     His bleeding army strew'd the thirsty ground,     And captive chains the rageful leader bound.     Resplendent far that holy chief behold!     Aside he throws the sacred staff of gold,     And wields the spear of steel. How bold advance     The num'rous Moors, and with the rested lance     Hem round the trembling Lusians. Calm and bold     Still towers the priest, and lo, the skies unfold:[519]     Cheer'd by the vision, brighter than the day,     The Lusians trample down the dread array     Of Hagar's legions: on the reeking plain     Low, with their slaves, four haughty kings lie slain.     In vain Alcazar rears her brazen walls,     Before his rushing host Alcazar falls.     There, by his altar, now the hero shines,     And, with the warrior's palm, his mitre twines.     That chief behold: though proud Castilia's host     He leads, his birth shall Tagus ever boast.     As a pent flood bursts headlong o'er the strand     So pours his fury o'er Algarbia's land:     Nor rampir'd town, nor castled rock afford     The refuge of defence from Payo's sword.     By night-veil'd art proud Sylves falls his prey,     And Tavila's high, walls, at middle day,     Fearless he scales: her streets in blood deplore     The seven brave hunters murder'd by the Moor.[520]     These three bold knights how dread![521] Thro' Spain and France     At joust and tourney with the tilted lance     Victors they rode: Castilia's court beheld     Her peers o'erthrown; the peers with rancour swell'd:     The bravest of the three their swords surround;     Brave Ribeir strews them vanquish'd o'er the ground.     Now let thy thoughts, all wonder and on fire,     That darling son of warlike Fame admire.     Prostrate at proud Castilia's monarch's feet     His land lies trembling: lo, the nobles meet:     Softly they seem to breathe, and forward bend     The servile neck; each eye distrusts his friend;     Fearful each tongue to speak; each bosom cold:     When, colour'd with stern rage, erect and bold,     The hero rises: 'Here no foreign throne     Shall fix its base; my native king alone     Shall reign.' Then, rushing to the fight, he leads;     Low, vanquish'd in the dust, Castilia bleeds.     Where proudest hope might deem it vain to dare,     God led him on, and crown'd the glorious war.     Though fierce, as num'rous, are the hosts that dwell     By Betis' stream, these hosts before him fell.     The fight behold: while absent from his bands,     Press'd on the step of flight his army stands,     To call the chief a herald speeds away:     Low, on his knees, the gallant chief survey!     He pours his soul, with lifted hands implores,     And Heav'n's assisting arm, inspir'd, adores.     Panting, and pale, the herald urges speed:     With holy trust of victory decreed,     Careless he answers, 'Nothing urgent calls:'     And soon the bleeding foe before him falls.     To Numa, thus, the pale patricians fled--     'The hostile squadrons o'er the kingdom spread!'     They cry; unmov'd, the holy king replies--     'And I, behold, am off'ring sacrifice!'[522]     Earnest, I see thy wond'ring eyes inquire     Who this illustrious chief, his country's sire?     The Lusian Scipio well might speak his fame,     But nobler Nunio shines a greater name:[523]     On earth's green bosom, or on ocean grey,     A greater never shall the sun survey.

      "Known by the silver cross, and sable shield,     Two Knights of Malta[524] there command the field;     From Tago's banks they drive the fleecy prey,     And the tir'd ox lows on his weary way:     When, as the falcon through the forest glade     Darts on the lev'ret, from the brown-wood shade     Darts Roderic on their rear; in scatter'd flight     They leave the goodly herds the victor's right.     Again, behold, in gore he bathes his sword;     His captive friend,[525] to liberty restor'd,     Glows to review the cause that wrought his woe,     The cause, his loyalty, as taintless snow.     Here treason's well-earn'd meed allures thine eyes,[526]     Low, grovelling in the dust, the traitor dies;     Great Elvas gave the blow. Again, behold,     Chariot and steed in purple slaughter roll'd:     Great Elvas triumphs; wide o'er Xeres' plain     Around him reeks the noblest blood of Spain.

      "Here Lisbon's spacious harbour meets the view:     How vast the foe's, the Lusian fleet how few!     Castile's proud war-ships, circling round, enclose     The Lusian galleys; through their thund'ring rows,     Fierce pressing on, Pereira fearless rides,     His hook'd irons grasp the adm'ral's sides:     Confusion maddens: on the dreadless knight     Castilia's navy pours its gather'd might:     Pereira dies, their self-devoted prey,     And safe the Lusian galleys speed away.[527]

      "Lo, where the lemon-trees from yon green hill     Throw their cool shadows o'er the crystal rill;     There twice two hundred fierce Castilian foes     Twice eight, forlorn, of Lusian race enclose;     Forlorn they seem; but taintless flow'd their blood     From those three hundred who of old withstood;     Withstood, and from a thousand Romans tore     The victor-wreath, what time the shepherd[528] bore     The leader's staff of Lusus: equal flame     Inspir'd these few,[529] their victory the same.     Though twenty lances brave each single spear,     Never the foes superior might to fear     Is our inheritance, our native right,     Well tried, well prov'd in many a dreadful fight.

      "That dauntless earl behold; on Libya's coast,     Far from the succour of the Lusian host,[530]     Twice hard besieg'd, he holds the Ceutan towers     Against the banded might of Afric's powers.     That other earl;[531]--behold the port he bore,     So, trod stern Mars on Thracia's hills of yore.     What groves of spears Alcazar's gates surround!     There Afric's nations blacken o'er the ground.     A thousand ensigns, glitt'ring to the day,     The waning moon's slant silver horns display.     In vain their rage; no gate, no turret falls,     The brave De Vian guards Alcazar's walls.     In hopeless conflict lost his king appears;     Amid the thickest of the Moorish spears     Plunges bold Vian: in the glorious strife     He dies, and dying saves his sov'reign's life.

      "Illustrious, lo, two brother-heroes shine,[532]     Their birth, their deeds, adorn the royal line;     To ev'ry king of princely Europe known,     In ev'ry court the gallant Pedro shone.     The glorious Henry[533]--kindling at his name     Behold my sailors' eyes all sparkle flame!     Henry the chief, who first, by Heav'n inspir'd,     To deeds unknown before, the sailor fir'd,     The conscious sailor left the sight of shore,     And dar'd new oceans, never plough'd before.     The various wealth of ev'ry distant land     He bade his fleets explore, his fleets command.     The ocean's great discoverer he shines;     Nor less his honours in the martial lines:     The painted flag the cloud-wrapt siege displays,     There Ceuta's rocking wall its trust betrays.     Black yawns the breach; the point of many a spear     Gleams through the smoke; loud shouts astound the ear.     Whose step first trod the dreadful pass? Whose sword     Hew'd its dark way, first with the foe begor'd?     'Twas thine, O glorious Henry, first to dare     The dreadful pass, and thine to close the war.     Taught by his might, and humbled in her gore,     The boastful pride of Afric tower'd no more.

      "Num'rous though these, more num'rous warriors shine     Th' illustrious glory of the Lusian line.     But ah, forlorn, what shame to barb'rous pride![534]     Friendless the master of the pencil died;     Immortal fame his deathless labours gave;     Poor man, he sunk neglected to the grave!"

      The gallant Paulus faithful thus explain'd     The various deeds the pictur'd flags contain'd.     Still o'er and o'er, and still again untir'd,     The wond'ring regent of the wars inquir'd:     Still wond'ring, heard the various pleasing tale,     Till o'er the decks cold sigh'd the ev'ning gale:     The falling darkness dimm'd the eastern shore,     And twilight hover'd o'er the billows hoar     Far to the west, when, with his noble band,     The thoughtful regent sought his native strand.

      O'er the tall mountain-forest's waving boughs     Aslant, the new moon's slender horns arose;     Near her pale chariot shone a twinkling star,     And, save the murm'ring of the wave afar,     Deep-brooding silence reign'd; each labour clos'd,     In sleep's soft arms the sons of toil repos'd.     And now, no more the moon her glimpses shed,     A sudden, black-wing'd cloud the sky o'erspread,     A sullen murmur through the woodland groan'd,     In woe-swoll'n sighs the hollow winds bemoan'd:     Borne on the plaintive gale, a patt'ring shower     Increas'd the horrors of the evil hour.     Thus, when the God of earthquakes rocks the ground,     He gives the prelude in a dreary sound;     O'er nature's face a horrid gloom he throws,     With dismal note the cock unusual crows,     A shrill-voic'd howling trembles thro' the air,     As passing ghosts were weeping in despair;     In dismal yells the dogs confess their fear,     And shiv'ring, own some dreadful presence near.     So, lower'd the night, the sullen howl the same,     And, 'mid the black-wing'd gloom, stern Bacchus came;     The form, and garb of Hagar's son he took,     The ghost-like aspect, and the threat'ning look.[535]     Then, o'er the pillow of a furious priest,     Whose burning zeal the Koran's lore profess'd,     Reveal'd he stood, conspicuous in a dream,     His semblance shining, as the moon's pale gleam:     "And guard," he cries, "my son, O timely guard,     Timely defeat the dreadful snare prepar'd:     And canst thou, careless, unaffected, sleep,     While these stern, lawless rovers of the deep     Fix on thy native shore a foreign throne,     Before whose steps thy latest race shall groan!"     He spoke; cold horror shook the Moorish priest;     He wakes, but soon reclines in wonted rest:     An airy phantom of the slumb'ring brain     He deem'd the vision; when the fiend again,     With sterner mien, and fiercer accent spoke:     "Oh faithless! worthy of the foreign yoke!     And know'st thou not thy prophet sent by Heav'n,     By whom the Koran's sacred lore was giv'n,     God's chiefest gift to men: and must I leave     The bowers of Paradise, for you to grieve,     For you to watch, while, thoughtless of your woe,     Ye sleep, the careless victims of the foe;     The foe, whose rage will soon with cruel joy,     If unoppos'd, my sacred shrines destroy?     Then, while kind Heav'n th'auspicious hour bestows,     Let ev'ry nerve their infant strength oppose.     When, softly usher'd by the milky dawn,     The sun first rises[536] o'er the daisied lawn,     His silver lustre, as the shining dew     Of radiance mild, unhurt the eye may view:     But, when on high the noon-tide flaming rays     Give all the force of living fire to blaze,     A giddy darkness strikes the conquer'd sight,     That dares, in all his glow, the lord of light.     Such, if on India's soil the tender shoot     Of these proud cedars fix the stubborn root,     Such, shall your power before them sink decay'd.     And India's strength shall wither in their shade."

      He spoke; and, instant from his vot'ry's bed     Together with repose, the demon fled;     Again cold horror shook the zealot's frame,     And all his hatred of Messiah's name     Burn'd in his venom'd heart, while, veil'd in night,     Right to the palace sped the demon's flight.     Sleepless the king he found, in dubious thought;     His conscious fraud a thousand terrors brought:     All gloomy as the hour, around him stand,     With haggard looks, the hoary Magi band:[537]     To trace what fates on India's wide domain     Attend the rovers from unheard-of Spain,     Prepar'd, in dark futurity, to prove     The hell-taught rituals of infernal Jove:     Mutt'ring their charms, and spells of dreary sound,     With naked feet they beat the hollow ground;     Blue gleams the altar's flame along the walls,     With dismal, hollow groans the victim falls;     With earnest eyes the priestly band explore     The entrails, throbbing in the living gore.     And lo, permitted by the power divine,     The hov'ring demon gives the dreadful sign.[538]     Here furious War her gleamy falchion draws,     Here lean-ribb'd Famine writhes her falling jaws;     Dire as the fiery pestilential star     Darting his eyes, high on his trophied car,     Stern Tyranny sweeps wide o'er India's ground;     On vulture-wings fierce Rapine hovers round;     Ills after ills, and India's fetter'd might,     Th'eternal yoke.[539] Loud shrieking at the sight,     The starting wizards from the altar fly,     And silent horror glares in ev'ry eye:     Pale stands the monarch, lost in cold dismay,     And, now impatient, waits the ling'ring day.

      With gloomy aspect rose the ling'ring dawn,     And dropping tears flow'd slowly o'er the lawn;     The Moorish priest, with fear and vengeance fraught,     Soon as the light appear'd his kindred sought;     Appall'd, and trembling with ungen'rous fear,     In secret council met, his tale they hear;     As, check'd by terror or impell'd by hate,     Of various means they ponder and debate,     Against the Lusian train what arts employ,     By force to slaughter, or by fraud destroy;     Now black, now pale, their bearded cheeks appear,     As boiling rage prevails, or boding fear;     Beneath their shady brows, their eye-balls roll,     Nor one soft gleam bespeaks the gen'rous soul;     Through quiv'ring lips they draw their panting breath.     While their dark fraud decrees the works of death;     Nor unresolv'd the power of gold to try     Swift to the lordly catual's gate they hie.--     Ah, what the wisdom, what the sleepless care     Efficient to avoid the traitor's snare;     What human power can give a king to know     The smiling aspect of the lurking foe!     So let the tyrant plead.[540]--The patriot king     Knows men, knows whence the patriot virtues spring;     From inward worth, from conscience firm and bold,     (Not from the man whose honest name is sold),     He hopes that virtue, whose unalter'd weight     Stands fix'd, unveering with the storms of state.

      Lur'd was the regent with the Moorish gold,     And now agreed their fraudful course to hold,     Swift to the king the regent's steps they tread;     The king they found o'erwhelm'd in sacred dread.     The word they take, their ancient deeds relate,     Their ever faithful service of the state;[541]     "For ages long, from shore to distant shore     For thee our ready keels the traffic bore:     For thee we dar'd each horror of the wave;     Whate'er thy treasures boast our labours gave.     And wilt thou now confer our long-earn'd due,     Confer thy favour on a lawless crew?     The race they boast, as tigers of the wold     Bear that proud sway, by justice uncontroll'd.     Yet, for their crimes, expell'd that bloody home,     These, o'er the deep, rapacious plund'rers roam.     Their deeds we know; round Afric's shores they came,     And spread, where'er they pass'd, devouring flame;     Mozambique's towers, enroll'd in sheets of fire,     Blaz'd to the sky, her own funereal pyre.     Imperial Calicut shall feel the same,     And these proud state-rooms feed the funeral flame;     While many a league far round, their joyful eyes     Shall mark old ocean reddening to the skies.     Such dreadful fates, o'er thee, O king, depend,     Yet, with thy fall our fate shall never blend:     Ere o'er the east arise the second dawn     Our fleets, our nation from thy land withdrawn,     In other climes, beneath a kinder reign     Shall fix their port: yet may the threat be vain!     If wiser thou with us thy powers employ,     Soon shall our powers the robber-crew destroy.     By their own arts and secret deeds o'ercome,     Here shall they meet the fate escaped at home."

      While thus the priest detain'd the monarch's ear,     His cheeks confess'd the quiv'ring pulse of fear.     Unconscious of the worth that fires the brave,     In state a monarch, but in heart a slave,     He view'd brave VASCO, and his gen'rous train,     As his own passions stamp'd the conscious stain:     Nor less his rage the fraudful regent fir'd;     And valiant GAMA'S fate was now conspir'd.

      Ambassadors from India GAMA sought,     And oaths of peace, for oaths of friendship brought;     The glorious tale, 'twas all he wish'd, to tell;     So Ilion's[542] fate was seal'd when Hector fell.

      Again convok'd before the Indian throne,     The monarch meets him with a rageful frown;     "And own," he cries, "the naked truth reveal,     Then shall my bounteous grace thy pardon seal.     Feign'd is the treaty thou pretend'st to bring:     No country owns thee, and thou own'st no king.     Thy life, long roving o'er the deep, I know--     A lawless robber, every man thy foe.     And think'st thou credit to thy tale to gain?     Mad were the sov'reign, and the hope were vain,     Through ways unknown, from utmost western shore,     To bid his fleets the utmost east explore.     Great is thy monarch, so thy words declare;     But sumptuous gifts the proof of greatness bear:     Kings thus to kings their empire's grandeur show;     Thus prove thy truth, thus we thy truth allow.     If not, what credence will the wise afford?     What monarch trust the wand'ring seaman's word?     No sumptuous gift thou bring'st.[543]--Yet, though some crime     Has thrown thee, banish'd from thy native clime,     (Such oft of old the hero's fate has been),     Here end thy toils, nor tempt new fates unseen:     Each land the brave man nobly calls his home:     Or if, bold pirates, o'er the deep you roam,     Skill'd the dread storm to brave, O welcome here!     Fearless of death, or shame, confess sincere:     My name shall then thy dread protection be,     My captain thou, unrivall'd on the sea."

      Oh now, ye Muses, sing what goddess fir'd     GAMA'S proud bosom, and his lips inspir'd.     Fair Acidalia, love's celestial queen,[544]     The graceful goddess of the fearless mien,     Her graceful freedom on his look bestow'd,     And all collected in his bosom glow'd.     "Sov'reign," he cries, "oft witness'd, well I know     The rageful falsehood of the Moorish foe:     Their fraudful tales, from hatred bred, believ'd,     Thine ear is poison'd, and thine eye deceiv'd.     What light, what shade the courtier's mirror gives,     That light, that shade the guarded king receives.     Me hast thou view'd in colours not mine own,     Yet, bold I promise shall my truth be known.     If o'er the seas a lawless pest I roam,     A blood-stain'd exile from my native home,     How many a fertile shore and beauteous isle,     Where Nature's gifts, unclaim'd, unbounded, smile,     Mad have I left, to dare the burning zone,     And all the horrors of the gulfs unknown     That roar beneath the axle of the world.     Where ne'er before was daring sail unfurl'd!     And have I left these beauteous shores behind,     And have I dar'd the rage of ev'ry wind,     That now breath'd fire, and now came wing'd with frost,     Lur'd by the plunder of an unknown coast?     Not thus the robber leaves his certain prey     For the gay promise of a nameless day.     Dread and stupendous, more than death-doom'd man     Might hope to compass, more than wisdom plan,     To thee my toils, to thee my dangers rise:     Ah! Lisbon's kings behold with other eyes.     Where virtue calls, where glory leads the way,     No dangers move them, and no toils dismay.     Long have the kings of Lusus' daring race     Resolv'd the limits of the deep to trace,     Beneath the morn to ride the furthest waves,     And pierce the farthest shore old Ocean laves.     Sprung from the prince,[545] before whose matchless power     The strength of Afric wither'd as a flower     Never to bloom again, great Henry shone,     Each gift of nature and of art his own;     Bold as his sire, by toils on toils untir'd,     To find the Indian shore his pride aspir'd.     Beneath the stars that round the Hydra shine,     And where fam'd Argo hangs the heav'nly sign,     Where thirst and fever burn on ev'ry gale     The dauntless Henry rear'd the Lusian sail.     Embolden'd by the meed that crown'd his toils,     Beyond the wide-spread shores and num'rous isles,     Where both the tropics pour the burning day,     Succeeding heroes forc'd th' exploring way;     That race which never view'd the Pleiad's car,     That barb'rous race beneath the southern star,     Their eyes beheld.--Dread roar'd the blast--the wave     Boils to the sky, the meeting whirlwinds rave     O'er the torn heav'ns; loud on their awe-struck ear     Great Nature seem'd to call, 'Approach not here!'     At Lisbon's court they told their dread escape,     And from her raging tempests, nam'd the Cape.[546]     'Thou southmost point,' the joyful king exclaim'd,     'Cape of Good Hope, be thou for ever nam'd!     Onward my fleets shall dare the dreadful way,     And find the regions of the infant day.'     In vain the dark and ever-howling blast     Proclaim'd, 'This ocean never shall be past;'     Through that dread ocean, and the tempests' roar,     My king commanded, and my course I bore.     The pillar thus of deathless fame, begun     By other chiefs,[547] beneath the rising sun     In thy great realm, now to the skies I raise,     The deathless pillar of my nation's praise.     Through these wild seas no costly gift I brought;     Thy shore alone and friendly peace I sought.     And yet to thee the noblest gift I bring     The world can boast--the friendship of my king.     And mark the word, his greatness shall appear     When next my course to India's strand I steer,     Such proofs I'll bring as never man before     In deeds of strife, or peaceful friendship bore.     Weigh now my words, my truth demands the light,     For truth shall ever boast, at last, resistless might."

      Boldly the hero spake with brow severe,     Of fraud alike unconscious, as of fear:     His noble confidence with truth impressed     Sunk deep, unwelcome, in the monarch's breast,     Nor wanting charms his avarice to gain     Appear'd the commerce of illustrious Spain.     Yet, as the sick man loathes the bitter draught,     Though rich with health he knows the cup comes fraught;     His health without it, self-deceiv'd, he weighs,     Now hastes to quaff the drug, and now delays;     Reluctant thus, as wav'ring passion veer'd,     The Indian lord the dauntless GAMA heard:     The Moorish threats yet sounding in his ear,     He acts with caution, and is led by fear.     With solemn pomp he bids his lords prepare     The friendly banquet; to the regent's care     Commends brave GAMA, and with pomp retires:     The regent's hearths awake the social fires;     Wide o'er the board the royal feast is spread,     And, fair embroidered, shines DE GAMA'S bed.     The regent's palace high o'erlook'd the bay     Where GAMA'S black-ribb'd fleet at anchor lay.[548]

      Ah, why the voice of ire and bitter woe     O'er Tago's banks, ye nymphs of Tagus, show?     The flow'ry garlands from your ringlets torn,     Why wand'ring wild with trembling steps forlorn?     The demon's rage you saw, and mark'd his flight     To the dark mansions of eternal night:     You saw how, howling through the shades beneath,     He wak'd new horrors in the realms of death.     What trembling tempests shook the thrones of hell,     And groan'd along her caves, ye muses, tell.     The rage of baffled fraud, and all the fire     Of powerless hate, with tenfold flames conspire;     From ev'ry eye the tawny lightnings glare,     And hell, illumin'd by the ghastly flare,     (A drear blue gleam), in tenfold horror shows     Her darkling caverns; from his dungeon rose     Hagar's stern son: pale was his earthy hue,     And from his eye-balls flash'd the lightnings blue;     Convuls'd with rage the dreadful shade demands     The last assistance of th' infernal bands.     As when the whirlwinds, sudden bursting, bear     Th' autumnal leaves high floating through the air;     So, rose the legions of th' infernal state,     Dark Fraud, base Art, fierce Rage, and burning Hate:     Wing'd by the Furies to the Indian strand     They bend; the demon leads the dreadful band,     And, in the bosoms of the raging Moors     All their collected, living strength he pours.     One breast alone against his rage was steel'd,     Secure in spotless Truth's celestial shield.

      One evening past, another evening clos'd,     The regent still brave GAMA'S suit oppos'd;     The Lusian chief his guarded guest detain'd,     With arts on arts, and vows of friendship feign'd.     His fraudful art, though veil'd in deep disguise,     Shone bright to GAMA'S manner-piercing eyes.     As in the sun's bright[549] beam the gamesome boy     Plays with the shining steel or crystal toy,     Swift and irregular, by sudden starts,     The living ray with viewless motion darts,     Swift o'er the wall, the floor, the roof, by turns     The sun-beam dances, and the radiance burns:     In quick succession, thus, a thousand views     The sapient Lusian's lively thought pursues;     Quick as the lightning ev'ry view revolves,     And, weighing all, fix'd are his dread resolves.     O'er India's shore the sable night descends,     And GAMA, now, secluded from his friends,     Detain'd a captive in the room of state,     Anticipates in thought to-morrow's fate;     For just Mozaide no gen'rous care delays,     And VASCO'S trust with friendly toils repays.


END OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.




BOOK IX.

THE ARGUMENT.

The liberation of Gama's factors is effected by a great victory over the Moorish fleet, and by the bombardment of Calicut. Gama returns in consequence to his ships, and weighs anchor to return to Europe with the news of his great discoveries. Camoëns then introduces a very singular, but agreeable episode, recounting the love adventures of his heroes in one of the islands of the ocean. Venus, in search of her son, journeys through all his realms to implore his aid, and at length arrives at the spot where Love's artillery and arms are forged. Venus intercedes with her son in favour of the Portuguese. The island of Love, like that of Delos, floats on the ocean. It is then explained by the poet that these seeming realities are only allegorical.


    Red[550] rose the dawn; roll'd o'er the low'ring sky,     The scattering clouds of tawny purple fly.     While yet the day-spring struggled with the gloom,     The Indian monarch sought the regent's dome.     In all the luxury of Asian state,     High on a star-gemm'd couch the monarch sat:     Then on th' illustrious captive, bending down     His eyes, stern darken'd with a threat'ning frown,     "Thy truthless tale," he cries, "thy art appears,     Confess'd inglorious by thy cautious fears.     Yet, still if friendship, honest, thou implore,     Yet now command thy vessels to the shore:     Gen'rous, as to thy friends, thy sails resign,     My will commands it, and the power is mine:     In vain thy art, in vain thy might withstands,     Thy sails, and rudders too, my will demands:[551]     Such be the test, thy boasted truth to try,     Each other test despis'd, I fix'd deny.     And has my regent sued two days in vain!     In vain my mandate, and the captive chain!     Yet not in vain, proud chief, ourself shall sue     From thee the honour to my friendship due:     Ere force compel thee, let the grace be thine,     Our grace permits it, freely to resign,     Freely to trust our friendship, ere too late     Our injur'd honour fix thy dreadful fate."

      While thus he spake, his changeful look declar'd     In his proud breast what starting passions warr'd.     No feature mov'd on GAMA'S face was seen;     Stern he replies, with bold yet anxious mien,     "In me my sov'reign represented see,     His state is wounded, and he speaks in me;     Unaw'd by threats, by dangers uncontroll'd,     The laws of nations bid my tongue be bold.     No more thy justice holds the righteous scale,     The arts of falsehood and the Moors prevail;     I see the doom my favour'd foes decree,     Yet, though in chains I stand, my fleet is free.     The bitter taunts of scorn the brave disdain;     Few be my words, your arts, your threats are vain.     My sov'reign's fleet I yield not to your sway;[552]     Safe shall my fleet to Lisboa's strand convey     The glorious tale of all the toils I bore,     Afric surrounded, and the Indian shore     Discover'd. These I pledg'd my life to gain,     These to my country shall my life maintain.     One wish alone my earnest heart desires,     The sole impassion'd hope my breast respires;     My finish'd labours may my sov'reign hear!     Besides that wish, nor hope I know, nor fear.     And lo, the victim of your rage I stand,     And bare my bosom to the murd'rer's hand."

      With lofty mien he spake. In stern disdain,     "My threats," the monarch cries, "were never vain:     Swift give the sign."--Swift as he spake, appear'd     The dancing streamer o'er the palace rear'd;     Instant another ensign distant rose,     Where, jutting through the flood, the mountain throws     A ridge enormous, and on either side     Defends the harbours from the furious tide.     Proud on his couch th' indignant monarch sat,     And awful silence fill'd the room of state.     With secret joy the Moors, exulting, glow'd,     And bent their eyes where GAMA'S navy rode,     Then, proudly heav'd with panting hope, explore     The wood-crown'd upland of the bending shore.     Soon o'er the palms a mast's tall pendant flows,     Bright to the sun the purple radiance glows;     In martial pomp, far streaming to the skies,     Vanes after vanes in swift succession rise,     And, through the opening forest-boughs of green,     The sails' white lustre moving on is seen;     When sudden, rushing by the point of land     The bowsprits nod, and wide the sails expand;     Full pouring on the sight, in warlike pride,     Extending still the rising squadrons ride:     O'er every deck, beneath the morning rays,     Like melted gold, the brazen spear-points blaze;     Each prore surrounded with a hundred oars,     Old Ocean boils around the crowded prores:     And, five times now in number GAMA'S might,     Proudly their boastful shouts provoke the fight;     Far round the shore the echoing peal rebounds,     Behind the hill an answ'ring shout resounds:     Still by the point new-spreading sails appear,     Till seven times GAMA'S fleet concludes the rear.     Again the shout triumphant shakes the bay;     Form'd as a crescent, wedg'd in firm array,     Their fleet's wide horns the Lusian ships enclasp,     Prepar'd to crush them in their iron grasp.     Shouts echo shouts.--With stern, disdainful eyes     The Indian king to manly GAMA cries,     "Not one of thine on Lisboa's shore shall tell     The glorious tale, how bold thy heroes fell."     With alter'd visage, for his eyes flash'd fire,     "God sent me here, and God's avengeful ire     Shall blast thy perfidy," great VASCO cried,     "And humble in the dust thy wither'd pride."     A prophet's glow inspir'd his panting breast,     Indignant smiles the monarch's scorn confess'd.     Again deep silence fills the room of state,     And the proud Moors, secure, exulting wait:     And now inclasping GAMA'S in a ring,     Their fleet sweeps on.--Loud whizzing from the string     The black-wing'd arrows float along the sky,     And rising clouds the falling clouds supply.     The lofty crowding spears that bristling stood     Wide o'er the galleys as an upright wood,     Bend sudden, levell'd for the closing fight,     The points, wide-waving, shed a gleamy light.     Elate with joy the king his aspect rears,     And valiant GAMA, thrill'd with transport, hears     His drums' bold rattling raise the battle sound;     Echo, deep-ton'd, hoarse, vibrates far around;     The shiv'ring trumpets tear the shrill-voic'd air,     Quiv'ring the gale, the flashing lightnings flare,     The smoke rolls wide, and sudden bursts the roar,     The lifted waves fall trembling, deep the shore     Groans; quick and quicker blaze embraces blaze     In flashing arms; louder the thunders raise     Their roaring, rolling o'er the bended skies     The burst incessant; awe-struck Echo dies     Falt'ring and deafen'd; from the brazen throats,     Cloud after cloud, enroll'd in darkness, floats,     Curling their sulph'rous folds of fiery blue,     Till their huge volumes take the fleecy hue,     And roll wide o'er the sky; wide as the sight     Can measure heav'n, slow rolls the cloudy white:     Beneath, the smoky blackness spreads afar     Its hov'ring wings, and veils the dreadful war     Deep in its horrid breast; the fierce red glare,     Cheq'ring the rifted darkness, fires the air,     Each moment lost and kindled, while around,     The mingling thunders swell the lengthen'd sound.     When piercing sudden through the dreadful roar     The yelling shrieks of thousands strike the shore:     Presaging horror through the monarch's breast     Crept cold; and gloomy o'er the distant east,     Through Gata's hills[553] the whirling tempest sigh'd,     And westward sweeping to the blacken'd tide,     Howl'd o'er the trembling palace as it past,     And o'er the gilded walls a gloomy twilight cast;     Then, furious, rushing to the darken'd bay,[554]     Resistless swept the black-wing'd night away,     With all the clouds that hover'd o'er the fight,     And o'er the weary combat pour'd the light.

      As by an Alpine mountain's pathless side     Some traveller strays, unfriended of a guide;     If o'er the hills the sable night descend,     And gath'ring tempest with the darkness blend,     Deep from the cavern'd rocks beneath, aghast     He hears the howling of the whirlwind's blast;     Above, resounds the crash, and down the steep     Some rolling weight groans on with found'ring sweep;     Aghast he stands, amid the shades of night,     And all his soul implores the friendly light:     It comes; the dreadful lightning's quiv'ring blaze     The yawning depth beneath his lifted step betrays;     Instant unmann'd, aghast in horrid pain,     his knees no more their sickly weight sustain;     Powerless he sinks, no more his heart-blood flows;     So sunk the monarch, and his heart-blood froze;     So sunk he down, when o'er the clouded bay     The rushing whirlwind pour'd the sudden day:     Disaster's giant arm in one wide sweep     Appear'd, and ruin blacken'd o'er the deep;     The sheeted masts drove floating o'er the tide,     And the torn hulks roll'd tumbling on the side;     Some shatter'd plank each heaving billow toss'd,     And, by the hand of Heav'n, dash'd on the coast     Groan'd prores ingulf'd; the lashing surges rave     O'er the black keels upturn'd, the swelling wave     Kisses the lofty mast's reclining head;     And, far at sea, some few torn galleys fled.     Amid the dreadful scene triumphant rode     The Lusian war-ships, and their aid bestow'd:     Their speedy boats far round assisting ply'd,     Where plunging, struggling, in the rolling tide,     Grasping the shatter'd wrecks, the vanquish'd foes     Rear'd o'er the dashing waves their haggard brows.     No word of scorn the lofty GAMA spoke,     Nor India's king the dreadful silence broke.     Slow pass'd the hour, when to the trembling shore,     In awful pomp, the victor-navy bore:     Terrific, nodding on, the bowsprits bend,     And the red streamers other war portend:     Soon bursts the roar; the bombs tremendous rise,     And trail their black'ning rainbows o'er the skies;     O'er Calicut's proud domes their rage they pour,     And wrap her temples in a sulph'rous shower.     'Tis o'er----In threat'ning silence rides the fleet:     Wild rage, and horror yell in ev'ry street;     Ten thousands pouring round the palace gate,     In clam'rous uproar wail their wretch'd fate:     While round the dome, with lifted hands, they kneel'd,     "Give justice, justice to the strangers yield--     Our friends, our husbands, sons, and fathers slain!     Happier, alas, than these that yet remain--     Curs'd be the counsels, and the arts unjust--     Our friends in chains--our city in the dust--     Yet, yet prevent----"                             The silent VASCO saw     The weight of horror, and o'erpowering awe     That shook the Moors, that shook the regent's knees,     And sunk the monarch down. By swift degrees     The popular clamour rises. Lost, unmann'd,     Around the king the trembling council stand;     While, wildly glaring on each other's eyes,     Each lip in vain the trembling accent tries;     With anguish sicken'd, and of strength bereft,     Earnest each look inquires, What hope is left!     In all the rage of shame and grief aghast,     The monarch, falt'ring, takes the word at last:     "By whom, great chief, are these proud war-ships sway'd,     Are there thy mandates honour'd and obey'd?     Forgive, great chief, let gifts of price restrain     Thy just revenge. Shall India's gifts be vain!--     Oh spare my people and their doom'd abodes--     Prayers, vows, and gifts appease the injur'd gods:     Shall man deny? Swift are the brave to spare:     The weak, the innocent confess their care--     Helpless, as innocent of guile, to thee     Behold these thousands bend the suppliant knee--     Thy navy's thund'ring sides black to the land     Display their terrors--yet mayst thou command----"

      O'erpower'd he paus'd. Majestic and serene     Great VASCO rose, then, pointing to the scene     Where bled the war, "Thy fleet, proud king, behold     O'er ocean and the strand in carnage roll'd!     So, shall this palace, smoking in the dust,     And yon proud city, weep thy arts unjust.     The Moors I knew, and, for their fraud prepar'd,     I left my fix'd command my navy's guard:[555]     Whate'er from shore my name or seal convey'd     Of other weight, that fix'd command forbade;     Thus, ere its birth destroy'd, prevented fell     What fraud might dictate, or what force compel.     This morn the sacrifice of Fraud I stood,     But hark, there lives the brother of my blood,     And lives the friend, whose cares conjoin'd control     These floating towers, both brothers of my soul.     'If thrice,' I said, 'arise the golden morn,     Ere to my fleet you mark my glad return,     Dark Fraud with all her Moorish arts withstands,     And force, or death withholds me from my bands:     Thus judge, and swift unfurl the homeward sail,     Catch the first breathing of the eastern gale,     Unmindful of my fate on India's shore:[556]     Let but my monarch know, I wish no more.'     Each, panting while I spoke, impatient cries,     The tear-drop bursting in their manly eyes,     'In all but one thy mandates we obey,     In one we yield not to thy gen'rous sway:     Without thee, never shall our sails return;     India shall bleed, and Calicut shall burn--     Thrice shall the morn arise; a flight of bombs     Shall then speak vengeance to their guilty domes:     Till noon we pause; then, shall our thunders roar,     And desolation sweep the treach'rous shore.'     Behold, proud king, their signal in the sky,     Near his meridian tower the sun rides high.     O'er Calicut no more the ev'ning shade     Shall spread her peaceful wings, my wrath unstaid;     Dire through the night her smoking dust shall gleam,     Dire thro' the night shall shriek the female scream."

      "Thy worth, great chief," the pale-lipp'd regent cries,     "Thy worth we own: oh, may these woes suffice!     To thee each proof of India's wealth we send;     Ambassadors, of noblest race, attend----"     Slow as he falter'd, GAMA caught the word,     "On terms I talk not, and no truce afford:     Captives enough shall reach the Lusian shore:     Once you deceiv'd me, and I treat no more.     E'en now my faithful sailors, pale with rage,     Gnaw their blue lips, impatient to engage;     Rang'd by their brazen tubes, the thund'ring band     Watch the first movement of my brother's hand;     E'en now, impatient, o'er the dreadful tire     They wave their eager canes betipp'd with fire;     Methinks my brother's anguish'd look I see,     The panting nostril and the trembling knee,     While keen he eyes the sun. On hasty strides,     Hurried along the deck, Coello chides     His cold, slow ling'ring, and impatient cries,     'Oh, give the sign, illume the sacrifice,     A brother's vengeance for a brother's blood----"

      He spake; and stern the dreadful warrior stood;     So seem'd the terrors of his awful nod,     The monarch trembled as before a god;     The treach'rous Moors sank down in faint dismay,     And speechless at his feet the council lay:     Abrupt, with outstretched arms, the monarch cries,     "What yet----" but dar'd not meet the hero's eyes,     "What yet may save!"[557]--Great VASCO stern rejoins,     "Swift, undisputing, give th' appointed signs:     High o'er thy loftiest tower my flag display,     Me and my train swift to my fleet convey:     Instant command--behold the sun rides high----"     He spake, and rapture glow'd in ev'ry eye;     The Lusian standard o'er the palace flow'd,     Swift o'er the bay the royal barges row'd.     A dreary gloom a sudden whirlwind threw;     Amid the howling blast, enrag'd, withdrew     The vanquish'd demon. Soon, in lustre mild     As April smiles, the sun auspicious smil'd:     Elate with joy, the shouting thousands trod,     And GAMA to his fleet triumphant rode.

      Soft came the eastern gale on balmy wings:     Each joyful sailor to his labour springs;     Some o'er the bars their breasts robust recline,     And, with firm tugs, the rollers[558] from the brine,     Reluctant dragg'd, the slime-brown'd anchors raise;     Each gliding rope some nimble hand obeys;     Some bending o'er the yard-arm's length, on high,     With nimble hands, the canvas wings untie;     The flapping sails their wid'ning folds distend,     And measur'd, echoing shouts their sweaty toils attend.     Nor had the captives lost the leader's care,     Some to the shore the Indian barges bear;     The noblest few the chief detains, to own     His glorious deeds before the Lusian throne;     To own the conquest of the Indian shore:     Nor wanted ev'ry proof of India's store.     What fruits in Ceylon's fragrant woods abound,     With woods of cinnamon her hills are crown'd:     Dry'd in its flower, the nut of Banda's grove,     The burning pepper, and the sable clove;     The clove, whose odour on the breathing gale,     Far to the sea, Molucca's plains exhale;     All these, provided by the faithful Moor,     All these, and India's gems, the navy bore:     The Moor attends, Mozaide, whose zealous care     To GAMA'S eyes unveil'd each treach'rous snare:[559]     So burn'd his breast with Heav'n-illumin'd flame,     And holy rev'rence of Messiah's name.     O, favour'd African, by Heaven's own light     Call'd from the dreary shades of error's night!     What man may dare his seeming ills arraign,     Or what the grace of Heaven's designs explain!     Far didst thou from thy friends a stranger roam,     There wast thou call'd to thy celestial home.[560]

      With rustling sound now swell'd the steady sail;     The lofty masts reclining to the gale,     On full-spread wings the navy springs away,     And, far behind them, foams the ocean grey:     Afar the less'ning hills of Gata fly,     And mix their dim blue summits with the sky:     Beneath the wave low sinks the spicy shore,     And, roaring through the tide, each nodding prore     Points to the Cape, great Nature's southmost bound,     The Cape of Tempests, now of Hope renown'd.     Their glorious tale on Lisboa's shore to tell     Inspires each bosom with a rapt'rous swell;     Now through their breasts the chilly tremors glide,     To dare once more the dangers dearly tried.--     Soon to the winds are these cold fears resign'd,     And all their country rushes on the mind;     How sweet to view their native land, how sweet     The father, brother, and the bride to greet!     While list'ning round the hoary parent's board     The wond'ring kindred glow at ev'ry word;     How sweet to tell what woes, what toils they bore,     The tribes, and wonders of each various shore!     These thoughts, the traveller's lov'd reward, employ,     And swell each bosom with unutter'd joy.[561]

      The queen of love, by Heaven's eternal grace,     The guardian goddess of the Lusian race;     The queen of love, elate with joy, surveys     Her heroes, happy, plough the wat'ry maze:     Their dreary toils revolving in her thought,     And all the woes by vengeful Bacchus wrought;     These toils, these woes, her yearning cares employ,     To bathe, and balsam in the streams of joy.     Amid the bosom of the wat'ry waste,     Near where the bowers of Paradise were plac'd,[562]     An isle, array'd in all the pride of flowers,     Of fruits, of fountains, and of fragrant bowers,     She means to offer to their homeward prows,     The place of glad repast and sweet repose;     And there, before their raptur'd view, to raise     The heav'n-topp'd column of their deathless praise.

      The goddess now ascends her silver car,     (Bright was its hue as love's translucent star);     Beneath the reins the stately birds,[563] that sing     Their sweet-ton'd death-song spread the snowy wing;     The gentle winds beneath her chariot sigh,     And virgin blushes purple o'er the sky:     On milk-white pinions borne, her cooing doves     Form playful circles round her as she moves;     And now their beaks in fondling kisses join,     In am'rous nods their fondling necks entwine.     O'er fair Idalia's bowers the goddess rode,     And by her altars sought Idalia's god:     The youthful bowyer of the heart was there;     His falling kingdom claim'd his earnest care.[564]     His bands he musters, through the myrtle groves     On buxom wings he trains the little loves.     Against the world, rebellious and astray,     He means to lead them, and resume his sway:     For base-born passions, at his shrine, 'twas told,     Each nobler transport of the breast controll'd.     A young Actæon,[565] scornful of his lore,     Morn after morn pursues the foamy boar,     In desert wilds, devoted to the chase;     Each dear enchantment of the female face     Spurn'd, and neglected. Him, enrag'd, he sees,     And sweet, and dread his punishment decrees.     Before his ravish'd sight, in sweet surprise,     Naked in all her charms, shall Dian rise;     With love's fierce flames his frozen heart shall burn,[566]     Coldly his suit, the nymph, unmov'd, shall spurn.     Of these lov'd dogs that now his passions sway,     Ah, may he never fall the hapless prey!

      Enrag'd, he sees a venal herd, the shame     Of human race, assume the titled name;[567]     And each, for some base interest of his own,     With Flatt'ry's manna'd lips assail the throne.     He sees the men, whom holiest sanctions bind     To poverty, and love of human kind;     While, soft as drop the dews of balmy May,     Their words preach virtue, and her charms display,     He sees with lust of gold their eyes on fire,     And ev'ry wish to lordly state aspire;     He sees them trim the lamp at night's mid hour,     To plan new laws to arm the regal power;     Sleepless, at night's mid hour, to raze the laws,     The sacred bulwarks of the people's cause,     Fram'd ere the blood of hard-earn'd victory     On their brave fathers' helm-hack'd swords was dry.

      Nor these alone; each rank, debas'd and rude,     Mean objects, worthless of their love, pursued:     Their passions thus rebellious to his lore,     The god decrees to punish and restore.     The little loves, light hov'ring in the air,     Twang their silk bow-strings, and their aims prepare:     Some on th' immortal anvils point the dart,     With power resistless to inflame the heart;     Their arrow heads they tip with soft desires,     And all the warmth of love's celestial fires;     Some sprinkle o'er the shafts the tears of woe,     Some store the quiver, some steel-spring the bow;     Each chanting as he works the tuneful strain     Of love's dear joys, of love's luxurious pain;     Charm'd was the lay to conquer and refine,     Divine the melody, the song divine.

      Already, now, began the vengeful war,     The witness of the god's benignant care;     On the hard bosoms of the stubborn crowd[568]     An arrowy shower the bowyer train bestow'd;     Pierced by the whizzing shafts, deep sighs the air,     And answering sighs the wounds of love declare.     Though various featur'd, and of various hue,     Each nymph seems loveliest in her lover's view;     Fir'd by the darts, by novice archers sped,     Ten thousand wild, fantastic loves are bred:     In wildest dreams the rustic hind aspires,     And haughtiest lords confess the humblest fires.

      The snowy swans of love's celestial queen     Now land her chariot on the shore of green;     One knee display'd, she treads the flow'ry strand,     The gather'd robe falls loosely from her hand;     Half-seen her bosom heaves the living snow,     And on her smiles the living roses glow.     The bowyer god,[569] whose subtle shafts ne'er fly     Misaim'd, in vain, in vain on earth or sky,     With rosy smiles the mother power receives;     Around her climbing, thick as ivy leaves,     The vassal loves in fond contention join     Who, first and most, shall kiss her hand divine.     Swift in her arms she caught her wanton boy,     And, "Oh, my son," she cries, "my pride, my joy!     Against thy might the dreadful Typhon fail'd,     Against thy shaft nor heav'n, nor Jove prevail'd;     Unless thine arrow wake the young desires,     My strength, my power, in vain each charm expires:     My son, my hope, I claim thy powerful aid,     Nor be the boon thy mother sues delay'd:     Where'er--so will th' eternal fates--where'er     The Lusian race the victor standards rear,     There shall my hymns resound, my altars flame,     And heav'nly Love her joyful lore proclaim.     My Lusian heroes, as my Romans, brave,     Long toss'd, long hopeless on the storm-torn wave,     Wearied and weak, at last on India's shore     Arriv'd, new toils, repose denied, they bore;     For Bacchus there with tenfold rage pursued     My dauntless sons, but now his might subdued,     Amid these raging seas, the scene of woes,     Theirs shall be now the balm of sweet repose;     Theirs ev'ry joy the noblest heroes claim,     The raptur'd foretaste of immortal fame.     Then, bend thy bow and wound the Nereid train,     The lovely daughters of the azure main;     And lead them, while they pant with am'rous fire,     Right to the isle which all my smiles inspire:     Soon shall my care that beauteous isle supply,     Where Zephyr, breathing love, on Flora's lap shall sigh.     There let the nymphs the gallant heroes meet,     And strew the pink and rose beneath their feet:     In crystal halls the feast divine prolong,     With wine nectareous and immortal song:     Let every nymph the snow-white bed prepare,     And, fairer far, resign her bosom there;     There, to the greedy riotous embrace     Resign each hidden charm with dearest grace.     Thus, from my native waves a hero line     Shall rise, and o'er the East illustrious shine;[570]     Thus, shall the rebel world thy prowess know,     And what the boundless joys our friendly powers bestow."

    She said; and smiling view'd her mighty boy;     Swift to the chariot springs the god of joy;     His ivory bow, and arrows tipp'd with gold,     Blaz'd to the sun-beam as the chariot roll'd:     Their silver harness shining to the day,     The swans, on milk-white pinions, spring away,     Smooth gliding o'er the clouds of lovely blue;     And Fame[571] (so will'd the god) before them flew:     A giant goddess, whose ungovern'd tongue     With equal zeal proclaims or right or wrong;     Oft had her lips the god of love blasphem'd,     And oft with tenfold praise his conquests nam'd:     A hundred eyes she rolls with ceaseless care,     A thousand tongues what these behold declare:     Fleet is her flight, the lightning's wing she rides,      }     And, though she shifts her colours swift as glides        }     The April rainbow, still the crowd she guides.            }     And now, aloft her wond'ring voice she rais'd,     And, with a thousand glowing tongues, she prais'd     The bold discoverers of the eastern world--     In gentle swells the list'ning surges curl'd,     And murmur'd to the sounds of plaintive love     Along the grottoes where the Nereids rove.     The drowsy power on whose smooth easy mien     The smiles of wonder and delight are seen,     Whose glossy, simp'ring eye bespeaks her name,     Credulity, attends the goddess Fame.     Fir'd by the heroes' praise, the wat'ry gods,[572]     With ardent speed forsake their deep abodes;     Their rage by vengeful Bacchus rais'd of late,     Now stung remorse, and love succeeds to hate.     Ah, where remorse in female bosom bleeds,     The tend'rest love in all its glow succeeds.     When fancy glows, how strong, O Love, thy power!     Nor slipp'd the eager god the happy hour;     Swift fly his arrows o'er the billowy main,     Wing'd with his fires, nor flies a shaft in vain:     Thus, ere the face the lover's breast inspires,     The voice of fame awakes the soft desires.     While from the bow-string start the shafts divine,     His ivory moon's wide horns incessant join,     Swift twinkling to the view: and wide he pours,     Omnipotent in love, his arrowy showers.     E'en Thetis' self confess'd the tender smart,     And pour'd the murmurs of the wounded heart:     Soft o'er the billows pants the am'rous sigh;     With wishful languor melting on each eye     The love-sick nymphs explore the tardy sails     That waft the heroes on the ling'ring gales.

      Give way, ye lofty billows, low subside,     Smooth as the level plain, your swelling pride,     Lo, Venus comes! Oh, soft, ye surges, sleep,     Smooth be the bosom of the azure deep,     Lo, Venus comes! and in her vig'rous train     She brings the healing balm of love-sick pain.     White as her swans,[573] and stately as they rear     Their snowy crests when o'er the lake they steer,     Slow moving on, behold, the fleet appears,     And o'er the distant billow onward steers.     The beauteous Nereids, flush'd in all their charms,     Surround the goddess of the soft alarms:     Right to the isle she leads the smiling train,     And all her arts her balmy lips explain;     The fearful languor of the asking eye,     The lovely blush of yielding modesty,     The grieving look, the sigh, the fav'ring smile,     And all th' endearments of the open wile,     She taught the nymphs--in willing breasts that heav'd     To hear her lore, her lore the nymphs receiv'd.

      As now triumphant to their native shore     Through the wide deep the joyful navy bore,     Earnest the pilot's eyes sought cape or bay,     For long was yet the various wat'ry way;     Sought cape or isle, from whence their boats might bring     The healthful bounty of the crystal spring:     When sudden, all in nature's pride array'd,     The Isle of Love its glowing breast display'd.     O'er the green bosom of the dewy lawn     Soft blazing flow'd the silver of the dawn,     The gentle waves the glowing lustre share,     Arabia's balm was sprinkled o'er the air.     Before the fleet, to catch the heroes' view,     The floating isle fair Acidalia drew:     Soon as the floating verdure caught their sight,[574]     She fix'd, unmov'd, the island of delight.     So when in child-birth of her Jove-sprung load,     The sylvan goddess and the bowyer god,     In friendly pity of Latona's woes,[575]     Amid the waves the Delian isle arose.     And now, led smoothly o'er the furrow'd tide,     Right to the isle of joy the vessels glide:     The bay they enter, where on ev'ry hand,     Around them clasps the flower-enamell'd land;     A safe retreat, where not a blast may shake     Its flutt'ring pinions o'er the stilly lake.     With purple shells, transfus'd as marble veins,     The yellow sands celestial Venus stains.     With graceful pride three hills of softest green     Rear their fair bosoms o'er the sylvan scene;     Their sides embroider'd boast the rich array     Of flow'ry shrubs in all the pride of May;     The purple lotus and the snowy thorn,     And yellow pod-flowers ev'ry slope adorn.     From the green summits of the leafy hills     Descend, with murm'ring lapse, three limpid rills:     Beneath the rose-trees loit'ring, slow they glide,     Now, tumbles o'er some rock their crystal pride;     Sonorous now, they roll adown the glade,     Now, plaintive tinkle in the secret shade,     Now, from the darkling grove, beneath the beam     Of ruddy morn, like melted silver stream,     Edging the painted margins of the bowers,     And breathing liquid freshness on the flowers.     Here, bright reflected in the pool below,     The vermeil apples tremble on the bough;     Where o'er the yellow sands the waters sleep     The primros'd banks, inverted, dew-drops weep;     Where murm'ring o'er the pebbles purls the stream     The silver trouts in playful curvings gleam.     Long thus, and various, ev'ry riv'let strays,     Till closing, now, their long meand'ring maze,     Where in a smiling vale the mountains end,     Form'd in a crystal lake the waters blend:[576]     Fring'd was the border with a woodland shade,     In ev'ry leaf of various green array'd,     Each yellow-ting'd, each mingling tint between     The dark ash-verdure and the silv'ry green.     The trees, now bending forward, slowly shake     Their lofty honours o'er the crystal lake;     Now, from the flood the graceful boughs retire     With coy reserve, and now again admire     Their various liv'ries, by the summer dress'd,     Smooth-gloss'd and soften'd in the mirror's breast.     So, by her glass the wishful virgin stays,     And, oft retiring, steals the ling'ring gaze.     A thousand boughs aloft to heav'n display     Their fragrant apples, shining to the day;     The orange here perfumes the buxom air,     And boasts the golden hue of Daphne's hair.[577]     Near to the ground each spreading bough descends,     Beneath her yellow load the citron bends;     The fragrant lemon scents the cooly grove;     Fair as (when rip'ning for the days of love)     The virgin's breasts the gentle swell avow,     So, the twin fruitage swell on every bough.     Wild forest-trees the mountain sides array'd     With curling foliage and romantic shade:     Here spreads the poplar, to Alcides dear;     And dear to Phoebus, ever verdant here,     The laurel joins the bowers for ever green,     The myrtle bowers belov'd of beauty's queen.     To Jove the oak his wide-spread branches rears;     And high to heav'n the fragrant cedar bears;     Where through the glades appear the cavern'd rocks,     The lofty pine-tree waves her sable locks;     Sacred to Cyb{)e}l{=e} the whisp'ring pine     Loves the wild grottoes where the white cliffs shine;     Here towers the cypress, preacher to the wise,     Less'ning from earth her spiral honours rise,     Till, as a spear-point rear'd, the topmost spray     Points to the Eden of eternal day.     Here round her fost'ring elm the smiling vine,     In fond embraces, gives her arms to twine,     The num'rous clusters pendant from the boughs,     The green here glistens, here the purple glows;     For, here the genial seasons of the year     Danc'd hand in hand, no place for winter here;     His grisly visage from the shore expell'd,     United sway the smiling seasons held.     Around the swelling fruits of deep'ning red,     Their snowy hues the fragrant blossoms spread;     Between the bursting buds of lucid green     The apple's ripe vermilion blush is seen;     For here each gift Pomona's hand bestows     In cultur'd garden, free, uncultur'd flows,     The flavour sweeter, and the hue more fair,     Than e'er was foster'd by the hand of care.     The cherry here in shining crimson glows;     And, stain'd with lover's blood,[578] in pendent rows,     The bending boughs the mulberries o'erload;     The bending boughs caress'd by Zephyr nod.     The gen'rous peach, that strengthens in exile     Far from his native earth, the Persian soil,     The velvet peach, of softest glossy blue,     Hangs by the pomegranate of orange hue,     Whose open heart a brighter red displays     Than that which sparkles in the ruby's blaze.     Here, trembling with their weight, the branches bear,     Delicious as profuse, the tap'ring pear.     For thee, fair fruit, the songsters of the grove     With hungry bills from bower to arbour rove.     Ah, if ambitious thou wilt own the care     To grace the feast of heroes and the fair,     Soft let the leaves, with grateful umbrage, hide     The green-tinged orange of thy mellow side.     A thousand flowers of gold, of white and red,     Far o'er the shadowy vale[579] their carpets spread,     Of fairer tap'stry, and of richer bloom,     Than ever glow'd in Persia's boasted loom:     As glitt'ring rainbows o'er the verdure thrown,     O'er every woodland walk th' embroid'ry shone.     Here o'er the wat'ry mirror's lucid bed     Narcissus, self-enamour'd, hangs the head;     And here, bedew'd with love's celestial tears,     The woe-mark'd flower of slain Adonis rears[580]     Its purple head, prophetic of the reign     When lost Adonis shall revive again.     At strife appear the lawns and purpled skies,     Which from each other stole the beauteous dyes:[581]     The lawn in all Aurora's lustre glows,     Aurora steals the blushes of the rose,     The rose displays the blushes that adorn     The spotless virgin on the nuptial morn.     Zephyr and Flora emulous conspire     To breathe their graces o'er the field's attire;     The one gives healthful freshness, one the hue     Fairer than e'er creative pencil drew.     Pale as the love-sick hopeless maid they dye     The modest violet; from the curious eye     The modest violet turns her gentle head,     And, by the thorn, weeps o'er her lowly bed.     Bending beneath the tears of pearly dawn     The snow-white lily glitters o'er the lawn;     Low from the bough reclines the damask rose,     And o'er the lily's milk-white bosom glows.     Fresh in the dew, far o'er the painted dales,     Each fragrant herb her sweetest scent exhales.     The hyacinth bewrays the doleful _Ai_,[582]     And calls the tribute of Apollo's sigh;     Still on its bloom the mournful flower retains     The lovely blue that dy'd the stripling's veins.     Pomona, fir'd with rival envy, views     The glaring pride of Flora's darling hues;     Where Flora bids the purple iris spread,     She hangs the wilding's blossom white and red;     Where wild-thyme purples, where the daisy snows     The curving slopes, the melon's pride she throws;     Where by the stream the lily of the vale,     Primrose, and cowslip meek, perfume the gale,     Beneath the lily, and the cowslip's bell,     The scarlet strawberries luxurious swell.     Nor these alone the teeming Eden yields,     Each harmless bestial crops the flow'ry fields;     And birds of ev'ry note, and ev'ry wing,     Their loves responsive thro' the branches sing:     In sweet vibrations thrilling o'er the skies,     High pois'd in air, the lark his warbling tries;     The swan, slow sailing o'er the crystal lake,     Tunes his melodious note; from ev'ry brake     The glowing strain the nightingale returns,     And, in the bowers of love, the turtle mourns.     Pleas'd to behold his branching horns appear,     O'er the bright fountain bends the fearless deer;     The hare starts trembling from the bushy shade,     And, swiftly circling, crosses oft the glade.     Where from the rocks the bubbling founts distil,     The milk-white lambs come bleating down the hill;     The dappled heifer seeks the vales below,     And from the thicket springs the bounding doe.     To his lov'd nest, on fondly flutt'ring wings,     In chirping bill the little songster brings     The food untasted; transport thrills his breast;     'Tis nature's touch, 'tis instinct's heav'n-like feast.     Thus bower and lawn were deck'd with Eden's flowers,     And song and joy imparadis'd the bowers.

      And soon the fleet their ready anchors threw:     Lifted on eager tip-toe at the view,     On nimble feet that bounded to the strand     The second Argonauts[583] elance to land.     Wide o'er the beauteous isle[584] the lovely fair     Stray through the distant glades, devoid of care.     From lowly valley and from mountain grove     The lovely nymphs renew the strains of love.     Here from the bowers that crown the plaintive rill     The solemn harp's melodious warblings thrill;     Here from the shadows of the upland grot     The mellow lute renews the swelling note.     As fair Diana, and her virgin train,     Some gaily ramble o'er the flow'ry plain,     In feign'd pursuit of hare or bounding roe,     Their graceful mien and beauteous limbs to show;     Now seeming careless, fearful now and coy,     (So, taught the goddess of unutter'd joy),     And, gliding through the distant glades, display     Each limb, each movement, naked as the day.     Some, light with glee, in careless freedom take     Their playful revels in the crystal lake;     One trembling stands no deeper than the knee     To plunge reluctant, while in sportful glee     Another o'er her sudden laves the tide;     In pearly drops the wishful waters glide,     Reluctant dropping from her breasts of snow;     Beneath the wave another seems to glow;     The am'rous waves her bosom fondly kiss'd,     And rose and fell, as panting, on her breast.     Another swims along with graceful pride,     Her silver arms the glist'ning waves divide,     Her shining sides the fondling waters lave,     Her glowing cheeks are brighten'd by the wave,     Her hair, of mildest yellow, flows from side     To side, as o'er it plays the wanton tide,     And, careless as she turns, her thighs of snow     Their tap'ring rounds in deeper lustre show.

      Some gallant Lusians sought the woodland prey,     And, thro' the thickets, forc'd the pathless way;     Where some, in shades impervious to the beam,     Supinely listen'd to the murm'ring stream:     When sudden, through the boughs, the various dyes     Of pink, of scarlet, and of azure rise,     Swift from the verdant banks the loit'rers spring,     Down drops the arrow from the half-drawn string:     Soon they behold 'twas not the rose's hue,     The jonquil's yellow, nor the pansy's blue:     Dazzling the shades the nymphs appear--the zone     And flowing scarf in gold and azure shone.     Naked as Venus stood in Ida's bower,     Some trust the dazzling charms of native power;     Through the green boughs and darkling shades they show     The shining lustre of their native snow,     And every tap'ring, every rounded swell     Of thigh, of bosom, as they glide, reveal.     As visions, cloth'd in dazzling white, they rise,     Then steal unnoted from the flurried eyes:     Again apparent, and again, withdrawn,     They shine and wanton o'er the smiling lawn.     Amaz'd and lost in rapture of surprise,     "All joy, my friends!" the brave VELOSO cries,     "Whate'er of goddesses old fable told,     Or poet sung of sacred groves, behold.     Sacred to goddesses divinely bright     These beauteous forests own their guardian might.     From eyes profane, from ev'ry age conceal'd,     To us, behold, all Paradise reveal'd!     Swift let us try if phantoms of the air,     Or living charms, appear divinely fair!"     Swift at the word the gallant Lusians bound,     Their rapid footsteps scarcely touch the ground;     Through copse, through brake, impatient of their prey,     Swift as the wounded deer, they spring away:     Fleet through the winding shades, in rapid flight,     The nymphs, as wing'd with terror, fly their sight;     Fleet though they fled, the mild reverted eye     And dimpling smile their seeming fear deny.     Fleet through the shades in parted rout they glide:     If winding path the chosen pairs divide,     Another path by sweet mistake betrays,     And throws the lover on the lover's gaze:     If dark-brow'd bower conceal the lovely fair,     The laugh, the shriek, confess the charmer there.

      Luxurious here the wanton zephyrs toy,     And ev'ry fondling fav'ring art employ.     Fleet as the fair ones speed, the busy gale     In wanton frolic lifts the trembling veil;     White though the veil, in fairer brighter glow,     The lifted robe displays the living snow:     Quick flutt'ring on the gale the robe conceals,     Then instant to the glance each charm reveals;     Reveals, and covers from the eyes on fire,     Reveals, and with the shade inflames desire.     One, as her breathless lover hastens on,     With wily stumble sudden lies o'erthrown;     Confus'd, she rises with a blushing smile;     The lover falls the captive of her guile:     Tripp'd by the fair, he tumbles on the mead,     The joyful victim of his eager speed.

      Afar, where sport the wantons in the lake,     Another band of gallant youths betake;     The laugh, the shriek, the revel and the toy,     Bespeak the innocence of youthful joy.     The laugh, the shriek, the gallant Lusians hear     As through the forest glades they chase the deer;     For, arm'd, to chase the bounding roe they came,     Unhop'd the transport of a nobler game.     The naked wantons, as the youths appear,     Shrill through the woods resound the shriek of fear.     Some feign such terror of the forc'd embrace,     Their virgin modesty to this gives place,     Naked they spring to land, and speed away     To deepest shades unpierc'd by glaring day;     Thus, yielding freely to the am'rous eyes     What to the am'rous hands their fear denies.     Some well assume Diana's virgin shame,     When on her naked sports the hunter[585] came     Unwelcome--plunging in the crystal tide,     In vain they strive their beauteous limbs to hide;     The lucid waves ('twas all they could) bestow     A milder lustre and a softer glow.     As, lost in earnest care of future need,     Some to the banks, to snatch their mantles, speed,     Of present view regardless; ev'ry wile     Was yet, and ev'ry net of am'rous guile.     Whate'er the terror of the feign'd alarm,     Display'd, in various force, was ev'ry charm.     Nor idle stood the gallant youth; the wing     Of rapture lifts them, to the fair they spring;     Some to the copse pursue their lovely prey;     Some, cloth'd and shod, impatient of delay,     Impatient of the stings of fierce desire,     Plunge headlong in the tide to quench the fire.     So, when the fowler to his cheek uprears     The hollow steel, and on the mallard bears,     His eager dog, ere bursts the flashing roar,     Fierce for the prey, springs headlong from the shore,     And barking, cuts the wave with furious joy:     So, mid the billow springs each eager boy,     Springs to the nymph whose eyes from all the rest     By singling him her secret wish confess'd.

      A son of Mars was there, of gen'rous race,     His ev'ry elegance of manly grace;     Am'rous and brave, the bloom of April youth     Glow'd on his cheek, his eye spoke simplest truth;     Yet love, capricious to th' accomplish'd boy,     Had ever turn'd to gall each promis'd joy,     Had ever spurn'd his vows; yet still his heart     Would hope, and nourish still the tender smart:     The purest delicacy fann'd his fires,     And proudest honour nurs'd his fond desires.     Not on the first that fair before him glow'd,     Not on the first the youth his love bestow'd.     In all her charms the fair Ephyre came,     And Leonardo's heart was all on flame.     Affection's melting transport o'er him stole,     And love's all gen'rous glow entranced his soul;     Of selfish joy unconscious, ev'ry thought     On sweet delirium's ocean stream'd afloat.     Pattern of beauty did Ephyre shine,     Nor less she wish'd these beauties to resign:     More than her sisters long'd her heart to yield,     Yet, swifter fled she o'er the smiling field.     The youth now panting with the hopeless chase,     "Oh turn," he cries, "oh turn thy angel face:     False to themselves, can charms like these conceal     The hateful rigour of relentless steel?     And, did the stream deceive me, when I stood     Amid my peers reflected in the flood?     The easiest port and fairest bloom I bore--     False was the stream--while I in vain deplore,     My peers are happy; lo, in ev'ry shade,     In ev'ry bower, their love with love repaid!     I, I alone through brakes, through thorns pursue     A cruel fair. Ah, still my fate proves true,     True to its rigour--who, fair nymph, to thee     Reveal'd 'twas I that sued! unhappy me!     Born to be spurn'd though honesty inspire.     Alas, I faint, my languid sinews tire;     Oh stay thee--powerless to sustain their weight     My knees sink down, I sink beneath my fate!"     He spoke; a rustling urges thro' the trees,     Instant new vigour strings his active knees,     Wildly he glares around, and raging cries,     "And must another snatch my lovely prize!     In savage grasp thy beauteous limbs constrain!     I feel, I madden while I feel the pain!     Oh lost, thou fli'st the safety of my arms,     My hand shall guard thee, softly seize thy charms,     No brutal rage inflames me, yet I burn!     Die shall thy ravisher. O goddess, turn,     And smiling view the error of my fear;     No brutal force, no ravisher is near;     A harmless roebuck gave the rustling sounds,     Lo, from the thicket swift as thee he bounds!     Ah, vain the hope to tire thee in the chase!     I faint, yet hear, yet turn thy lovely face.     Vain are thy fears; were ev'n thy will to yield     The harvest of my hope, that harvest field     My fate would guard, and walls of brass would rear     Between my sickle and the golden ear.     Yet fly me not; so may thy youthful prime     Ne'er fly thy cheek on the grey wing of time.     Yet hear, the last my panting breath can say,     Nor proudest kings, nor mightiest hosts can sway     Fate's dread decrees; yet thou, O nymph, divine,     Yet thou canst more, yet thou canst conquer mine.     Unmov'd each other yielding nymph I see;     Joy to their lovers, for they touch not thee!     But thee!--oh, every transport of desire,     That melts to mingle with its kindred fire,     For thee respires--alone I feel for thee     The dear wild rage of longing ecstasy:     By all the flames of sympathy divine     To thee united, thou by right art mine.     From thee, from thee the hallow'd transport flows     That sever'd rages, and for union glows:     Heav'n owns the claim. Hah, did the lightning glare:     Yes, I beheld my rival, though the air     Grew dim; ev'n now I heard him softly tread.     Oh rage, he waits thee on the flow'ry bed!     I see, I see thee rushing to his arms,     And sinking on his bosom, all thy charms     To him resigning in an eager kiss,     All I implor'd, the whelming tide of bliss!     And shall I see him riot on thy charms,     Dissolv'd in joy, exulting in thine arms?     Oh burst, ye lightnings, round my destin'd head,     Oh pour your flashes----" Madd'ning as he said,[586]     Amid the windings of the bow'ry wood     His trembling footsteps still the nymph pursued.     Woo'd to the flight she wing'd her speed to hear     His am'rous accents melting on her ear.     And now, she turns the wild walk's serpent maze;     A roseate bower its velvet couch displays;     The thickest moss its softest verdure spread,     Crocus and mingling pansy fring'd the bed,     The woodbine dropp'd its honey from above,     And various roses crown'd the sweet alcove.     Here, as she hastens, on the hopeless boy     She turns her face, all bath'd in smiles of joy;     Then, sinking down, her eyes suffused with love     Glowing on his, one moment lost reprove.     Here was no rival, all he wish'd his own;     Lock'd in her arms soft sinks the stripling down.     Ah, what soft murmurs panting thro' the bowers     Sigh'd to the raptures of the paramours!     The wishful sigh, and melting smile conspire,     Devouring kisses fan the fiercer fire;     Sweet violence, with dearest grace, assails,     Soft o'er the purpos'd frown the smile prevails,     The purpos'd frown betrays its own deceit,     In well-pleas'd laughter ends the rising threat;     The coy delay glides off in yielding love,     And transport murmurs thro' the sacred grove.     The joy of pleasing adds its sacred zest,     And all is love, embracing and embraced.

      The golden morn beheld the scenes of joy;     Nor, sultry noon, mayst thou the bowers annoy;     The sultry noon-beam shines the lover's aid,     And sends him glowing to the secret shade.     O'er evr'y shade, and ev'ry nuptial bower     The love-sick strain the virgin turtles pour;     For nuptial faith and holy rites combin'd,     The Lusian heroes and the nymphs conjoin'd.     With flow'ry wreaths, and laurel chaplets, bound     With ductile gold, the nymphs the heroes crown'd:     By ev'ry spousal holy ritual tied,     No chance, they vow, shall e'er their hands divide,     In life, in death, attendant as their fame;     Such was the oath of ocean's sov'reign dame:     The dame (from heav'n and holy Vesta sprung,     For ever beauteous and for ever young),     Enraptur'd, views the chief whose deathless name     The wond'ring world and conquer'd seas proclaim.     With stately pomp she holds the hero's hand,     And gives her empire to his dread command,     By spousal ties confirm'd; nor pass'd untold     What Fate's unalter'd page had will'd of old:     The world's vast globe in radiant sphere she show'd,     The shores immense, and seas unknown, unplough'd;     The seas, the shores, due to the Lusian keel     And Lusian sword, she hastens to reveal.     The glorious leader by the hand she takes,     And, dim below, the flow'ry bower forsakes.     High on a mountain's starry top divine     Her palace walls of living crystal shine;     Of gold and crystal blaze the lofty towers;     Here, bath'd in joy, they pass the blissful hours:     Engulf'd in tides on tides of joy, the day     On downy pinions glides unknown away.     While thus the sov'reigns in the palace reign,     Like transport riots o'er the humbler plain,     Where each, in gen'rous triumph o'er his peers,     His lovely bride to ev'ry bride prefers.

      "Hence, ye profane!"[587]--the song melodious rose,     By mildest zephyrs wafted through the boughs,     Unseen the warblers of the holy strain--     "Far from these sacred bowers, ye lewd profane!     Hence each unhallow'd eye, each vulgar ear;     Chaste and divine are all the raptures here.     The nymphs of ocean, and the ocean's queen,     The isle angelic, ev'ry raptur'd scene,     The charms of honour and its meed confess,     These are the raptures, these the wedded bliss:     The glorious triumph and the laurel crown,     The ever blossom'd palms of fair renown,     By time unwither'd, and untaught to cloy;     These are the transports of the Isle of Joy.     Such was Olympus and the bright abodes;     Renown was heav'n, and heroes were the gods.     Thus, ancient times, to virtue ever just,     To arts and valour rear'd the worshipp'd bust.     High, steep, and rugged, painful to be trod,     With toils on toils immense is virtue's road;     But smooth at last the walks umbrageous smile,     Smooth as our lawns, and cheerful as our isle.     Up the rough road Alcides, Hermes, strove,     All men like you, Apollo, Mars, and Jove:     Like you to bless mankind Minerva toil'd;     Diana bound the tyrants of the wild;     O'er the waste desert Bacchus spread the vine;     And Ceres taught the harvest-field to shine.     Fame rear'd her trumpet; to the blest abodes     She rais'd, and hail'd them gods, and sprung of gods.

      "The love of fame, by heav'n's own hand impress'd,     The first, and noblest passion of the breast,     May yet mislead.--Oh guard, ye hero train,     No harlot robes of honours false and vain,     No tinsel yours, be yours all native gold,     Well-earn'd each honour, each respect you hold:     To your lov'd king return a guardian band,     Return the guardians of your native land;     To tyrant power be dreadful; from the jaws     Of fierce oppression guard the peasant's cause.     If youthful fury pant for shining arms,     Spread o'er the eastern world the dread alarms;[588]     There bends the Saracen the hostile bow,     The Saracen thy faith, thy nation's foe;     There from his cruel gripe tear empire's reins,     And break his tyrant-sceptre o'er his chains.     On adamantine pillars thus shall stand     The throne, the glory of your native land;     And Lusian heroes, an immortal line,     Shall ever with us share our isle divine."




DISSERTATION

ON THE

FICTION OF THE ISLAND OF VENUS.


From the earliest ages, and in the most distant nations, palaces, forests and gardens, have been the favourite themes of poets. And though, as in Homer's island of Rhadamanthus, the description is sometimes only cursory; at other times they have lavished all their powers, and have vied with each other in adorning their edifices and landscapes. The gardens of Alcinous in the Odyssey, and Elysium in the Æneid, have excited the ambition of many imitators. Many instances of these occur in the later writers. These subjects, however, it must be owned, are so natural to the genius of poetry, that it is scarcely fair to attribute to an imitation of the classics, the innumerable descriptions of this kind which abound in the old romances. In these, under different allegorical names, every passion, every virtue and vice, had its palace, its enchanted bower, or its dreary cave. Among the Italians, on the revival of letters, Pulci, Boiardo, and others, borrowed these fictions from the Gothic romancers; Ariosto borrowed from them, and Spenser has copied Ariosto and Tasso. In the sixth and seventh books of the Orlando Furioso, there is a fine description of the island and palace of Alcina, or Vice; and in the tenth book (but inferior to the other in poetical colouring), we have a view of the country of Logistilla, or Virtue. The passage, of this kind, however, where Ariosto has displayed the richest poetical painting, is in the xxxiv. book, in the description of Paradise, whither he sends Astolpho, the English duke, to ask the help of St. John to recover the wits of Orlando. The whole is most admirably fanciful. Astolpho mounts the clouds on the winged horse, sees Paradise, and, accompanied by the Evangelist, visits the moon; the adventures in which orb are almost literally translated in Milton's Limbo. But the passage which may be said to bear the nearest resemblance to the descriptive part of the island of Venus, is the landscape of Paradise, of which the ingenious Mr. Hoole, to whose many acts of friendship I am proud to acknowledge myself indebted, has obliged me with this translation, though only ten books of his Ariosto are yet published.

    "O'er the glad earth the blissful season pours     The vernal beauties of a thousand flowers     In varied tints: there show'd the ruby's hue,     The yellow topaz, and the sapphire blue.     The mead appears one intermingled blaze     Where pearls and diamonds dart their trembling rays.     Not emerald here so bright a verdure yields     As the fair turf of those celestial fields.     On ev'ry tree the leaves unfading grow,     The fruitage ripens and the flow'rets blow!     The frolic birds, gay-plum'd, of various wing     Amid the boughs their notes melodious sing:     Still lakes, and murm'ring streams, with waters clear,     Charm the fix'd eye, and lull the list'ning ear.     A soft'ning genial air, that ever seems     In even tenor, cools the solar beams     With fanning breeze; while from the enamell'd field,     Whate'er the fruits, the plants, the blossoms yield     Of grateful scent, the stealing gales dispense     The blended sweets to feed th' immortal sense.

      "Amid the plain a palace dazzling bright,     Like living flame, emits a streamy light,     And, wrapp'd in splendour of refulgent day,     Outshines the strength of ev'ry mortal ray.

      "Astolpho gently now directs his speed     To where the spacious pile enfolds the mead     In circuit wide, and views with eager eyes     Each nameless charm that happy soil supplies.     With this compar'd, he deems the world below     A dreary desert and a seat of woe!     By Heaven and Nature, in their wrath bestow'd,     In evil hour, for man's unblest abode.

      "Near and more near the stately walls he drew,     In steadfast gaze transported at the view:     They seem'd one gem entire, of purer red     Than deep'ning gleams transparent rubies shed.     Stupendous work! by art Dædalian rais'd,     Transcending all by feeble mortals prais'd!     No more henceforth let boasting tongues proclaim     Those wonders of the world, so chronicled by fame!"

Camoëns read and admired Ariosto; but it by no means follows that he borrowed the hint of his island of Venus from that poet. The luxury of flowery description is as common in poetry as are the tales of love. The heroes of Ariosto meet beautiful women in the palace of Alcina:--

    "Before the threshold wanton damsels wait,     Or, sport between the pillars of the gate:     But, beauty more had brighten'd in their face     Had modesty attemper'd ev'ry grace;     In vestures green each damsel swept the ground,     Their temples fair, with leafy garlands crown'd.     These, with a courteous welcome, led the knight     To this sweet Paradise of soft delight....     Enamour'd youths and tender damsels seem     To chant their loves beside a purling stream.     Some by a branching tree, or mountain's shade,     In sports and dances press the downy glade,     While one discloses to his friend, apart,     The secret transport of his am'rous heart."--BOOK vi.

But these descriptions also, which bring the homes of knight-errantry into the way of beautiful wantons, are as common in the old romance as the use of the alphabet: and indeed the greatest part of these love-adventures are evidently borrowed from the fable of Circe. Astolpho, who was transformed into a myrtle by Alcina, thus informs Rogero:--

      "Her former lovers she esteem'd no more,     For many lovers she possess'd before;     I was her joy----     Too late, alas, I found her wav'ring mind     In love inconstant as the changing wind!     Scarce had I held two months the fairy's grace,     When a new youth was taken to my place:     Rejected, then, I join'd the banish'd herd     That lost her love, as others were preferr'd ...     Some here, some there, her potent charms retain,     In diverse forms imprison'd to remain;     In beeches, olives, palms, or cedars clos'd,     Or, such as me, you here behold expos'd;     In fountains some, and some in beasts confin'd,     As suits the wayward fairy's cruel mind."

    HOOLE, Ar. bk. vi.

When incidents, character, and conduct confess the resemblance, we may, with certainty, pronounce from whence the copy is taken. Where only a similar stroke of passion or description occurs, it belongs alone to the arrogance of dulness, to tell us on what passage the poet had his eye. Every great poet has been persecuted in this manner: Milton in particular. His commentators have not left him a flower of his own growth. Yet, like the creed of the atheist, their system is involved in the deepest absurdity. It is easy to suppose that men of poetical feelings, in describing the same thing, should give us the same picture. But, that the Paradise Lost, which forms one animated whole of the noblest poetry, is a mere cento, compiled from innumerable authors, ancient and modern, is a supposition which gives Milton a cast of talents infinitely more extraordinary and inexplicable than the greatest poetical genius. When Gaspar Poussin painted clouds and trees in his landscapes, he did not borrow the green and the blue of the leaf and the sky from Claude Lorraine. Neither did Camoëns, when he painted his island of Venus, spend the half of his life in collecting his colours from all his predecessors who had described the beauties of the vernal year, or the stages of passion. Camoëns knew how others had painted the flowery bowers of love; these formed his taste, and corrected his judgment. He viewed the beauties of nature with poetical eyes, from thence he drew his landscapes; he had felt all the allurements of love, and from thence he describes the agitations of that passion.

Nor is the description of fairy bowers and palaces, though most favourite topics, peculiar to the romances of chivalry. The poetry of the orientals also abounds with them, yet, with some characteristic differences. Like the constitutions and dress of the Asiatics, the landscapes of the eastern muse are warm and feeble, brilliant and slight, and, like the manners of the people, wear an eternal sameness. The western muse, on the contrary, is nervous as her heroes, sometimes flowery as her Italian or English fields, sometimes majestically great as her Runic forests of oak and pine; and always various, as the character of her inhabitants. Yet, with all those differences of feature, several oriental fictions greatly resemble the island of Circe, and the flowery dominions of Alcina. In particular, the adventures of Prince Agib, or the third Calender, in the Arabian Tales, afford a striking likeness of painting and catastrophe.

If Ariosto's, however, seem to resemble any eastern fiction, the island of Venus in Camoëns bears a more striking resemblance to a passage in Chaucer. The following beautiful piece of poetical painting occurs in the Assembly of the Fowles:--

    "The bildir oak, and eke the hardie ashe,     The pillir elme, the coffir unto caraine,     The boxe pipetre, the holme to whippis lasshe,     The sailing firre, the cypres deth to plaine,     The shortir ewe, the aspe for shaftis plaine,     The olive of pece, and eke the dronkin vine,     The victor palme, the laurir to divine.     A gardein sawe I full of blossomed bowis,     Upon a river, in a grené mede     There as sweetness evirmore inough is,     With flouris white, and blewe, yelowe, and rede,     And colde and clere wellestremis, nothing dede,     That swommin full of smale fishis light,     With finnis rede, and scalis silver bright.

    On every bough the birdis herd I syng     With voice of angell, in ther harmonie     That busied 'hem, ther birdis forthe to bryng,     And little pretie conies to ther plaie gan hie;     And furthir all about I gan espie     The dredful roe, the buck, the hart and hind,     Squirils, and bestis smal of gentle kind.     Of instrumentes of stringis, in accorde     Herd I so plaie a ravishyng swetnesse,     That God, that makir is of all and Lorde,     Ne herd nevir a better, as I gesse,     There with a winde, unneth it might be lesse,     Made in the levis grene a noisé soft     Accordant to the foulis song en loft.

    The aire of the place so attempre was,     That ner was there grevaunce of hot ne cold--

    * * *

    Under a tre beside a well I seye     Cupid our lorde his arrowes forge and file,     And at his fete his bowe all redie laye,     And well his doughtir temprid all the while     The heddis in the well, and with her wile     She couchid 'hem aftir as thei should serve,     Some for to flea, and some to wound and carve.

    * * *

    And upon pillirs grete of Jaspir long     I saw a temple of Brasse ifoundid strong.

    And about the temple dauncid alwaie     Women inow, of which some there ywere     Faire of 'hemself, and some of 'hem were gaie,     In kirtils all disheveled went thei there,     That was ther office or from yere to yere,     And on the temple sawe I white and faire     Of dovis sittyng many a thousande paire."

Here we have Cupid forging his arrows, the woodland, the streams, the music of instruments and birds, the frolics of deer and other animals; and _women enow_. In a word, the island of Venus is here sketched out, yet Chaucer was never translated into Latin or any language of the continent, nor did Camoëns understand a line of English. The subject was common, and the same poetical feelings in Chaucer and Camoëns pointed out to each what were the beauties of landscapes and of bowers devoted to pleasure.

Yet, though the fiction of bowers, of islands, and palaces, was no novelty in poetry, much, however, remains to be attributed to the poetical powers and invention of Camoëns. The island of Venus contains, of all others, by much the completest gradation, and fullest assemblage of that species of luxuriant painting. Nothing in the older writers is equal to it in fulness. Nor can the island of Armida, in Tasso, be compared to it, in poetical embroidery or passionate expression; though Tasso as undoubtedly built upon the model of Camoëns, as Spenser appropriated the imagery of Tasso when he described the bower of Acrasia, part of which he has literally translated from the Italian poet. The beautiful fictions of Armida and Acrasia, however, are much too long to be here inserted, and they are well known to every reader of taste.

But the chief praise of our poet is yet unmentioned. The introduction of so beautiful a fiction as an essential part of the conduct and machinery of an epic poem, does the greatest honour to the invention of Camoëns. The machinery of the former part of the poem not only acquires dignity, but is completed by it. And the conduct of Homer and Virgil has, in this, not only received a fine imitation, but a masterly contrast. In the finest allegory the heroes of the Lusiad receive their reward: and, by means of this allegory, our poet gives a noble imitation of the noblest part of the Æneid. In the tenth Lusiad, GAMA and his heroes hear the nymphs in the divine palace of Thetis sing the triumphs of their countrymen in the conquest of India: after this the goddess shows GAMA a view of the eastern world, from the Cape of Good Hope to the furthest islands of Japan. She poetically describes every region, and the principal islands, and concludes, "All these are given to the western world by you." It is impossible any poem can be summed up with greater sublimity. The Fall of Troy is nothing to this. Nor is this all: the most masterly fiction, finest compliment, and ultimate purpose of the Æneid is not only nobly imitated, but the conduct of Homer, in concluding the Iliad, as already observed, is paralleled, without one circumstance being borrowed. Poetical conduct cannot possibly bear a stronger resemblance, than the reward of the heroes of the Lusiad, the prophetic song, and the vision shown to GAMA bear to the games at the funeral of Patroclus and the redemption of the body of Hector, considered as the completion of the anger of Achilles, the subject of the Iliad. Nor is it a greater honour to resemble a Homer and a Virgil, than it is to be resembled by a Milton. Milton certainly heard of Fanshaw's translation of the Lusiad, though he might never have seen the original, for it was published fourteen years before he gave his Paradise Lost to the world. But, whatever he knew of it, had the last book of the Lusiad been two thousand years known to the learned, every one would have owned that the two last boots of the Paradise Lost were evidently formed upon it. But whether Milton borrowed any hint from Camoëns is of little consequence. That the genius of the great Milton suggested the conclusion of his immortal poem in the manner and with the machinery of the Lusiad, is enough. It is enough that the part of Michael and Adam in the two last books of the Paradise Lost are, in point of conduct, exactly the same with the part of Thetis and GAMA in the conclusion of the Lusiad. Yet, this difference must be observed; in the narrative of his last book, Milton has flagged, as Addison calls it, and fallen infinitely short of the untired spirit of the Portuguese poet.


END OF THE NINTH BOOK.




BOOK X.

THE ARGUMENT.

In the opening of this, the last canto, the poet resumes the allegory of the Isle of Joy, or of Venus: the fair nymphs conduct their lovers to their radiant palaces, where delicious wines sparkle in every cup. Before the poet describes the song of a prophetic siren, who celebrates the praise of the heroes who are destined in ennoble the name of their country, he addresses himself to his muse in a tone of sorrow, which touches us the more deeply when we reflect upon the unhappy situation to which this great poet was at last reduced. In the song of the siren, which follows, is afforded a prophetic view from the period of Gama's expedition down to Camoëns' own times, in which Pacheco, and other heroes of Portugal, pass in review before the eye of the reader. When the siren has concluded her prophetic song, Thetis conducts Gama to the top of a mountain and addresses him in a set speech. The poem concludes with the poet's apostrophe to King Sebastian.


    Far o'er the western ocean's distant bed     Apollo now his fiery coursers sped;     Far o'er the silver lake of Mexic[589] roll'd     His rapid chariot wheels of burning gold:     The eastern sky was left to dusky grey,     And o'er the last hot breath of parting day,     Cool o'er the sultry noon's remaining flame,     On gentle gales the grateful twilight came.     Dimpling the lucid pools, the fragrant breeze     Sighs o'er the lawns, and whispers thro' the trees;     Refresh'd, the lily rears the silver head,     And opening jasmines o'er the arbours spread.     Fair o'er the wave that gleam'd like distant snow,     Graceful arose the moon, serenely slow;     Not yet full orb'd, in clouded splendour dress'd,     Her married arms embrace her pregnant breast.     Sweet to his mate, recumbent o'er his young,     The nightingale his spousal anthem sung;     From ev'ry bower the holy chorus rose,     From ev'ry bower the rival anthem flows.     Translucent, twinkling through the upland grove,     In all her lustre shines the star of love;     Led by the sacred ray from ev'ry bower,     A joyful train, the wedded lovers pour:     Each with the youth above the rest approv'd,     Each with the nymph above the rest belov'd,     They seek the palace of the sov'reign dame;     High on a mountain glow'd the wondrous frame:     Of gold the towers, of gold the pillars shone,     The walls were crystal, starr'd with precious stone.     Amid the hall arose the festive board,     With nature's choicest gifts promiscuous stor'd:     So will'd the goddess to renew the smile     Of vital strength, long worn by days of toil.     On crystal chairs, that shin'd as lambent flame,     Each gallant youth attends his lovely dame;     Beneath a purple canopy of state     The beauteous goddess and the leader sat:     The banquet glows-- Not such the feast, when all     The pride of luxury in Egypt's hall     Before the love-sick Roman[590] spread the boast     Of ev'ry teeming sea and fertile coast.     Sacred to noblest worth and Virtue's ear,     Divine, as genial, was the banquet here;     The wine, the song, by sweet returns inspire,     Now wake the lover's, now the hero's fire.     On gold and silver from th' Atlantic main,     The sumptuous tribute of the sea's wide reign,     Of various savour, was the banquet pil'd;     Amid the fruitage mingling roses smil'd.     In cups of gold that shed a yellow light,     In silver, shining as the moon of night,     Amid the banquet flow'd the sparkling wine,     Nor gave Falernia's fields the parent vine:     Falernia's vintage, nor the fabled power     Of Jove's ambrosia in th' Olympian bower     To this compare not; wild, nor frantic fires,     Divinest transport this alone inspires.     The bev'rage, foaming o'er the goblet's breast,     The crystal fountain's cooling aid confess'd;[591]     The while, as circling flow'd the cheerful bowl,     Sapient discourse, the banquet of the soul,     Of richest argument and brightest glow,     Array'd in dimpling smiles, in easiest flow     Pour'd all its graces: nor in silence stood     The powers of music, such as erst subdued     The horrid frown of hell's profound domains,[592]     And sooth'd the tortur'd ghosts to slumber on their chains.     To music's sweetest chords, in loftiest vein,     An angel siren joins the vocal strain;     The silver roofs resound the living song,     The harp and organ's lofty mood prolong     The hallow'd warblings; list'ning Silence rides     The sky, and o'er the bridled winds presides;     In softest murmurs flows the glassy deep,     And each, lull'd in his shade, the bestials sleep.     The lofty song ascends the thrilling skies,     The song of godlike heroes yet to rise;     Jove gave the dream, whose glow the siren fir'd,     And present Jove the prophecy inspir'd.     Not he, the bard of love-sick Dido's board,     Nor he, the minstrel of Phæacia's lord,     Though fam'd in song, could touch the warbling string,     Or, with a voice so sweet, melodious sing.     And thou, my muse, O fairest of the train,     Calliope, inspire my closing strain.     No more the summer of my life remains,[593]     My autumn's length'ning ev'nings chill my veins;     Down the black stream of years by woes on woes     Wing'd on, I hasten to the tomb's repose,     The port whose deep, dark bottom shall detain     My anchor, never to be weigh'd again,     Never on other sea of life to steer     The human course.--Yet thou, O goddess, hear,     Yet let me live, though round my silver'd head     Misfortune's bitt'rest rage unpitying shed     Her coldest storms; yet, let me live to crown     The song that boasts my nation's proud renown.

      Of godlike heroes sung the nymph divine,     Heroes whose deeds on GAMA'S crest shall shine;     Who through the seas, by GAMA first explor'd,     Shall bear the Lusian standard and the sword,     Till ev'ry coast where roars the orient main,     Blest in its sway, shall own the Lusian reign;     Till ev'ry pagan king his neck shall yield,     Or vanquish'd, gnaw the dust on battle-field.

      "High Priest of Malabar," the goddess sung,     "Thy faith