[LIS-lusiad  —  part 4 of 6, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

repent not, nor lament thy wrong;[594]     Though, for thy faith to Lusus' gen'rous race,     The raging zamoreem thy fields deface:     From Tagus, lo, the great Pacheco sails     To India, wafted on auspicious gales.     Soon as his crooked prow the tide shall press,     A new Achilles shall the tide confess;     His ship's strong sides shall groan beneath his weight,     And deeper waves receive the sacred freight.[595]     Soon as on India's strand he shakes his spear,     The burning east shall tremble, chill'd with fear;     Reeking with noble blood, Cambalao's stream     Shall blaze impurpled on the ev'ning beam;     Urg'd on by raging shame, the monarch brings,     Banded with all their powers, his vassal kings:     Narsinga's rocks their cruel thousands pour,     Bipur's stern king attends, and thine, Tanore:     To guard proud Calicut's imperial pride     All the wide North sweeps down its peopled tide:     Join'd are the sects that never touch'd before,     By land the pagan, and by sea the Moor.     O'er land, o'er sea the great Pacheco strews     The prostrate spearmen, and the founder'd proas.[596]     Submiss and silent, palsied with amaze,     Proud Malabar th' unnumber'd slain surveys:     Yet burns the monarch; to his shrine he speeds;     Dire howl the priests, the groaning victim bleeds;     The ground they stamp, and, from the dark abodes,     With tears and vows, they call th' infernal gods.     Enrag'd with dog-like madness, to behold     His temples and his towns in flames enroll'd,     Secure of promis'd victory, again     He fires the war, the lawns are heap'd with slain.     With stern reproach he brands his routed Nayres,     And for the dreadful field himself prepares;     His harness'd thousands to the fight he leads;     And rides exulting where the combat bleeds:     Amid his pomp his robes are sprinkled o'er,     And his proud face dash'd, with his menials' gore:[597]     From his high couch he leaps, and speeds to flight     On foot inglorious, in his army's sight.     Hell then he calls, and all the powers of hell,     The secret poison, and the chanted spell;     Vain as the spell the poison'd rage is shed,     For Heav'n defends the hero's sacred head.     Still fiercer from each wound the tyrant burns,     Still to the field with heavier force returns;     The seventh dread war he kindles; high in air     The hills dishonour'd lift their shoulders bare;     Their woods, roll'd down, now strew the river's side,     Now rise in mountain turrets o'er the tide;     Mountains of fire, and spires of bick'ring flame,     While either bank resounds the proud acclaim,     Come floating down, round Lusus' fleet to pour     Their sulph'rous entrails[598] in a burning shower.     Oh, vain the hope.--Let Rome her boast resign;     Her palms, Pacheco, never bloom'd like thine;     Nor Tiber's bridge,[599] nor Marathon's red field,    }     Nor thine, Thermopylæ, such deeds beheld;             }     Nor Fabius' arts such rushing storms repell'd.        }     Swift as, repuls'd, the famish'd wolf returns     Fierce to the fold, and, wounded, fiercer burns;     So swift, so fierce, seven times, all India's might     Returns unnumber'd to the dreadful fight;     One hundred spears, seven times in dreadful stower,     Strews in the dust all India's raging power."

      The lofty song (for paleness o'er her spread)     The nymph suspends, and bows the languid head;     Her falt'ring words are breathed on plaintive sighs:     "Ah, Belisarius, injur'd chief," she cries,     "Ah, wipe thy tears; in war thy rival see,     Injur'd Pacheco falls despoil'd like thee;     In him, in thee dishonour'd Virtue bleeds,     And Valour weeps to view her fairest deeds,--     Weeps o'er Pacheco, where, forlorn he lies     Low on an alms-house bed, and friendless dies.     Yet shall the muses plume his humble bier,     And ever o'er him pour th' immortal tear;     Though by the king, alone to thee unjust,     Thy head, great chief, was humbled in the dust,     Loud shall the muse indignant sound thy praise--     'Thou gav'st thy monarch's throne its proudest blaze.'     While round the world the sun's bright car shall ride,     So bright shall shine thy name's illustrious pride;     Thy monarch's glory, as the moon's pale beam,     Eclips'd by thine, shall shed a sickly gleam.     Such meed attends when soothing flatt'ry sways,     And blinded State its sacred trust betrays!"

      Again the nymph exalts her brow, again     Her swelling voice resounds the lofty strain:     "Almeyda comes, the kingly name he bears,     Deputed royalty his standard rears:     In all the gen'rous rage of youthful fire     The warlike son attends the warlike sire.     Quiloa's blood-stain'd tyrant now shall feel     The righteous vengeance of the Lusian steel.     Another prince, by Lisbon's throne belov'd,     Shall bless the land, for faithful deeds approv'd.     Mombaz shall now her treason's meed behold,     When curling flames her proudest domes enfold:     Involv'd in smoke, loud crashing, low shall fall     The mounded temple and the castled wall.     O'er India's seas the young Almeyda pours,     Scorching the wither'd air, his iron show'rs;     Torn masts and rudders, hulks and canvas riv'n,     Month after month before his prows are driv'n;     But Heav'n's dread will, where clouds of darkness rest,     That awful will, which knows alone the best,     Now blunts his spear: Cambaya's squadrons join'd     With Egypt's fleets, in pagan rage combin'd,     Engrasp him round; red boils the stagg'ring flood,     Purpled with volleying flames and hot with blood:     Whirl'd by the cannon's rage, in shivers torn,     His thigh, far scattered, o'er the wave is borne.     Bound to the mast the godlike hero stands,[600]     Waves his proud sword, and cheers his woful bands.     Though winds and seas their wonted aid deny,     To yield he knows not, but he knows to die:     Another thunder tears his manly breast:     Oh fly, blest spirit, to thy heav'nly rest!     Hark! rolling on the groaning storm I hear,     Resistless vengeance thund'ring on the rear.     I see the transports of the furious sire,     As o'er the mangled corse his eyes flash fire.     Swift to the fight, with stern though weeping eyes,     Fix'd rage fierce burning in his breast, he flies;     Fierce as the bull that sees his rival rove     Free with the heifers through the mounded grove,     On oak or beech his madd'ning fury pours;     So pours Almeyda's rage on Dabul's towers.     His vanes wide waving o'er the Indian sky,     Before his prows the fleets of India fly;[601]     On Egypt's chief his mortars' dreadful tire     Shall vomit all the rage of prison'd fire:     Heads, limbs, and trunks shall choke the struggling tide,     Till, ev'ry surge with reeking crimson dy'd,     Around the young Almeyda's hapless urn     His conqueror's naked ghosts shall howl and mourn.     As meteors flashing through the darken'd air     I see the victors' whirling falchions glare;     Dark rolls the sulph'rous smoke o'er Dio's skies,     And shrieks of death, and shouts of conquest rise,     In one wide tumult blended. The rough roar     Shakes the brown tents on Ganges' trembling shore;     The waves of Indus from the banks recoil;     And matrons, howling on the strand of Nile,     By the pale moon, their absent sons deplore:     Long shall they wail; their sons return no more.

      "Ah, strike the notes of woe!" the siren cries;     "A dreary vision swims before my eyes.     To Tagus' shore triumphant as he bends,     Low in the dust the hero's glory ends:     Though bended bow, nor thund'ring engine's hail,     Nor Egypt's sword, nor India's spear prevail,     Fall shall the chief before a naked foe,     Rough clubs and rude-hurl'ed stones shall strike the blow;     The Cape of Tempests shall his tomb supply,     And in the desert sands his bones shall lie,     No boastful trophy o'er his ashes rear'd:     Such Heav'n's dread will, and be that will rever'd!

      "But lo, resplendent shines another star,"     Loud she resounds, "in all the blaze of war!     Great Cunia[602] guards Melinda's friendly shore,     And dyes her seas with Oja's hostile gore;     Lamo and Brava's tow'rs his vengeance tell:     Green Madagascar's flow'ry dales shall swell     His echo'd fame, till ocean's southmost bound     On isles and shores unknown his name resound.

      "Another blaze, behold, of fire and arms!     Great Albuquerque awakes the dread alarms:     O'er Ormuz' walls his thund'ring flames he pours,     While Heav'n, the hero's guide, indignant show'rs     Their arrows backwards[603] on the Persian foe,     Tearing the breasts and arms that twang'd the bow.     Mountains of salt and fragrant gums in vain     Were spent untainted to embalm the slain.     Such heaps shall strew the seas and faithless strand     Of Gerum, Mazcate,[604] and Calayat's land,     Till faithless Ormuz own the Lusian sway,     And Barem's[605] pearls her yearly safety pay.

      "What glorious palms on Goa's isle I see,[606]     Their blossoms spread, great Albuquerque, for thee!     Through castled walls the hero breaks his way,     And opens with his sword the dread array     Of Moors and pagans; through their depth he rides,     Through spears and show'ring fire the battle guides.     As bulls enrag'd, or lions smear'd with gore,     His bands sweep wide o'er Goa's purpled shore.     Nor eastward far though fair Malacca[607] lie,     Her groves embosom'd in the morning sky;     Though with her am'rous sons the valiant line     Of Java's isle in battle rank combine,     Though poison'd shafts their pond'rous quivers store;     Malacca's spicy groves and golden ore,     Great Albuquerque, thy dauntless toils shall crown!     Yet art thou stain'd."[608] Here, with a sighful frown,     The goddess paus'd, for much remain'd unsung,     But blotted with a humble soldier's wrong.     "Alas," she cries, "when war's dread horrors reign,     And thund'ring batteries rock the fiery plain,     When ghastly famine on a hostile soil,     When pale disease attends on weary toil,     When patient under all the soldier stands,     Detested be the rage which then demands     The humble soldier's blood, his only crime     The am'rous frailty of the youthful prime!     Incest's cold horror here no glow restrain'd,     Nor sacred nuptial bed was here profan'd,     Nor here unwelcome force the virgin seiz'd;     A slave, lascivious, in his fondling pleas'd,     Resigns her breast. Ah, stain to Lusian fame!     ('Twas lust of blood, perhaps 'twas jealous flame;)     The leader's rage, unworthy of the brave,     Consigns the youthful soldier to the grave.     Not Ammon[609] thus Apelles' love repaid,     Great Ammon's bed resign'd the lovely maid;     Nor Cyrus thus reprov'd Araspas' fire;     Nor haughtier Carlo thus assum'd the sire,     Though iron Baldwin to his daughter's bower,     An ill-match'd lover, stole in secret hour:     With nobler rage the lofty monarch glow'd,     And Flandria's earldom on the knight bestow'd."[610]

      Again the nymph the song of fame resounds:     "Lo, sweeping wide o'er Ethiopia's bounds,     Wide o'er Arabia's purple shore, on high     The Lusian ensigns blaze along the sky:     Mecca, aghast, beholds the standards shine,     And midnight horror shakes Medina's shrine;[611]     Th' unhallow'd altar bodes th' approaching foe,     Foredoom'd in dust its prophet's tomb to strew.     Nor Ceylon's isle, brave Soarez, shall withhold     Its incense, precious as the burnish'd gold,     What time o'er proud Columbo's loftiest spire     Thy flag shall blaze: Nor shall th' immortal lyre     Forget thy praise, Sequeyra! To the shore     Where Sheba's sapient queen the sceptre bore,[612]     Braving the Red Sea's dangers shalt thou force     To Abyssinia's realm thy novel course;     And isles, by jealous Nature long conceal'd,     Shall to the wond'ring world be now reveal'd.     Great Menez next the Lusian sword shall bear;     Menez, the dread of Afric, high shall rear     His victor lance, till deep shall Ormuz groan,     And tribute doubled her revolt atone.

      "Now shines thy glory in meridian height"--     And loud her voice she rais'd--"O matchless knight!     Thou, thou, illustrious GAMA, thou shalt bring     The olive bough of peace, deputed king!     The lands by thee discover'd shall obey     Thy sceptred power, and bless thy regal sway.     But India's crimes, outrageous to the skies,     A length of these Saturnian days denies:     Snatch'd from thy golden throne,[613] the heav'ns shall claim     Thy deathless soul, the world thy deathless name.

      "Now o'er the coast of faithless Malabar     Victorious Henry[614] pours the rage of war;     Nor less the youth a nobler strife shall wage,     Great victor of himself though green in age;     No restless slave of wanton am'rous fire,     No lust of gold shall taint his gen'rous ire.     While youth's bold pulse beats high, how brave the boy     Whom harlot-smiles nor pride of power decoy!     Immortal be his name! Nor less thy praise,     Great Mascarene,[615] shall future ages raise:     Though power, unjust, withhold the splendid ray     That dignifies the crest of sov'reign sway,     Thy deeds, great chief, on Bintam's humbled shore     (Deeds such as Asia never view'd before)     Shall give thy honest fame a brighter blaze     Than tyrant pomp in golden robes displays.     Though bold in war the fierce usurper shine,     Though Cutial's potent navy o'er the brine     Drive vanquish'd: though the Lusian Hector's sword     For him reap conquest, and confirm him lord;     Thy deeds, great peer, the wonder of thy foes,     Thy glorious chains unjust, and gen'rous woes,     Shall dim the fierce Sampayo's fairest fame,     And o'er his honours thine aloud proclaim.     Thy gen'rous woes! Ah gallant injur'd chief,     Not thy own sorrows give the sharpest grief.     Thou seest the Lusian name her honours stain,     And lust of gold her heroes' breasts profane;     Thou seest ambition lift the impious head,     Nor God's red arm, nor ling'ring justice dread;     O'er India's bounds thou seest these vultures prowl,     Full gorged with blood, and dreadless of control;     Thou seest and weepst thy country's blotted name,     The gen'rous sorrow thine, but not the shame.     Nor long the Lusian ensigns stain'd remain:     Great Nunio[616] comes, and razes every stain.     Though lofty Calè's warlike towers he rear;     Though haughty Melic groan beneath his spear;     All these, and Diu yielded to his name,     Are but th' embroid'ry of his nobler fame.     Far haughtier foes of Lusian race he braves;     The awful sword of justice high he waves:     Before his bar the injur'd Indian stands,     And justice boldly on his foe demands,     The Lusian foe; in wonder lost, the Moor     Beholds proud rapine's vulture grip restore;     Beholds the Lusian hands in fetters bound     By Lusian hands, and wound repaid for wound.     Oh, more shall thus by Nunio's worth be won,     Than conquest reaps from high-plum'd hosts o'erthrown.     Long shall the gen'rous Nunio's blissful sway     Command supreme. In Dio's hopeless day     The sov'reign toil the brave Noronha takes;               }     Awed by his fame[617] the fierce-soul'd Rumien shakes,    }     And Dio's open'd walls in sudden flight forsakes.         }     A son of thine, O GAMA,[618] now shall hold     The helm of empire, prudent, wise, and bold:     Malacca sav'd and strengthen'd by his arms,     The banks of Tor shall echo his alarms;     His worth shall bless the kingdoms of the morn,     For all thy virtues shall his soul adorn.     When fate resigns thy hero to the skies,     A vet'ran, fam'd on Brazil's shore[619] shall rise:     The wide Atlantic and the Indian main,     By turns, shall own the terrors of his reign.     His aid the proud Cambayan king implores,     His potent aid Cambaya's king restores.     The dread Mogul with all his thousands flies,     And Dio's towers are Souza's well-earn'd prize.     Nor less the zamorim o'er blood-stain'd ground[620]     Shall speed his legions, torn with many a wound,     In headlong rout. Nor shall the boastful pride     Of India's navy, though the shaded tide     Around the squadron'd masts appear the down     Of some wide forest, other fate renown.     Loud rattling through the hills of Cape Camore[621]     I hear the tempest of the battle roar!     Clung to the splinter'd masts I see the dead     Badala's shore with horrid wreck bespread;     Baticala inflam'd by treach'rous hate,     Provokes the horrors of Badala's fate:     Her seas in blood, her skies enwrapt in fire,     Confess the sweeping storm of Souza's ire.     No hostile spear now rear'd on sea or strand,     The awful sceptre graces Souza's hand;     Peaceful he reigns, in counsel just and wise;     And glorious Castro now his throne supplies:     Castro, the boast of gen'rous fame, afar     From Dio's strand shall sway the glorious war.     Madd'ning with rage to view the Lusian band,     A troop so few, proud Dio's towers command,     The cruel Ethiop Moor to heav'n complains,     And the proud Persian's languid zeal arraigns.     The Rumien fierce, who boasts the name of Rome,[622]     With these conspires, and vows the Lusians' doom.     A thousand barb'rous nations join their powers     To bathe with Lusian blood the Dion towers.     Dark rolling sheets, forth belch'd from brazen wombs,     And bor'd, like show'ring clouds, with hailing bombs,     O'er Dio's sky spread the black shades of death;     The mine's dread earthquakes shake the ground beneath.     No hope, bold Mascarene,[623] mayst thou respire,     A glorious fall alone, thy just desire.     When lo, his gallant son brave Castro sends--     Ah heav'n, what fate the hapless youth attends!     In vain the terrors of his falchion glare:     The cavern'd mine bursts, high in pitchy air     Rampire and squadron whirl'd convulsive, borne     To heav'n, the hero dies in fragments torn.     His loftiest bough though fall'n, the gen'rous sire     His living hope devotes with Roman ire.     On wings of fury flies the brave Alvar     Through oceans howling with the wintry war,     Through skies of snow his brother's vengeance bears;     And, soon in arms, the valiant sire appears:     Before him vict'ry spreads her eagle wing     Wide sweeping o'er Cambaya's haughty king.     In vain his thund'ring coursers shake the ground,     Cambaya bleeding of his might's last wound     Sinks pale in dust: fierce Hydal-Kan[624] in vain     Wakes war on war; he bites his iron chain.     O'er Indus' banks, o'er Ganges' smiling vales,     No more the hind his plunder'd field bewails:     O'er ev'ry field, O Peace, thy blossoms glow,     The golden blossoms of thy olive bough;     Firm bas'd on wisest laws great Castro crowns,     And the wide East the Lusian empire owns.

      "These warlike chiefs, the sons of thy renown,     And thousands more, O VASCO, doom'd to crown     Thy glorious toils, shall through these seas unfold     Their victor-standards blaz'd with Indian gold;     And in the bosom of our flow'ry isle,     Embath'd in joy shall o'er their labours smile.     Their nymphs like yours, their feast divine the same,     The raptur'd foretaste of immortal fame."

      So sang the goddess, while the sister train     With joyful anthem close the sacred strain:     "Though Fortune from her whirling sphere bestow     Her gifts capricious in unconstant flow,     Yet laurell'd honour and immortal fame     Shall ever constant grace the Lusian name."     So sung the joyful chorus, while around     The silver roofs the lofty notes resound.     The song prophetic, and the sacred feast,     Now shed the glow of strength through ev'ry breast.     When with the grace and majesty divine,     Which round immortals when enamour'd shine,     To crown the banquet of their deathless fame,     To happy GAMA thus the sov'reign dame:     "O lov'd of Heav'n, what never man before,     What wand'ring science never might explore,     By Heav'n's high will, with mortal eyes to see     Great nature's face unveil'd, is given to thee.     Thou and thy warriors follow where I lead:     Firm be your steps, for arduous to the tread,     Through matted brakes of thorn and brier, bestrew'd     With splinter'd flint, winds the steep slipp'ry road."     She spake, and smiling caught the hero's hand,     And on the mountain's summit soon they stand;     A beauteous lawn with pearl enamell'd o'er,     Emerald and ruby, as the gods of yore     Had sported here. Here in the fragrant air     A wondrous globe appear'd, divinely fair!     Through ev'ry part the light transparent flow'd,     And in the centre, as the surface, glow'd.     The frame ethereal various orbs compose,     In whirling circles now they fell, now rose;     Yet never rose nor fell,[625] for still the same     Was ev'ry movement of the wondrous frame;     Each movement still beginning, still complete,     Its author's type, self-pois'd, perfection's seat.

      Great VASCO, thrill'd with reverential awe,     And rapt with keen desire, the wonder saw.     The goddess mark'd the language of his eyes,     "And here," she cried, "thy largest wish suffice."     Great nature's fabric thou dost here behold,     Th' ethereal, pure, and elemental mould     In pattern shown complete, as nature's God     Ordain'd the world's great frame, His dread abode;     For ev'ry part the Power Divine pervades,     The sun's bright radiance, and the central shades;     Yet, let not haughty reason's bounded line     Explore the boundless God, or where define,     Where in Himself, in uncreated light     (While all His worlds around seem wrapp'd in night),     He holds His loftiest state.[626] By primal laws     Impos'd on Nature's birth (Himself the cause),     By her own ministry, through ev'ry maze,     Nature in all her walks, unseen, He sways.     These spheres behold;[627] the first in wide embrace     Surrounds the lesser orbs of various face;     The Empyrean this, the holiest heav'n     To the pure spirits of the bless'd is giv'n:     No mortal eye its splendid rays may bear,     No mortal bosom feel the raptures there.     The earth, in all her summer pride array'd,     To this might seem a drear sepulchral shade.     Unmov'd it stands; within its shining frame,     In motion swifter than the lightning's flame,     Swifter than sight the moving parts may spy,     Another sphere whirls round its rapid sky.     Hence motion darts its force,[628] impulsive draws,     And on the other orbs impresses laws;     The sun's bright car attentive to its force     Gives night and day, and shapes his yearly course;     Its force stupendous asks a pond'rous sphere     To poise its fury, and its weight to bear:     Slow moves that pond'rous orb; the stiff, slow pace     One step scarce gains, while wide his annual race     Two hundred times the sun triumphant rides;     The crystal heav'n is this, whose rigour guides     And binds the starry sphere:[629] That sphere behold,     With diamonds spangled, and emblaz'd with gold!     What radiant orbs that azure sky adorn,     Fair o'er the night in rapid motion borne!     Swift as they trace the heav'n's wide circling line,     Whirl'd on their proper axles, bright they shine.     Wide o'er this heav'n a golden belt displays     Twelve various forms; behold the glitt'ring blaze!     Through these the sun in annual journey towers,     And o'er each clime their various tempers pours;     In gold and silver of celestial mine     How rich far round the constellations shine!     Lo, bright emerging o'er the polar tides,     In shining frost the Northern Chariot rides;[630]     Mid treasur'd snows here gleams the grisly Bear,     And icy flakes incrust his shaggy hair.     Here fair Andromeda, of heav'n belov'd;     Her vengeful sire, and, by the gods reprov'd,     Beauteous Cassiope. Here, fierce and red,      }     Portending storms, Orion lifts his head;       }     And here the Dogs their raging fury shed.      }     The Swan, sweet melodist, in death he sings,     The milder Swan here spreads his silver wings.     Here Orpheus' Lyre, the melancholy Hare,     And here the watchful Dragon's eye-balls glare;     And Theseus' ship, oh, less renown'd than thine,     Shall ever o'er these skies illustrious shine.     Beneath this radiant firmament behold     The various planets in their orbits roll'd:     Here, in cold twilight, hoary Saturn rides;     Here Jove shines mild, here fiery Mars presides;     Apollo here, enthron'd in light, appears     The eye of heav'n, emblazer of the spheres;     Beneath him beauteous glows the Queen of Love--     The proudest hearts her sacred influence prove;     Here Hermes, fam'd for eloquence divine,     And here Diana's various faces shine;     Lowest she rides, and, through the shadowy night,     Pours on the glist'ning earth her silver light.     These various orbs, behold, in various speed     Pursue the journeys at their birth decreed.     Now, from the centre far impell'd they fly,     Now, nearer earth they sail a lower sky,     A shorten'd course: Such are their laws impress'd     By God's dread will,[631] that will for ever best.

      "The yellow earth, the centre of the whole,     There lordly rests sustain'd on either pole.     The limpid air enfolds in soft embrace     The pond'rous orb, and brightens o'er her face.     Here, softly floating o'er th' aërial blue,     Fringed with the purple and the golden hue,     The fleecy clouds their swelling sides display;     From whence, fermented by the sulph'rous ray,     The lightnings blaze, and heat spreads wide and rare;     And now, in fierce embrace with frozen air,     Their wombs, compress'd, soon feel parturient throws,     And white wing'd gales bear wide the teeming snows.     Thus, cold and heat their warring empires hold,     Averse yet mingling, each by each controll'd,     The highest air and ocean's bed they pierce,     And earth's dark centre feels their struggles fierce.

      "The seat of man, the earth's fair breast, behold;     Here wood-crown'd islands wave their locks of gold.     Here spread wide continents their bosoms green,     And hoary Ocean heaves his breast between.     Yet, not th' inconstant ocean's furious tide     May fix the dreadful bounds of human pride.     What madd'ning seas between these nations roar!     Yet Lusus' hero-race shall visit ev'ry shore.     What thousand tribes, whom various customs sway,     And various rites, these countless shores display!     Queen of the world, supreme in shining arms,     Hers ev'ry art, and hers all wisdom's charms,     Each nation's tribute round her foot-stool spread,     Here Christian Europe[632] lifts the regal head.     Afric behold,[633] alas, what alter'd view!     Her lands uncultur'd, and her son's untrue;     Ungraced with all that sweetens human life,     Savage and fierce they roam in brutal strife;     Eager they grasp the gifts which culture yields,     Yet, naked roam their own neglected fields.     Lo, here enrich'd with hills of golden ore,     Monomotapa's empire hems the shore.     There round the Cape, great Afric's dreadful bound,     Array'd in storms (by you first compass'd round),     Unnumber'd tribes as bestial grazers stray,     By laws unform'd, unform'd by reason's sway:     Far inward stretch the mournful sterile dales,     Where, on the parch'd hill-side, pale Famine wails.     On gold in vain the naked savage treads;     Low, clay-built huts, behold, and reedy sheds,     Their dreary towns. Gonzalo's zeal shall glow[634]     To these dark minds the path of light to show:     His toils to humanize the barb'rous mind     Shall, with the martyr's palms, his holy temples bind.     Great Naya,[635] too, shall glorious here display     His God's dread might: behold, in black array,     Num'rous and thick as when in evil hour     The feather'd race whole harvest fields devour,     So thick, so num'rous round Sofála's towers     Her barb'rous hordes remotest Africa pours:     In vain; Heav'n's vengeance on their souls impress'd,     They fly, wide scatter'd as the driving mist.     Lo, Quama there, and there the fertile Nile     Curs'd with that gorging fiend, the crocodile,     Wind their long way: the parent lake behold,     Great Nilus' fount, unseen, unknown of old,     From whence, diffusing plenty as he glides,     Wide Abyssinia's realm the stream divides.     In Abyssinia Heav'n's own altars blaze,[636]     And hallow'd anthems chant Messiah's praise.     In Nile's wide breast the isle of M{)e}r{)o}{=e} see!     Near these rude shores a hero sprung from thee,     Thy son, brave GAMA,[637] shall his lineage show     In glorious triumphs o'er the paynim[638] foe.     There by the rapid Ob her friendly breast     Melinda spreads, thy place of grateful rest.     Cape Aromata there the gulf defends,     Where by the Red Sea wave great Afric ends.     Illustrious Suez, seat of heroes old,     Fam'd Hierapolis, high-tower'd, behold.     Here Egypt's shelter'd fleets at anchor ride,     And hence, in squadrons, sweep the eastern tide.     And lo, the waves that aw'd by Moses' rod,     While the dry bottom Israel's armies trod,     On either hand roll'd back their frothy might,     And stood, like hoary rocks, in cloudy height.     Here Asia, rich in ev'ry precious mine,     In realms immense, begins her western line.     Sinai behold, whose trembling cliffs of yore     In fire and darkness, deep pavilion'd, bore     The Hebrews' God, while day, with awful brow,     Gleam'd pale on Israel's wand'ring tents below.     The pilgrim now the lonely hill ascends,     And, when the ev'ning raven homeward bends,     Before the virgin-martyr's tomb[639] he pays     His mournful vespers, and his vows of praise.     Jidda behold, and Aden's parch'd domain     Girt by Arzira's rock, where never rain     Yet fell from heav'n; where never from the dale     The crystal riv'let murmur'd to the vale.     The three Arabias here their breasts unfold,     Here breathing incense, here a rocky wold;     O'er Dofar's plain the richest incense breathes,     That round the sacred shrine its vapour wreathes;     Here the proud war-steed glories in his force,     As, fleeter than the gale, he holds the course.     Here, with his spouse and household lodg'd in wains,     The Arab's camp shifts, wand'ring o'er the plains,     The merchant's dread, what time from eastern soil     His burthen'd camels seek the land of Nile.     Here Rosalgate and Farthac stretch their arms,     And point to Ormuz, fam'd for war's alarms;     Ormuz, decreed full oft to quake with dread     Beneath the Lusian heroes' hostile tread,     Shall see the Turkish moons,[640] with slaughter gor'd,     Shrink from the lightning of De Branco's sword.[641]     There on the gulf that laves the Persian shore,     Far through the surges bends Cape Asabore.     There Barem's isle;[642] her rocks with diamonds blaze,     And emulate Aurora's glitt'ring rays.     From Barem's shore Euphrates' flood is seen,     And Tigris' waters, through the waves of green     In yellowy currents many a league extend,     As with the darker waves averse they blend.     Lo, Persia there her empire wide unfolds!     In tented camp his state the monarch holds:     Her warrior sons disdain the arms of fire,[643]     And, with the pointed steel, to fame aspire;     Their springy shoulders stretching to the blow,     Their sweepy sabres hew the shrieking foe.     There Gerum's isle the hoary ruin wears     Where Time has trod:[644] there shall the dreadful spears     Of Sousa and Menezes strew the shore     With Persian sabres, and embathe with gore.     Carpella's cape, and sad Carmania's strand,     There, parch'd and bare, their dreary wastes expand.     A fairer landscape here delights the view;     From these green hills beneath the clouds of blue,     The Indus and the Ganges roll the wave,     And many a smiling field propitious lave.     Luxurious here, Ulcinda's harvests smile,     And here, disdainful of the seaman's toil,     The whirling tides of Jaquet furious roar;     Alike their rage when swelling to the shore,     Or, tumbling backward to the deep, they force     The boiling fury of their gulfy course:     Against their headlong rage nor oars nor sails,     The stemming prow alone, hard toil'd, prevails.     Cambaya here begins her wide domain;     A thousand cities here shall own the reign     Of Lisboa's monarchs. He who first shall crown     Thy labours, GAMA,[645] here shall boast his own.     The length'ning sea that washes India's strand     And laves the cape that points to Ceylon's land     (The Taprobanian isle,[646] renown'd of yore),     Shall see his ensigns blaze from shore to shore.     Behold how many a realm, array'd in green,     The Ganges' shore and Indus' bank between!     Here tribes unnumber'd, and of various lore,     With woful penance fiend-like shapes adore;     Some Macon's orgies;[647] all confess the sway     Of rites that shun, like trembling ghosts, the day.     Narsinga's fair domain behold; of yore     Here shone the gilded towers of Meliapore.     Here India's angels, weeping o'er the tomb     Where Thomas sleeps,[648] implore the day to come,     The day foretold, when India's utmost shore     Again shall hear Messiah's blissful lore.     By Indus' banks the holy prophet trod,     And Ganges heard him preach the Saviour-God;     Where pale disease erewhile the cheek consum'd,     Health, at his word, in ruddy fragrance bloom'd;     The grave's dark womb his awful voice obey'd,     And to the cheerful day restor'd the dead;     By heavenly power he rear'd the sacred shrine,     And gain'd the nations by his life divine.     The priests of Brahma's hidden rites beheld,     And envy's bitt'rest gall their bosom's swell'd.     A thousand deathful snares in vain they spread;     When now the chief who wore the triple thread,[649]     Fir'd by the rage that gnaws the conscious breast     Of holy fraud, when worth shines forth confess'd,     Hell he invokes, nor hell in vain he sues;     His son's life-gore his wither'd hands imbrues;     Then, bold assuming the vindictive ire,     And all the passions of the woful sire,     Weeping, he bends before the Indian throne,     Arraigns the holy man, and wails his son:     A band of hoary priests attest the deed,     And India's king condemns the seer to bleed.     Inspir'd by Heav'n the holy victim stands,     And o'er the murder'd corse extends his hands:     'In God's dread power, thou slaughter'd youth, arise,     And name,thy murderer,' aloud he cries.     When, dread to view, the deep wounds instant close,     And, fresh in life, the slaughter'd youth arose,     And nam'd his treach'rous sire. The conscious air     Quiver'd, and awful horror raised the hair     On ev'ry head. From Thomas India's king     The holy sprinkling of the living spring     Receives, and wide o'er all his regal bounds     The God of Thomas ev'ry tongue resounds.     Long taught the holy seer the words of life;     The priests of Brahma still to deeds of strife     (So boil'd their ire) the blinded herd impell'd,     And high, to deathful rage, their rancour swell'd.     'Twas on a day, when melting on his tongue     Heav'n's offer'd mercies glow'd, the impious throng,     Rising in madd'ning tempest, round him shower'd     The splinter'd flint; in vain the flint was pour'd:     But Heav'n had now his finish'd labours seal'd;     His angel guards withdraw the etherial shield;     A Brahmin's javelin tears his holy breast----     Ah Heav'n, what woes the widow'd land express'd!     Thee, Thomas, thee, the plaintive Ganges mourn'd,[650]     And Indus' banks the murm'ring moan return'd;     O'er ev'ry valley where thy footsteps stray'd,     The hollow winds the gliding sighs convey'd.     What woes the mournful face of India wore,     These woes in living pangs his people bore.     His sons, to whose illumin'd minds he gave     To view the ray that shines beyond the grave,     His pastoral sons bedew'd his corse with tears,     While high triumphant through the heav'nly spheres,     With songs of joy, the smiling angels wing     His raptur'd spirit to the eternal King.     O you, the followers of the holy seer,     Foredoom'd the shrines of Heav'n's own lore to rear,     You, sent by Heav'n his labours to renew,     Like him, ye Lusians, simplest Truth pursue.[651]     Vain is the impious toil, with borrow'd grace,     To deck one feature of her angel face;     Behind the veil's broad glare she glides away,     And leaves a rotten form, of lifeless, painted clay.

      "Much have you view'd of future Lusian reign;     Broad empires yet, and kingdoms wide, remain,     Scenes of your future toils and glorious sway--     And lo, how wide expands the Gangic bay!     Narsinga here in num'rous legions bold,     And here Oryxa boasts her cloth of gold.     The Ganges here in many a stream divides,            }     Diffusing plenty from his fatt'ning tides,           }     As through Bengala's rip'ning vales he glides;       }     Nor may the fleetest hawk, untir'd, explore     Where end the ricy groves that crown the shore.     There view what woes demand your pious aid!     On beds and litters, o'er the margin laid,     The dying[652] lift their hollow eyes, and crave     Some pitying hand to hurl them in the wave.     Thus Heav'n (they deem), though vilest guilt they bore     Unwept, unchanged, will view that guilt no more.     There, eastward, Arracan her line extends;     And Pegu's mighty empire southward bends:     Pegu, whose sons (so held old faith) confess'd     A dog their sire;[653] their deeds the tale attest.     A pious queen their horrid rage restrain'd;[654]     Yet, still their fury Nature's God arraign'd.     Ah, mark the thunders rolling o'er the sky;     Yes, bath'd in gore, shall rank pollution lie.

      "Where to the morn the towers of Tava shine,     Begins great Siam's empire's far-stretch'd line.     On Queda's fields the genial rays inspire     The richest gust of spicery's fragrant fire.     Malacca's castled harbour here survey,     The wealthful seat foredoom'd of Lusian sway.     Here to their port the Lusian fleets shall steer,     From ev'ry shore far round assembling here     The fragrant treasures of the eastern world:     Here from the shore by rolling earthquakes hurl'd,     Through waves all foam, Sumatra's isle was riv'n,     And, mid white whirlpools, down the ocean driv'n.[655]     To this fair isle, the golden Chersonese,     Some deem the sapient monarch plough'd the seas;     Ophir its Tyrian name.[656] In whirling roars     How fierce the tide boils down these clasping shores!     High from the strait the length'ning coast afar     Its moonlike curve points to the northern star,     Opening its bosom to the silver ray     When fair Aurora pours the infant day.     Patane and Pam, and nameless nations more,     Who rear their tents on Menam's winding shore,     Their vassal tribute yield to Siam's throne;     And thousands more,[657] of laws, of names unknown,     That vast of land inhabit. Proud and bold,     Proud of their numbers, here the Laos hold     The far-spread lawns; the skirting hills obey     The barb'rous Avas', and the Brahma's sway.     Lo, distant far, another mountain chain     Rears its rude cliffs, the Guio's dread domain;     Here brutaliz'd the human form is seen,     The manners fiend-like as the brutal mien:     With frothing jaws they suck the human blood,     And gnaw the reeking limbs,[658] their sweetest food;     Horrid, with figur'd seams of burning steel,     Their wolf-like frowns their ruthless lust reveal.     Cambaya there the blue-tinged Mecon laves,     Mecon the eastern Nile, whose swelling waves,     'Captain of rivers' nam'd, o'er many a clime,     In annual period, pour their fatt'ning slime.     The simple natives of these lawns believe     That other worlds the souls of beasts receive;[659]     Where the fierce murd'rer-wolf, to pains decreed,     Sees the mild lamb enjoy the heav'nly mead.     Oh gentle Mecon,[660] on thy friendly shore     Long shall the muse her sweetest off'rings pour!     When tyrant ire, chaf'd by the blended lust     Of pride outrageous, and revenge unjust,     Shall on the guiltless exile burst their rage,     And madd'ning tempests on their side engage,     Preserv'd by Heav'n the song of Lusian fame,     The song, O VASCO, sacred to thy name,     Wet from the whelming surge, shall triumph o'er     The fate of shipwreck on the Mecon's shore,     Here rest secure as on the muse's breast!     Happy the deathless song, the bard, alas, unblest!

      "Chiampa there her fragrant coast extends,     There Cochin-China's cultur'd land ascends:     From Anam Bay begins the ancient reign     Of China's beauteous art-adorn'd domain;     Wide from the burning to the frozen skies,     O'erflow'd with wealth, the potent empire lies.     Here, ere the cannon's rage in Europe roar'd,[661]     The cannon's thunder on the foe was pour'd:     And here the trembling needle sought the north,     Ere Time in Europe brought the wonder forth.     No more let Egypt boast her mountain pyres;     To prouder fame yon bounding wall aspires,     A prouder boast of regal power displays     Than all the world beheld in ancient days.     Not built, created seems the frowning mound;                    }     O'er loftiest mountain tops, and vales profound                 }     Extends the wondrous length, with warlike castles crown'd.      }     Immense the northern wastes their horrors spread;[662]     In frost and snow the seas and shores are clad.     These shores forsake, to future ages due:     A world of islands claims thy happier view,     Where lavish Nature all her bounty pours,     And flowers and fruits of ev'ry fragrance showers.     Japan behold; beneath the globe's broad face     Northward she sinks, the nether seas embrace     Her eastern bounds; what glorious fruitage there,     Illustrious GAMA, shall thy labours bear!     How bright a silver mine![663] when Heav'n's own lore     From pagan dross shall purify her ore.

      "Beneath the spreading wings of purple morn,     Behold what isles these glist'ning seas adorn!     'Mid hundreds yet unnam'd, Ternate behold!     By day, her hills in pitchy clouds inroll'd,     By night, like rolling waves, the sheets of fire     Blaze o'er the seas, and high to heav'n aspire.     For Lusian hands here blooms the fragrant clove,     But Lusian blood shall sprinkle ev'ry grove.     The golden birds that ever sail the skies     Here to the sun display their shining dyes,     Each want supplied, on air they ever soar;     The ground they touch not[664] till they breathe no more.     Here Banda's isles their fair embroid'ry spread     Of various fruitage, azure, white, and red;     And birds of ev'ry beauteous plume display     Their glitt'ring radiance, as, from spray to spray,     From bower to bower, on busy wings they rove,     To seize the tribute of the spicy grove.     Borneo here expands her ample breast,     By Nature's hand in woods of camphor dress'd;     The precious liquid, weeping from the trees,     Glows warm with health, the balsam of disease.     Fair are Timora's dales with groves array'd,     Each riv'let murmurs in the fragrant shade,     And, in its crystal breast, displays the bowers     Of Sanders, blest with health-restoring powers.     Where to the south the world's broad surface bends,     Lo, Sunda's realm her spreading arms extends.     From hence the pilgrim brings the wondrous tale,[665]     A river groaning through a dreary dale     (For all is stone around) converts to stone     Whate'er of verdure in its breast is thrown.     Lo, gleaming blue, o'er fair Sumatra's skies,     Another mountain's trembling flames arise;     Here from the trees the gum[666] all fragrance swells,     And softest oil a wondrous fountain wells.     Nor these alone the happy isle bestows,     Fine is her gold, her silk resplendent glows.     Wide forests there beneath Maldivia's tide[667]     From with'ring air their wondrous fruitage hide.     The green-hair'd Nereids, tend the bow'ry dells,     Whose wondrous fruitage poison's rage expels.     In Ceylon, lo, how high yon mountain's brows!     The sailing clouds its middle height enclose.     Holy the hill is deem'd, the hallow'd tread     Of sainted footstep[668] marks its rocky head.     Lav'd by the Red Sea gulf, Socotra's bowers     There boast the tardy aloe's beauteous flowers.     On Afric's strand, foredoom'd to Lusian sway,     Behold these isles, and rocks of dusky gray;     From cells unknown here bounteous ocean pours     The fragrant amber on the sandy shores.     And lo, the Island of the Moon[669] displays     Her vernal lawns, and num'rous peaceful bays:     The halcyons[670] hov'ring o'er the bays are seen,     And lowing herds adorn the vales of green.

      "Thus, from the cape where sail was ne'er unfurl'd,     Till thine, auspicious, sought the eastern world,     To utmost wave, where first the morning star     Sheds the pale lustre of her silver car,     Thine eyes have view'd the empires and the isles,     The world immense, that crowns thy glorious toils--     That world where ev'ry boon is shower'd from Heav'n,     Now to the West, by thee, great chief, is giv'n.[671]

      "And still, O blest, thy peerless honours grow,     New op'ning views the smiling fates bestow.     With alter'd face the moving globe behold;     There ruddy ev'ning sheds her beams of gold.     While now, on Afric's bosom faintly die     The last pale glimpses of the twilight sky,     Bright o'er the wide Atlantic rides the morn,     And dawning rays another world adorn:     To farthest north that world enormous bends,     And cold, beneath the southern pole-star ends.     Near either pole[672] the barb'rous hunter, dress'd     In skins of bears, explores the frozen waste:     Where smiles the genial sun with kinder rays,     Proud cities tower, and gold-roof'd temples blaze.     This golden empire, by the heav'n's decree,     Is due, Castile, O favour'd power, to thee!     Even now, Columbus o'er the hoary tide     Pursues the ev'ning sun, his navy's guide.     Yet, shall the kindred Lusian share the reign,     What time this world shall own the yoke of Spain.     The first bold hero[673] who to India's shores     Through vanquish'd waves thy open'd path explores,     Driv'n by the winds of heav'n from Afric's strand,     Shall fix the holy cross on yon fair land.     That mighty realm, for purple wood renown'd,     Shall stretch the Lusian empire's western bound.     Fir'd by thy fame, and with his king in ire,     To match thy deeds shall Magalhaens aspire.[674]     In all but loyalty, of Lusian soul,     No fear, no danger shall his toils control.     Along these regions, from the burning zone     To deepest south, he dares the course unknown.     While, to the kingdoms of the rising day,     To rival thee he holds the western way,     A land of giants[675] shall his eyes behold,     Of camel strength, surpassing human mould:     And, onward still, thy fame his proud heart's guide     Haunting him unappeas'd, the dreary tide     Beneath the southern star's cold gleam he braves,     And stems the whirls of land-surrounded waves.     For ever sacred to the hero's fame,     These foaming straits shall bear his deathless name.     Through these dread jaws of rock he presses on,     Another ocean's breast, immense, unknown,     Beneath the south's cold wings, unmeasur'd, wide,     Receives his vessels; through the dreary tide     In darkling shades, where never man before     Heard the waves howl, he dares the nameless shore.

      "Thus far, O favour'd Lusians, bounteous Heav'n     Your nation's glories to your view has giv'n.     What ensigns, blazing to the morn, pursue     The path of heroes, open'd first by you!     Still be it yours the first in fame to shine:     Thus shall your brides new chaplets still entwine,     With laurels ever new your brows enfold,     And braid your wavy locks with radiant gold.

      "How calm the waves, how mild the balmy gale!     The halcyons call; ye Lusians, spread the sail;     Old ocean, now appeas'd, shall rage no more.     Haste, point the bowsprit to your native shore:     Soon shall the transports of the natal soil     O'erwhelm, in bounding joy, the thoughts of ev'ry toil."

      The goddess spake[676]; and VASCO wav'd his hand,     And soon the joyful heroes crowd the strand.     The lofty ships with deepen'd burthens prove     The various bounties of the Isle of Love.     Nor leave the youths their lovely brides behind,     In wedded bands, while time glides on, conjoin'd;     Fair as immortal fame in smiles array'd,     In bridal smiles, attends each lovely maid.     O'er India's sea, wing'd on by balmy gales     That whisper'd peace, soft swell'd the steady sails:     Smooth as on wing unmov'd the eagle flies,     When to his eyrie cliff he sails the skies,     Swift o'er the gentle billows of the tide,     So smooth, so soft, the prows of GAMA glide;     And now their native fields, for ever dear,     In all their wild transporting charms appear;     And Tago's bosom, while his banks repeat     The sounding peals of joy, receives the fleet.     With orient titles and immortal fame     The hero band adorn their monarch's name;     Sceptres and crowns beneath his feet they lay,     And the wide East is doom'd to Lusian sway.[677]

      Enough, my muse, thy wearied wing no more     Must to the seat of Jove triumphant soar.     Chill'd by my nation's cold neglect, thy fires     Glow bold no more, and all thy rage expires.     Yet thou, Sebastian, thou, my king, attend;     Behold what glories on thy throne descend!     Shall haughty Gaul or sterner Albion boast     That all the Lusian fame in thee is lost!     Oh, be it thine these glories to renew,     And John's bold path and Pedro's course pursue:[678]     Snatch from the tyrant-noble's hand the sword,     And be the rights of humankind restor'd.     The statesman prelate to his vows confine,     Alone auspicious at the holy shrine;     The priest, in whose meek heart Heav'n pours its fires,     Alone to Heav'n, not earth's vain pomp, aspires.     Nor let the muse, great king, on Tago's shore,     In dying notes the barb'rous age deplore.     The king or hero to the muse unjust     Sinks as the nameless slave, extinct in dust.     But such the deeds thy radiant morn portends,     Aw'd by thy frown ev'n now old Atlas bends     His hoary head, and Ampeluza's fields     Expect thy sounding steeds and rattling shields.     And shall these deeds unsung, unknown, expire!     Oh, would thy smiles relume my fainting ire!     I, then inspir'd, the wond'ring world should see     Great Ammon's warlike son reviv'd in thee;     Reviv'd, unenvied[679] of the muse's flame     That o'er the world resounds Pelides'[680] name.     "O let th' Iambic Muse revenge that wrong     Which cannot slumber in thy sheets of lead;     Let thy abused honour crie as long     As there be quills to write, or eyes to reade:     On his rank name let thine own votes be turn'd,     _Oh may that man that hath the Muses scorn'd     Alive, nor dead, be ever of a Muse adorn'd_."


THE END.


LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _Poems of Luis de Camoëns, with Remarks on his Life and Writings._ By Lord Viscount Strangford. Fifth edition. London, 1808.

[2] The Cama{=o õ}. Formerly every well-regulated family in Spain retained one of these terrible attendants. The infidelity of its mistress was the only circumstance which could deprive it of life. This odious distrust of female honour is ever characteristic of a barbarous age.

[3] The laws of Portugal were peculiarly severe against those who carried on a love-intrigue within the palace: they punished the offence with death. Joam I. suffered one of his favourites to be burnt alive for it.--_Ed._

[4] The Maekhaun, or Camboja.--_Ed._

[5] Thomas Moore Musgrave's translation of The Lusiad is in blank verse, and is dedicated to the Earl of Chichester. I vol. 8vo. Murray; 1826.

[6] A document in the archives of the Portuguese India House, on which Lord Strangford relies, places it in 1524, or the following year.--_Ed._

[7] The French translator gives us so fine a description of the person of Camoëns, that it seems borrowed from the Fairy Tales. It is universally agreed, however, that he was handsome, and had a most engaging mien and address. He is thus described by Nicolas Antonio "_Mediocri statura fuit, et carne plena, capillis usque ad croci colorem flavescentibus, maxime in juventute. Eminebat ei frons, et medius nasus, cætera longus, et in fine crassiusculus._"

[8] Castera tells us, "that posterity by no means enters into the resentment of our poet, and that the Portuguese historians make glorious mention of Barreto, who was a man of true merit." The Portuguese historians, however, knew not what true merit was. The brutal, uncommercial wars of Sampayo are by them mentioned as much more glorious than the less bloody campaigns of a Nunio, which established commerce and empire.

[9] Having named the Mecon, or Meekhaun, a river of Cochin China, he says--

    _Este recebera placido, e brando,     No seu regaço o Canto, que molhado_, etc.

Literally thus: "On his gentle hospitable bosom (_sic_ brando _poeticé_) shall he receive the song, wet from woful unhappy shipwreck, escaped from destroying tempests, from ravenous dangers, the effect of the unjust sentence upon him, whose lyre shall be more renowned than enriched." When Camoëns was commissary, he visited the islands of Ternate, Timor, etc., described in the Lusiad.

[10] According to the Portuguese Life of Camoëns, prefixed to Gedron's the best edition of his works, Diogo de Couto, the historian, one of the company in this homeward voyage, wrote annotations upon the Lusiad, under the eye of its author. But these, unhappily, have never appeared in public.

[11] Cardinal Henry's patronage of learning and learned men is mentioned with cordial esteem by the Portuguese writers. Happily they also tell us what that learning was. It was to him the Romish Friars of the East transmitted their childish forgeries of inscriptions and miracles. He corresponded with them, directed their labours, and received the first accounts of their success. Under his patronage it was discovered, that St. Thomas ordered the Indians to worship the cross; and that the Moorish tradition of Perimal (who, having embraced Mohammedanism, divided his kingdom among his officers, whom he rendered tributary to the Zamorim) was a malicious misrepresentation, for that Perimal, having turned Christian, resigned his kingdom and became a monk. Such was the learning patronized by Henry, under whose auspices that horrid tribunal, the Inquisition, was erected at Lisbon, where he himself long presided as Inquisitor-General. Nor was he content with this: he established an Inquisition, also, at Goa, and sent a whole apparatus of holy fathers to form a court of inquisitors, to suppress the Jews and reduce the native Christians to the see of Rome. Nor must the treatment experienced by Buchanan at Lisbon be here omitted. John III., earnest to promote the cultivation of polite literature among his subjects, engaged Buchanan, the most elegant Latinist, perhaps, of modern times, to teach philosophy and the _belles lettres_ at Lisbon. But the design of the monarch was soon frustrated by the clergy, at the head of whom was Henry, afterwards king. Buchanan was committed to prison, because it was alleged that he had eaten flesh in Lent, and because in his early youth, at St. Andrew's in Scotland, he had written a satire against the Franciscans; for which, however, ere he would venture to Lisbon, John had promised absolute indemnity. John, with much difficulty, procured his release from a loathsome jail, but could not effect his restoration as a teacher. No, he only changed his prison, for Buchanan was sent to a monastery "to be instructed by the monks," of the men of letters patronized by Henry. These are thus characterized by their pupil Buchanan,--_nec inhumanis, nec malis, sed omnis religionis ignaris_: "Not uncivilized, not flagitious, but ignorant of every religion."

[12] According to Gedron, a second edition of the Lusiad appeared in the same year with the first. There are two Italian and four Spanish translations of it. A hundred years before Castera's version it appeared in French. Thomas de Faria, Bp. of Targa in Africa, translated it into Latin. Le P. Niceron says there were two other Latin translations. It is translated, also, into Hebrew, with great elegance and spirit, by one Luzzatto, a learned and ingenious Jew, author of several poems in that language, who died in the Holy Land.

[13] This passage in inverted commas is cited, with the alteration of the name only, from Langhorne's account of the life of William Collins.

[14] The drama and the epopoeia are in nothing so different as in this--the subjects of the drama are inexhaustible, those of the epopoeia are perhaps exhausted. He who chooses war, and warlike characters, cannot appear as an original. It was well for the memory of Pope that he did not write the epic poem he intended. It would have been only a copy of Virgil. Camoëns and Milton have been happy in the novelty of their subjects, and these they have exhausted. There cannot possibly be so important a voyage as that which gave the eastern world to the western. And, did even the story of Columbus afford materials equal to that of Gama, the adventures of the hero, and the view of the extent of his discoveries must now appear as servile copies of the Lusiad.

[15] See his Satyricon.--_Ed._

[16] See letters on Chivalry and Romance.

[17] The Lusiad is also rendered poetical by other fictions. The elegant satire on King Sebastian, under the name of Acteon; and the prosopopoeia of the populace of Portugal venting their murmurs upon the beach when Gama sets sail, display the richness of our author's poetical genius, and are not inferior to anything of the kind in the classics.

[18] Hence the great interest which we as Britons either do, or ought to, feel in this noble epic. We are the successors of the Portuguese in the possession and government of India; and therefore what interested them must have for us, as the actual possessors, a double interest.--_Ed._

[19] Castera was every way unequal to his task. He did not perceive his author's beauties. He either suppresses or lowers the most poetical passages, and substitutes French tinsel and impertinence in their place.

[20] Pope, Odyss. XX.

[21] Richard Fanshaw, Esq., afterwards Sir Richard, was English Ambassador both at Madrid and Lisbon. He had a taste for literature, and translated from the Italian several pieces which were of service in the refinement of our poetry. Though his Lusiad, by the dedication of it to William, Earl of Strafford, dated May 1, 1655, seems as if published by himself, we are told by the editor of his Letters, that "during the unsettled times of our anarchy, some of his MSS., falling by misfortune into unskilful hands, were printed and published without his knowledge or consent, and before he could give them his last finishing strokes: such was his translation of the Lusiad." He can never have enough of conceits, low allusions, and expressions. When gathering of flowers is simply mentioned (C. 9, st. 24) he gives it, "gather'd flowers by pecks;" and the Indian Regent is avaricious (C. 8, st. 95)--

    _Meaning a better penny thence to get._

But enough of these have already appeared in the notes. It may be necessary to add, that the version of Fanshaw, though the Lusiad very particularly requires them, was given to the public without one note.

[22] Some liberties of a less poetical kind, however, require to be mentioned. In Homer and Virgil's lists of slain warriors, Dryden and Pope have omitted several names which would have rendered English versification dull and tiresome. Several allusions to ancient history and fable have for this reason been abridged; e.g. in the prayer of GAMA (Book 6) the mention of Paul, "thou who deliveredst Paul and defendest him from quicksands and wild waves--

    _Das scyrtes arenosas e ondas feas_--"

is omitted. However excellent in the original, the prayer in English would lose both its dignity and ardour. Nor let the critic, if he find the meaning of Camoëns in some instances altered, imagine that he has found a blunder in the translator. He who chooses to see a slight alteration of this kind will find an instance, which will give him an idea of others, in Canto 8, st. 48, and another in Canto 7, st. 41. It was not to gratify the dull few, whose greatest pleasure in reading a translation is to see what the author exactly says; it was to give a poem that might live in the English language, which was the ambition of the translator. And, for the same reason, he has not confined himself to the Portuguese or Spanish pronunciation of proper names. Regardless, therefore, of Spanish pronunciation, the translator has accented Granáda, Evóra, etc. in the manner which seemed to him to give most dignity to English versification. In the word Sofala he has even rejected the authority of Milton, and followed the more sonorous usage of Fanshaw. Thus Sir Richard: "Against Sofála's batter'd fort." Which is the more sonorous there can be no dispute.

[23] Judges xviii. 7, 9, 27, 28.

[24] This ferocity of savage manners affords a philosophical account how the most distant and inhospitable climes were first peopled. When a Romulus erects a monarchy and makes war on his neighbours, some naturally fly to the wilds. As their families increase, the stronger commit depredations on the weaker; and thus from generation to generation, they who either dread just punishment or unjust oppression, fly farther and farther in search of that protection which is only to be found in civilized society.

[25] The author of that voluminous work, _Histoire Philosophique et Politique des Etablissements et du Commerce des Européens dans les deux Indes_, is one of the many who assert that savage life is happier than civil. His reasons are thus abridged: The savage has no care or fear for the future; his hunting and fishing give him a certain subsistence. He sleeps sound, and knows not the diseases of cities. He cannot want what he does not desire, nor desire that which he does not know, and vexation or grief do not enter his soul. He is not under the control of a superior in his actions; in a word, says our author, the savage only suffers the evils of nature.

If the civilized, he adds, enjoy the elegancies of life, have better food, and are more comfortably defended against the change of seasons, it is use which makes these things necessary, and they are purchased by the painful labours of the multitude who are the basis of society. To what outrages is not the man of civil life exposed? if he has property, it is in danger; and government or authority is, according to our author, the greatest of all evils. If there is a famine in North America, the savage, led by the wind and the sun, can go to a better clime; but in the horrors of famine, war, or pestilence, the ports and barriers of civilized states place the subjects in a prison, where they must perish. There still remains an infinite difference between the lot of the civilized and the savage; a difference, all entirely to the disadvantage of society, that injustice which reigns in the inequality of fortunes and conditions.

[26] The innocent simplicity of the Americans in their conferences with the Spaniards, and the horrid cruelties they suffered from them, divert our view from their complete character. Almost everything was horrid in their civil customs and religious rites. In some tribes, to cohabit with their mothers, sisters, and daughters was esteemed the means of domestic peace. In others, catamites were maintained in every village; they went from house to house as they pleased, and it was unlawful to refuse them what victuals they chose. In every tribe, the captives taken in war were murdered with the most wanton cruelty, and afterwards devoured by the victors. Their religious rites were, if possible, still more horrid. The abominations of ancient Moloch were here outnumbered; children, virgins, slaves, and captives bled on different altars, to appease their various gods. If there was a scarcity of human victims, the priests announced that the gods were dying of thirst for human blood. And, to prevent a threatened famine, the kings of Mexico were obliged to make war on the neighbouring states. The prisoners of either side died by the hand of the priest. But the number of the Mexican sacrifices so greatly exceeded those of other nations, that the Tlascalans, who were hunted down for this purpose, readily joined Cortez with about 200,000 men, and enabled him to make one great sacrifice of the Mexican nation. Who that views Mexico, steeped in her own blood, can restrain the emotion which whispers to him, This is the hand of Heaven!--By the number of these sacred butcheries, one would think that cruelty was the greatest amusement of Mexico. At the dedication of the temple of Vitzliputzli, A.D. 1486, no less than 64,080 human victims were sacrificed in four days. And, according to the best accounts, the annual sacrifices of Mexico required several thousands. The skulls of the victims sometimes were hung on strings which reached from tree to tree around their temples, and sometimes were built up in towers and cemented with lime. In some of these towers Andrew de Tapia one day counted 136,000 skulls. During the war with Cortez they increased their usual sacrifices, till priest and people were tired of their bloody religion.--See, for ample justification of these statements, the _Histories of the Conquest of Mexico and Peru_, by Prescott.--_Ed._

[27] Mahommed Ali Khan, Nawab of the Carnatic, declared, "I met the British with that freedom of openness which they love, and I esteem it my honour as well as security to be the ally of such a nation of princes."

[28] Every man must follow his father's trade, and must marry a daughter of the same occupation. Innumerable are their other barbarous restrictions of genius and inclination.

[29] Extremity; for it were both highly unjust and impolitic in government to allow importation in such a degree as might be destructive of domestic agriculture.

[30] Even that warm admirer of savage happiness, the author of _Histoire Philosophique et Politique des Etablissements_, confesses that the wild Americans seem destitute of the feeling of love. When the heat of passion, says he, is gratified, they lose all affection and attachment for their women, whom they degrade to the most servile offices.--A tender remembrance of the first endearments, a generous participation of care and hope, the compassionate sentiments of honour; all these delicate feelings, which arise into affection, and bind attachment, are indeed, incompatible with the ferocious and gross sensations of barbarians.

[31] It is a question still debated among medical writers, and by no means yet decided, whether the disease referred to is of American origin. We do not read, it is true, of any such disease in the pages of the ancient classic writers; it has hence been inferred that it was unknown to them.--_Ed._

[32] The degeneracy of the Roman literature preceded the fate of the state, and the reason is obvious. The men of fortune grew frivolous, and superficial in every branch of knowledge, and were therefore unable to hold the reigns of empire. The degeneracy of literary taste is, therefore, the surest proof of the general ignorance.

[33] The soldiers and navigators were the only considerable gainers by their acquirements in the Indies. Agriculture and manufactures are the natural strength of a nation; these received little or no increase in Spain and Portugal by the great acquisitions of these crowns.

[34] Ariosto, who adopted the legends of the old romance, chose this period for the subject of his Orlando Furioso. Paris besieged by the Saracens, Orlando and the other Christian knights assemble in aid of Charlemagne, who are opposed in their amours and in battle by Rodomont, Ferraw, and other Saracen knights. That there was a noted Moorish Spaniard, named Ferraw, a redoubted champion of that age, we have the testimony of Marcus Antonius Sabellicus, a writer of note of the fifteenth century.

[35] Small indeed in extent, but so rich in fertility, that it was called _Medulla Hispanica_, "The marrow of Spain."--Vid. Resandii Antiq. Lusit. l. iii.

[36] In propriety most certainly a crusade, though that term has never before been applied to this war.

[37] The power of deposing, and of electing their kings, under certain circumstances, is vested in the people by the statutes of Lamego.

[38] For the character of this prince, see the note, Bk. iii. p. 96.

[39] For anecdotes of this monarch, see the notes, Bk. iii. p. 99.

[40] This great prince was the natural son of Pedro the Just. Some years after the murder of his beloved spouse, Inez de Castro (see Lusiad, Bk. iii. p. 96), lest his father, whose severe temper he too well knew, should force him into a disagreeable marriage, Don Pedro commenced an amour with a Galician lady, who became the mother of John I., the preserver of the Portuguese monarchy.

[41] The sons of John, who figure in history, were Edward, Juan, Fernando, Pedro and Henry. Edward succeeded his father. Juan, distinguished both in the camp and cabinet, in the reign of his brother Edward had the honour to oppose the expedition against Tangier, which was proposed by his brother Fernando, in whose perpetual captivity it ended.

[42] The dominion of the Portuguese in the Indian seas cut the sinews of the Egyptian and other Mohammedan powers.

[43] Flanders has been the school-mistress of husbandry to Europe. Sir Charles Lisle, a royalist, resided in this country several years during the Commonwealth; and after the Restoration, rendered England the greatest service, by introducing the present system of agriculture. Where trade increases, men's thoughts are set in action; hence the increase of food which is wanted is supplied by a redoubled attention to husbandry; and hence it was that agriculture was of old improved and diffused by the Phoenician colonies.

[44] At the reduction of Ceuta in Africa, and in other engagements, Prince Henry displayed military genius and valour of the first magnitude. The important fortress of Ceuta was in a manner won by his own sword.

[45] Nam, in Portuguese, a negative. It is now called by corruption Cape Nun.

[46] Cape Bojador, from the Spanish, _bojar_, to compass or go about.

[47] Unluckily, he also left on this island two rabbits, whose young so increased that in a few years it was found not habitable, every vegetable being destroyed by the great increase of these animals.

[48] Madeira in Portuguese signifies timber.--_Ed._

[49] If one would trace the true character of Cortez and the Americans, he must have recourse to the numerous Spanish writers, who were either witnesses of the first wars, or soon after travelled in these countries. [The reader cannot do better than refer to Prescott's _History of the Conquest of Mexico and Peru_ for information on these points.--_Ed._] In these he will find many anecdotes which afford a light not to be found in our modern histories. Cortez set out to take gold by force, and not by establishing any system of commerce with the natives, the only just reason for effecting a settlement in a foreign country. He was asked by various states, what commodities or drugs he wanted, and was promised abundant supply. He and his Spaniards, he answered, had a disease at their hearts, which nothing but gold could cure; and he received intelligence that Mexico abounded with it. Under pretence of a friendly conference, he made the Mexican emperor, Montezuma, his prisoner, and ordered him to pay tribute to Charles V. Immense sums were paid, but the demand was boundless. Tumults ensued. Cortez displayed amazing generalship, and some millions of those who boasted of the greatness of Montezuma were sacrificed to the disease of Cortez's heart. Pizarro, however, in the barbarity of his character, far exceeded him. There is a bright side to the character of Cortez, if we can forget that his avarice was the cause of a most unjust and most bloody war; but Pizarro is a character completely detestable, destitute of every spark of generosity. He massacred the Peruvians because they were barbarians, and he himself could not read. Atabalipa, the Peruvian Inca, amazed at the art of reading, got a Spaniard to write the word Dios (God) on his finger. On trying if the Spaniards agreed in what it signified, he discovered that Pizarro could not read. And Pizarro, in revenge of the contempt he perceived in the face of Atabalipa, ordered that prince to be tried for his life, for having concubines, and being an idolater. Atabalipa was condemned to be burned; but on submitting to baptism, he was only hanged. See Prescott's _Conquest of Peru_.

[50] The difficulties he surmounted, and the assistance he received, are sufficient proofs that an adventurer of inferior birth could never have carried his designs into execution.

[51] Don Pedro was villainously accused of treacherous designs by his illegitimate brother, the first Duke of Braganza. Henry left his town of Sagrez to defend his brother at court, but in vain. Pedro, finding the young king in the power of Braganza, fled, and soon after was killed in defending himself against a party who were sent to seize him. His innocence, after his death, was fully proved, and his nephew, Alonzo V., gave him an honourable burial.

[52] Henry, who undertook to extend the boundaries which ignorance had given to the world, had extended them much beyond the sensible horizon long ere Columbus appeared. Columbus indeed taught the Spaniards the use of longitude and latitude in navigation, but that great mathematician, Henry, was the author of that grand discovery, and of the _use_ of the compass. Every alteration ascribed to Columbus, had almost fifty years before been effected by Henry. Even Henry's idea of sailing to India was adopted by Columbus. It was everywhere his proposal. When he arrived in the West Indies he thought he had found the Ophir of Solomon, and thence these islands received their general name, and on his return he told John II. that he had been at the islands of India. To find the Spice Islands of the East was his proposal at the court of Spain; and even on his fourth and last voyage in 1502, three years after Gama's return, he promised the King of Spain to find India by a westward passage. But though great discoveries rewarded his toils, his first and last purpose he never completed. It was reserved for Magalhaens to discover the westward route to the Eastern world.

Gomara and other Spanish writers relate, that while Columbus lived in Madeira, a pilot, the only survivor of a ship's crew, died at his house. This pilot, they say, had been driven to the West Indies, or America, by tempest, and on his death-bed communicated the journal of his voyage to Columbus.

[53] Or Bethlehem, so named from the chapel.

[54] Now called St. Helen's.

[55] The voyage of Gama has been called merely a coasting one, and therefore regarded as much less dangerous and heroical than that of Columbus, or of Magalhaens. But this is one of the opinions hastily taken up, and founded on ignorance. Columbus and Magalhaens undertook to navigate unknown oceans, and so did Gama; with this difference, that the ocean around the Cape of Good Hope, which Gama was to encounter, was believed to be, and had been avoided by Diaz, as impassable. Prince Henry suggested that the current of Cape Bojador might be avoided by standing out to sea, and thus that Cape was first passed. Gama for this reason did not coast, but stood out to sea for upwards of three months of tempestuous weather. The tempests which afflicted Columbus and Magalhaens are by their different historians described with circumstances of less horror and danger than those which attacked Gama. All the three commanders were endangered by mutiny; but none of their crews, save Gama's, could urge the opinion of ages, and the example of a living captain, that the dreadful ocean which they attempted was impassable. Columbus and Magalhaens always found means, after detecting a conspiracy, to keep the rest in hope; but Gama's men, when he put the pilots in irons, continued in the utmost despair. Columbus was indeed ill obeyed; Magalhaens sometimes little better; but nothing, save the wonderful authority of Gama's command, could have led his crew through the tempest which he surmounted ere he doubled the Cape of Good Hope. Columbus, with _his_ crew, must have returned. The expedients which he used to soothe them, would, under _his_ authority, have had no avail in the tempest which Gama rode through. From every circumstance it is evident that Gama had determined not to return, unless he found India. Nothing less than such resolution to perish or attain his point could have led him on.

[56] It afterwards appeared that the Moorish King of Mombas had been informed of what happened at Mozambique, and intended to revenge it by the total destruction of the fleet.

[57] Amerigo Vespucci, describing his voyage to America, says, "Having passed the line, _e come desideroso d'essere autore che segnassi la stella_--desirous to be the namer and discoverer of the Pole-star of the other hemisphere, I lost my sleep many nights in contemplating the stars of the other pole." He then laments, that as his instruments could not discover any star of less motion then ten degrees, he had not the satisfaction of giving a name to any one. But as he observed four stars, in form of an almond, which had but little motion, he hoped in his next voyage he should be able to mark them out.--All this is curious, and affords a good comment on the temper of the man who had the art to defraud Columbus, by giving his own name to America; of which he challenged the discovery. Near fifty years before the voyage of Amerigo Vespucci, the Portuguese had crossed the line; and Diaz fourteen, and Gama nearly three years before, had doubled the Cape of Good Hope; had discovered seven stars in the constellation of the south pole, and from the appearance of the four most luminous, had given it the name of "The Cross," a figure which it better resembles than that of an almond.

[58] Properly "Samudra-Rajah," King of the Sea, corrupted into Zamorim.--_Ed._

[59] "Kotwâl" signifies Superintendent of the Police.--_Ed._

[60] Faria y Sousa.

[61] It was the custom of the first discoverers to erect crosses at various places remarkable in their voyage. Gama erected six: one, dedicated to St. Raphael, at the river of Good Signs; one to St. George, at Mozambique; one to St. Stephen, at Melinda; one to St. Gabriel, at Calicut; and one to St. Mary, at the island thence named, near Anchediva.

[62] _The Lusiad_; in the original, Os Lusiadas, The Lusiads, from the Latin name (_Lusitania_) of Portugal, derived from Lusus or Lysas, the companion of Bacchus in his travels, who settled a colony in Lusitania, See Plin. 1, iii. c. i.

[63] _Thro' seas where sail was never spread before._--M. Duperron de Castera, who has given a French prose translation, or rather paraphrase, of the Lusiad, has a long note on this passage, which, he tells us, must not be understood literally. Our author, he says, could not be ignorant that the African and Indian Oceans had been navigated before the times of the Portuguese. The Phoenicians, whose fleets passed the straits of Gibraltar, made frequent voyages in these seas, though they carefully concealed the course of their navigation that other nations might not become partakers of their lucrative traffic.--See the Periplus of Hanno, in Cory's Ancient Fragments.--_Ed._

[64] _And all my country's wars._--He interweaves artfully the history of Portugal.--VOLTAIRE.

[65] _To Holy Faith unnumber'd altars rear'd._--In no period of history does human nature appear with more shocking, more diabolical features than in the wars of Cortez, and the Spanish conquerors of South America. Zeal for the Christian religion was esteemed, at the time of the Portuguese grandeur, as the most cardinal virtue, and to propagate Christianity and extirpate Mohammedanism were the most certain proofs of that zeal. In all their expeditions this was professedly a principal motive of the Lusitanian monarchs, and Camoëns understood the nature of epic poetry too well to omit it.

[66] Ulysses, who is the subject of the Odyssey.

[67] The voyage of Æneas, described in the Æneid of Virgil.

[68] Alexander the Great, who claimed to be the son of Jupiter Ammon.

[69] Vasco de Gama is, in a great measure, though not exclusively, the hero of the Lusiad.

[70] King Sebastian, who came to the throne in his minority. Though the warm imagination of Camoëns anticipated the praises of the future hero, the young monarch, like Virgil's Pollio, had not the happiness to fulfil the prophecy. His endowments and enterprising genius promised, indeed, a glorious reign. Ambitious of military laurels, he led a powerful army into Africa, on purpose to replace Muley Hamet on the throne of Morocco, from which he had been deposed by Muley Molucco. On the 4th of August, 1578, in the twenty-fifth year of his age, he gave battle to the usurper on the plains of Alcazar. This was that memorable engagement, to which the Moorish Emperor, extremely weakened by sickness, was carried in his litter. By the impetuosity of the attack, the first line of the Moorish infantry was broken, and the second disordered. Muley Molucco on this mounted his horse, drew his sabre, and would have put himself at the head of his troops, but was prevented by his attendants. His emotion of mind was so great that he fell from his horse, and one of his guards having caught him in his arms, conveyed him to his litter, where, putting his finger on his lips to enjoin them silence, he immediately expired. Hamet Taba stood by the curtains of the carriage, opened them from time to time, and gave out orders as if he had received them from the Emperor. Victory declared for the Moors, and the defeat of the Portuguese was so total, that not above fifty of their whole army escaped. Hieron de Mendoça and Sebastian de Mesa relate, that Don Sebastian, after having two horses killed under him, was surrounded and taken; but the party who had secured him, quarrelling among themselves whose prisoner he was, a Moorish officer rode up and struck the king a blow over the right eye, which brought him to the ground; when, despairing of ransom, the others killed him. About twenty years after this fatal defeat there appeared a stranger at Venice, who called himself Sebastian, King of Portugal, whom he so perfectly resembled, that the Portuguese of that city acknowledged him for their sovereign. He underwent twenty-eight examinations before a committee of the nobles, in which he gave a distinct account of the manner in which he had passed his time from the fatal defeat at Alcazar. It was objected, that the successor of Muley Molucco sent a corpse to Portugal which had been owned as that of the king by the Portuguese nobility who survived the battle. To this he replied, that his _valet de chambre_ had produced that body to facilitate his escape, and that the nobility acted upon the same motive, and Mesa and Baena confess, that some of this nobility, after their return to Portugal acknowledged that the corpse was so disfigured with wounds that it was impossible to know it. He showed natural marks on his body, which many remembered on the person of the king whose name he assumed. He entered into a minute detail of the transactions that had passed between himself and the republic, and mentioned the secrets of several conversations with the Venetian ambassadors in the palace of Lisbon. He fell into the hands of the Spaniards, who conducted him to Naples, where they treated him with the most barbarous indignities. After they had often exposed him, mounted on an ass, to the cruel insults of the brutal mob, he was shipped on board a galley, as a slave. He was then carried to St. Lucar, from thence to a castle in the heart of Castile, and never was heard of more. The firmness of his behaviour, his singular modesty and heroical patience, are mentioned with admiration by Le Clede. To the last he maintained the truth of his assertions: a word never slipped from his lips which might countenance the charge of imposture, or justify the cruelty of his persecutors.

[71] Portugal, when Camoëns wrote his Lusiad, was at the zenith of its power and splendour. The glorious successes which had attended the arms of the Portuguese in Africa, had gained them the highest military reputation. Their fleets covered the ocean. Their dominions and settlements extended along the western and eastern sides of the vast African continent. From the Red Sea to China and Japan, they were sole masters of the riches of the East; and in America, the fertile and extensive regions of Brazil completed their empire.

[72] Lusitania is the Latin name of a Roman province which comprised the greater part of the modern kingdom of Portugal, besides a considerable portion of Leon and Spanish Estremadura.--_Ed._

[73] _The sun._--Imitated, perhaps, from Rutilius, speaking of the Roman Empire--

    _Volvitur ipse tibi, qui conspicit omnia, Phoebus,     Atque tuis ortos in tua condit equos;_

or, more probably, from these lines of Buchanan, addressed to John III. King of Portugal, the grandfather of Sebastian--

    _Inque tuis Phoebus regnis oriensque cadensque       Vix longum fesso conderet axe diem.     Et quæcunque vago se circumvolvit Olympo       Affulget ratibus flamma ministra tuis._


[74] _i.e._ poetic. Aonia was the ancient name of Boeotia, in which country was a fountain sacred to the Muses, whence Juvenal sings of a poet--

    "Enamoured of the woods, and fitted for drinking       At the fountains of the Aonides."

    JUV. Sat. vii. 58.--_Ed._


[75] _To match the Twelve so long by bards renown'd._--The Twelve Peers of France, often mentioned in the old romances. For the episode of Magricio and his eleven companions, see the sixth Lusiad.

[76] Afonso in Portuguese. In the first edition Mickle had Alfonso, which he altered to Alonzo in the second edition.

[77] _Thy grandsires._--John III. King of Portugal, celebrated for a long and peaceful reign; and the Emperor Charles V., who was engaged in almost continual wars.

[78] Some critics have condemned Virgil for stopping his narrative to introduce even a short observation of his own. Milton's beautiful complaint of his blindness has been blamed for the same reason, as being no part of the subject of his poem. The address of Camoëns to Don Sebastian at the conclusion of the tenth Lusiad has not escaped the same censure; though in some measure undeservedly, as the poet has had the art to interweave therein some part of the general argument of his poem.

[79] This brave Lusitanian, who was first a shepherd and a famous hunter, and afterwards a captain of banditti, exasperated at the tyranny of the Romans, encouraged his countrymen to revolt and shake off the yoke. Being appointed general, he defeated Vetilius the prætor, who commanded in Lusitania, or farther Spain. After this he defeated, in three pitched battles, the prætors, C. Plautius Hypsæus and Claudius Unimanus, though they led against him very numerous armies. For six years he continued victorious, putting the Romans to flight wherever he met them, and laying waste the countries of their allies. Having obtained such advantages over the proconsul, Servilianus, that the only choice which was left to the Roman army was death or slavery, the brave Viriatus, instead of putting them all to the sword, as he could easily have done, sent a deputation to the general, offering to conclude a peace with him on this single condition, _That he should continue master of the country now in his power, and that the Romans should remain possessed of the rest of Spain_.

The proconsul, who expected nothing but death or slavery, thought these very favourable and moderate terms, and without hesitation concluded a peace, which was soon after ratified by the Roman senate and people. Viriatus, by this treaty, completed the glorious design he had always in view, which was to erect a kingdom in the vast country he had conquered from the republic. And, had it not been for the treachery of the Romans, he would have become, as Florus calls him, the Romulus of Spain.

The senate, desirous to revenge their late defeat, soon after this peace, ordered Q. Servilius Cæpio to exasperate Viriatus, and force him, by repeated affronts, to commit the first acts of hostility. But this mean artifice did not succeed: Viriatus would not be provoked to a breach of the peace. On this the Conscript Fathers, to the eternal disgrace of their republic, ordered Cæpio to declare war, and to proclaim Viriatus, who had given no provocation, an enemy to Rome. To this baseness Cæpio added one still greater; he corrupted the ambassadors whom Viriatus had sent to negotiate with him, who, at the instigation of the Roman, treacherously murdered their protector and general while he slept.--UNIV. HISTORY.

[80] Sertorius, who was invited by the Lusitanians to defend them against the Romans. He had a tame white hind, which he had accustomed to follow him, and from which he pretended to receive the instructions of Diana. By this artifice he imposed upon the superstition of that people.

[81] _No more in Nysa._--An ancient city in India sacred to Bacchus.

[82] _Urania-Venus._--An Italian poet has given the following description of the celestial Venus--

    _Questa è vaga di Dio Venere bella     Vicina al Sole, e sopra ogni altra estella     Questa è quella beata, a cui s'inchina,     A cui si volge desiando amore,     Chiamata cui del Ciel rara e divina     Beltà che vien tra noi per nostro honore,     Per far le menti desiando al Cielo     Obliare l'altrui col proprio velo._--MARTEL.


[83] See the note in the Second Book on the following passage--

    _As when in Ida's bower she stood of yore, etc._


[84] _The manly music of their tongue the same._--Camoëns says:

    _E na lingoa, na qual quando imagina,     Com pouca corrupçao cré que he Latina._

Qualifications are never elegant in poetry. Fanshaw's translation and the original both prove this:

    ----_their tongue     Which she thinks Latin, with small dross among._


[85] _i.e._ helmet.

[86]---- _and the light turn'd pale._--The thought in the original has something in it wildly great, though it is not expressed in the happiest manner of Camoëns--

    _O ceo tremeo, e Apollo detorvado     Hum pauco a luz perdeo, como infiado._


[87] Mercury, the messenger of the gods.--_Ed._

[88] _And pastoral Madagascar._--Called by the ancient geographers, Menuthia and Cerna Ethiopica; by the natives, the Island of the Moon; and by the Portuguese, the Isle of St. Laurence, on whose festival they discovered it.

[89] _Praso._--Name of a promontory near the Red Sea.--_Ed._

[90] _Lav'd by the gentle waves._--The original says, the sea showed them new islands, which it encircled and laved. Thus rendered by Fanshaw--

    _Neptune disclos'd new isles which he did play     About, and with his billows danc't the hay._


[91] The historical foundation of the fable of Phaeton is this. Phaeton was a young enterprising prince of Libya. Crossing the Mediterranean in quest of adventures, he landed at Epirus, from whence he went to Italy to see his intimate friend Cygnus. Phaeton was skilled in astrology, from whence he arrogated to himself the title of the son of Apollo. One day in the heat of summer, as he was riding along the banks of the Po, his horses took fright at a clap of thunder, and plunged into the river, where, together with their master, they perished. Cygnus, who was a poet, celebrated the death of his friend in verse, from whence the fable.--Vid. Plutarch, in Vit. Pyrr.

[92] _Acheron._--The river of Hades, or hell.--_Ed._

[93] _From Abram's race our holy prophet sprung._--Mohammed, who was descended from Ishmael, the son of Abraham by Hagar.

[94] The Hydaspes was a tributary of the river Indus.--_Ed._

[95] _Calm twilight now._--Camoëns, in this passage, has imitated Homer in the manner of Virgil: by diversifying the scene he has made the description his own. The passage alluded to is in the eighth Iliad--

    [Greek: Ôs d' hot' en ouranô astra phaeinên amphi amphi selênên     Phainet' ariprepea], etc.

Thus elegantly translated by Pope:--

    _As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,     O'er heaven's clear azure spreads her sacred light,     When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,     And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene;     Around her throne the vivid planets roll,     And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole,     O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,     And tip with silver every mountain's head;     Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,     A flood of glory bursts from all the skies:     The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,     Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light._


[96] The Turks, or Osmanli Turcomans.--_Ed._

[97] Constantinople.

[98] _Straight as he spoke._--The description of the armoury, and account which Vasco de Gama gives of his religion, consists, in the original, of thirty-two lines, which M. Castera has reduced into the following sentence: _Leur Governeur fait differentes questions au Capitaine, qui pour le satisfaire lui explique en peu des mots la Religion que les Portugais suivent, l'usage des armes dont ils se servent dans la guerre, et le dessein qui les amène._

[99] _i.e._, helmets.

[100] Coats of mail.

[101] _When Gama's lips Messiah's name confess'd._--This, and the reason of the Moor's hate, is entirely omitted by Castera. The original is, the Moor conceived hatred, "knowing they were followers of the truth which the Son of David taught." Thus rendered by Fanshaw:--

    _Knowing they follow that unerring light,     The Son of David holds out in his Book._

Zacocia (governor of Mozambique) made no doubt but our people were of some Mohammedan country. The mutual exchange of good offices between our people and these islanders promised a long continuance of friendship, but it proved otherwise. No sooner did Zacocia understand they were Christians, than all his kindness was turned into the most bitter hatred; he began to meditate their ruin, and sought to destroy the fleet.--OSORIO, Bp. of Sylves, Hist. of the Portug. Discov.

[102] Bacchus, god of wine.

[103] _Whom nine long months his father's thigh conceal'd._--Bacchus was nourished during his infancy in a cave of mount Meros, which in Greek signifies a _thigh_. Hence the fable.

[104] Alexander the Great, who on visiting the temple of Jupiter Ammon, was hailed as son of that deity by his priests.--_Ed._

[105] Bacchus.

[106] _His form divine he cloth'd in human shape_--

    _Alecto torvam faciem et furialia membra     Exuit: in vultus sese transformat aniles,     Et frontem obscænum rugis arat._

    VIR. Æn. vii.


[107] To be identified with the Sun, in the opinion of later mythologists; but not so in Homer, with whom Helios (the Sun) is himself a deity.--_Ed._

[108]

    _Thus, when to gain his beauteous charmer's smile,     The youthful lover dares the bloody toil._

This simile is taken from a favourite exercise in Spain, where it is usual to see young gentlemen of the best families entering the lists to fight with a bull, adorned with ribbons, and armed with a javelin or kind of cutlass, which the Spaniards call _Machete_.

[109]

     ------------_e maldizia     O velho inerte, e a m{=a}y, que o filho cria._

Thus translated by Fanshaw--

     ------------_curst their ill luck,     Th' old Devil and the Dam that gave them suck._


[110]

    _Flints, clods, and javelins hurling as they fly,     As rage, &c.--

      Jamque faces et saxa volant, furor arma ministrat._

    VIRG. Æn. i.

The Spanish commentator on this place relates a very extraordinary instance of the _furor arma ministrans_. A Portuguese soldier at the siege of Diu in the Indies, being surrounded by the enemy, and having no ball to charge his musket, pulled out one of his teeth, and with it supplied the place of a bullet.

[111] The italics indicate that there is nothing in the original corresponding to these lines.--_Ed._

[112] See Virgil's Æneid, bk. ii.--_Ed._

[113] Quiloa is an island, with a town of the same name, on the east coast of Africa.--_Ed._

[114] _But heavenly Love's fair queen._--When GAMA arrived in the East, the Moors were the only people who engrossed the trade of those parts. Jealous of such formidable rivals as the Portuguese, they employed every artifice to accomplish the destruction of GAMA'S fleet. As the Moors were acquainted with these seas and spoke the Arabic language, GAMA was obliged to employ them both as pilots and interpreters. The circumstance now mentioned by Camoëns is an historical fact. "The Moorish pilot," says De Barros, "intended to conduct the Portuguese into Quiloa, telling them that place was inhabited by Christians; but a sudden storm arising, drove the fleet from that shore, where death or slavery would have been the certain fate of GAMA and his companions. The villainy of the pilot was afterwards discovered. As GAMA was endeavouring to enter the port of Mombaz his ship struck on a sand-bank, and finding their purpose of bringing him into the harbour defeated, two of the Moorish pilots leaped into the sea and swam ashore. Alarmed at this tacit acknowledgment of guilt, GAMA ordered two other Moorish pilots who remained on board to be examined by whipping, who, after some time, made a full confession of their intended villainy. This discovery greatly encouraged GAMA and his men, who now interpreted the sudden storm which had driven them from Quiloa as a miraculous interposition of Divine Providence in their favour.

[115] _i.e._ Mohammed.--_Ed._

[116] After GAMA had been driven from Quiloa by a sudden storm, the assurances of the Mozambique pilot, that the city was chiefly inhabited by Christians, strongly inclined him to enter the harbour of Mombas.

[117] "There were," says Osorius, "ten men in the fleet under sentence of death, whose lives had been spared on condition that, wherever they might be landed, they should explore the country and make themselves acquainted with the manners and laws of the people."

During the reign of Emmanuel, and his predecessor John II., few criminals were executed in Portugal. These great and political princes employed the lives which were forfeited to the public in the most dangerous undertakings of public utility. In their foreign expeditions the condemned criminals were sent upon the most hazardous undertakings. If death was their fate, it was the punishment they had merited: if successful in what was required, their crimes were expiated; and often they rendered their country the greatest atonement for their guilt which men in their circumstances could possibly make. What multitudes every year, in the prime of their life, end their days in Great Britain by the hands of the executioner! That the legislature _might_ devise means to make the greatest part of these lives useful to society is a fact, which surely cannot be disputed; though, perhaps, the remedy of an evil so shocking to humanity may be at some distance.

[118] Semele was the mother of Bacchus, but, as he was prematurely born, Jupiter, his father, sewed him up in his thigh until he came to maturity.--_Ed._

[119]

    _On it, the picture of that shape he placed,       In which the Holy Spirit did alight,     The picture of the dove, so white, so chaste,       On the blest Virgin's head, so chaste, so white._

In these lines, the best of all Fanshaw's, the happy repetition "so chaste, so white," is a beauty which, though not contained in the original, the present translator was unwilling to lose.

[120] See the Preface.

[121] When GAMA lay at anchor among the islands of St. George, near Mozambique, "there came three Ethiopians on board (says Faria y Sousa) who, seeing St. Gabriel painted on the poop, fell on their knees in token of their Christianity, which had been preached to them in the primitive times, though now corrupted." Barros, c. 4, and Castaneda, l. i. c. 9, report, that the Portuguese found two or three Abyssinian Christians in the city of Mombas, who had an oratory in their house. The following short account of the Christians of the East may perhaps be acceptable. In the south parts of Malabar, about 200,000 of the inhabitants professed Christianity before the arrival of the Portuguese. They use the Syriac language in their services, and read the Scriptures in that tongue, and call themselves Christians of St. Thomas, by which apostle their ancestors had been converted. For 1300 years they had been under the Patriarch of Babylon, who appointed their _Mutran_, or archbishop. Dr. Geddes, in his History of the Church of Malabar, relates that Francisco Roz, a Jesuit missionary, complained to Menezes, the Portuguese archbishop of Goa, that when he showed these people an image of the Virgin Mary, they cried out, "Away with that filthiness, we are Christians, and do not adore idols."

Dom Frey Aleixo de Menezes, archbishop of Goa, "endeavoured to thrust upon the church of Malabar the whole mass of popery, which they were before unacquainted with."--Millar's History of the Propag. of Christianity.

[122] Venus.

[123] _Proud of her kindred birth._--The French translator has the following note on this place:--"This is one of the places which discover our author's intimate acquaintance with mythology, and at the same time how much attention his allegory requires. Many readers, on finding that the protectress of the Lusians sprung from the sea, would be apt to exclaim, Behold, the birth of the terrestrial Venus! How can a nativity so infamous be ascribed to the celestial Venus, who represents Religion? I answer, that Camoëns had not his eye on those fables, which derive the birth of Venus from the foam of the waves, mixed with the blood which flowed from the dishonest wound of Saturn: he carries his views higher; his Venus is from a fable more noble. Nigidius relates that two fishes one day conveyed an egg to the seashore. This egg was hatched by two pigeons whiter than snow, and gave birth to the Assyrian Venus, which, in the pagan theology, is the same with the celestial. She instructed mankind in religion, gave them the lessons of virtue and the laws of equity. Jupiter, in reward of her labours, promised to grant her whatever she desired. She prayed him to give immortality to the two fishes, who had been instrumental in her birth, and the fishes were accordingly placed in the Zodiac, the sign Pisces.... This fable agrees perfectly with Religion, as I could clearly show; but I think it more proper to leave to the ingenious reader the pleasure of tracing the allegory."

[124] _Doto, Nyse, and Nerine._--Cloto, or Clotho, as Castera observes, has by some error crept into almost all the Portuguese editions of the Lusiad. Clotho was one of the Fates, and neither Hesiod, Homer, nor Virgil has given such a name to any of the Nereids; but in the ninth Æneid Doto is mentioned--

            ----_magnique jubebo     Æquoris esse Deas, qualis Nereïa Doto     Et Galatea secant spumantem pectore pontum._

The Nereids, in the Lusiad, says Castera, are the virtues divine and human. In the first book they accompany the Portuguese fleet--

        ----_before the bounding prows     The lovely forms of sea-born nymphs arose._


[125] The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer.--PROVERBS xxx. 25.--_Ed._

[126] Imitated from Virgil--

    _Cymothoë simul, et Triton adnixus acuto     Detrudunt naves scopulo._--VIRG. Æn. i.


[127] Latona, says the fable, flying from the serpent Python, and faint with thirst, came to a pond, where some Lycian peasants were cutting the bulrushes. In revenge of the insults which they offered her in preventing her to drink, she changed them into frogs. This fable, says Castera, like almost all the rest, is drawn from history. Philocorus, as cited by Boccace, relates, that the Rhodians having declared war against the Lycians, were assisted by some troops from Delos, who carried the image of Latona on their standards. A detachment of these going to drink at a lake in Lycia, a crowd of peasants endeavoured to prevent them. An encounter ensued; the peasants fled to the lake for shelter, and were there slain. Some months afterwards their companions came in search of their corpses, and finding an unusual quantity of frogs, imagined, according to the superstition of their age, that the souls of their friends appeared to them under that metamorphosis.

To some it may, perhaps, appear needless to vindicate Camoëns, in a point wherein he is supported by the authority of Homer and Virgil. Yet, as many readers are infected with the _sang froid_ of a Bossu or a Perrault, an observation in defence of our poet cannot be thought impertinent. If we examine the finest effusions of genius, we shall find that the most genuine poetical feeling has often dictated those similes which are drawn from familiar and low objects. The sacred writers, and the greatest poets of every nation, have used them. We may, therefore, conclude that the criticism which condemns them is a refinement not founded on nature. But, allowing them admissible, it must be observed, that to render them pleasing requires a peculiar happiness and delicacy of management. When the poet attains this indispensable point, he gives a striking proof of his elegance, and of his mastership in his art. That the similes of the emmets and of the frogs in Camoëns are happily expressed and applied, is indisputable. In that of the frogs there is a peculiar propriety, both in the comparison itself, and in the allusion to the fable, as it was the intent of the poet to represent not only the flight, but the baseness of the Moors. The simile he seems to have copied from Dante, Inf. Cant. 9--

    _Come le rane innanzi a la nemica     Biscia per l'acqua si dileguan tutte     Fin che a la terra ciascuna s'abbica. _

And Cant. 22--

    _E come a l'orlo de l'acqua d'un fosso     Stan li ranocchi pur col muso fuori     Sì che celano i piedi, e l'altro grosso. _


[128] Barros and Castaneda, in relating this part of the voyage of Gama, say that the fleet, just as they were entering the port of Mombas, were driven back as it were by an invisible hand. By a subsequent note it will appear that the safety of the Armada depended upon this circumstance.

[129] Venus.

[130] As the planet of Jupiter is in the sixth heaven, the author has with propriety there placed the throne of that god.--CASTERA.

[131] "I am aware of the objection, that this passage is by no means applicable to the celestial Venus. I answer once for all, that the names and adventures of the pagan divinities are so blended and uncertain in mythology, that a poet is at great liberty to adapt them to his allegory as he pleases. Even the fables, which may appear as profane, even these contain historical, physical, and moral truths, which fully atone for the seeming licentiousness of the letter. I could prove this in many instances, but let the present suffice. Paris, son of Priam, king of Troy, spent his first years as a shepherd in the country. At this time Juno, Minerva, and Venus disputed for the apple of gold, which was destined to be given to the most beautiful goddess. They consented that Paris should be their judge. His equity claimed this honour. He saw them all naked. Juno promised him riches, Minerva the sciences, but he decided in favour of Venus, who promised him the possession of the most beautiful woman. What a ray of light is contained in this philosophical fable! Paris represents a studious man, who, in the silence of solitude, seeks the supreme good. Juno is the emblem of riches and dignities; Minerva, that of the sciences purely human; Venus is that of religion, which contains the sciences both human and divine; the charming female, which she promises to the Trojan shepherd, is that divine wisdom which gives tranquillity of heart. A judge so philosophical as Paris would not hesitate a moment to whom to give the apple of gold."--CASTERA.

[132] "The allegory of Camoëns is here obvious. If Acteon, and the slaves of their violent passions, could discover the beauties of true religion, they would be astonished and reclaimed: according to the expression of Seneca, 'Si virtus cerni posset oculis corporeis, omnes ad amorem suum pelliceret.'"--CASTERA.

[133] "That is Divine love, which always accompanies religion. Behold how our author insinuates the excellence of his moral!"--CASTERA.

As the French translator has acknowledged, there is no doubt but several readers will be apt to decry this allegorical interpretation of the machinery of Camoëns. Indeed there is nothing more easy than to discover a system of allegory in the simplest narrative. The reign of Henry VIII. is as susceptible of it as any fable in the heathen mythology. Nay, perhaps, more so. Under the names of Henry, More, Wolsey, Cromwell, Pole, Cranmer, etc., all the war of the passions, with their different catastrophes, might be delineated. Though it may be difficult to determine how far, yet one may venture to affirm that Homer and Virgil sometimes allegorised. The poets, however, who wrote on the revival of letters have left us in no doubt; we have their own authority for it that their machinery is allegorical. Not only the pagan deities, but the more modern adventures of enchantment were used by them to delineate the affections, and the trials and rewards of the virtues and vices. Tasso published a treatise to prove that his _Gerusalemme Liberata_ is no other than the Christian spiritual warfare. And Camoëns, as observed in the preface, has twice asserted that his machinery is allegorical. The poet's assertion, and the taste of the age in which he wrote, sufficiently vindicate and explain the allegory of the Lusiad.

[134] The following speech of Venus and the reply of Jupiter, are a fine imitation from the first Æneid, and do great honour to the classical taste of the Portuguese poet.

[135] Imitated from Virg. Æn. i.--

    _Olli subridens hominum sator atque Deorum,     Vultu, quo coelum tempestatesque serenat,     Oscula libavit natæ_----


[136] Ulysses, king of Ithaka.--_Ed._

[137] _i.e._, the slave of Calypso, who offered Ulysses immortality on condition that he would live with her.

[138] Æneas.--_Ed._

[139]

    "Far on the right her dogs foul Scylla hides,     Charybdis roaring on the left presides,     And in her greedy whirlpool sucks the tides."

    DRYDEN'S Virg. Æn. iii.--_Ed._


[140] After the Portuguese had made great conquests in India, GAMA had the honour to be appointed Viceroy. In 1524, when sailing thither to take possession of his government, his fleet was so becalmed on the coast of Cambaya that the ships stood motionless on the water, when in an instant, without the least change of the weather, the waves were shaken with a violent agitation, like trembling. The ships were tossed about, the sailors were terrified, and in the utmost confusion, thinking themselves lost. Gama, perceiving it to be the effect of an earthquake, with his wonted heroism and prudence, exclaimed, "_Of what are you afraid? Do you not see how the ocean trembles under its sovereigns!_" Barros, l. 9, c. 1, and Faria, c. 9, say, that such as lay sick of fevers were cured by the fright.

[141] Ormuz, or Hormuz, an island at the entrance of the Persian Gulf, once a great commercial dépôt.--_Ed._

[142] Both Barros and Castaneda relate this fact. Albuquerque, during the war of Ormuz, having given battle to the Persians and Moors, by the violence of a sudden wind the arrows of the latter were driven back upon themselves, whereby many of their troops were wounded.

[143] Calicut was a seaport town of Malabar, more properly _Colicodu_.

[144]

    _Hinc ope barbarica, variisque Antonius armis,     Victor ab Auroræ populis et littore rubro,     Ægyptum, viresque Orientis, et ultima secum     Bactra vehit: sequiturque nefas! Ægyptia conjux.     Una omnes ruere, ac totum spumare, reductis     Convulsum remis rostrisque tridentibus, æquor.     Alta petunt: pelago credas innare revulsas     Cycladas, aut montes concurrere montibus altos:     Tanta mole viri turritis puppibus instant.     Stuppea flamma manu telisque volatile ferrum     Spargitur: arva nova Neptunia cæde rubescunt.     ----Sævit medio in certamine Maxors._

    VIRG. Æn. viii.


[145] Antony.

[146] Gades, now Cadiz, an ancient and still flourishing seaport of Spain.--_Ed._

[147] _The Lusian pride, etc._--Magalhaens, a most celebrated navigator, neglected by Emmanuel, king of Portugal, offered his service to the king of Spain, under whom he made most important discoveries round the Straits which bear his name, and in parts of South America. Of this hero see further, Lusiad X., in the notes.

[148] Mercury.

[149] Mombas, a seaport town on an island of the same name off the coast of Zanguebar, East Africa.--_Ed._

[150] Mercury, so called from Cyll{=e}n{=e}, the highest mountain in the Peloponnesus, where he had a temple, and on which spot he is said to have been born.--_Ed._

[151] Petasus.

[152] The caduceus, twined with serpents.--_Ed._

[153]

    "But first he grasps within his awful hand     The mark of sovereign power, the magic wand:     With this he draws the ghosts from hollow graves,     With this he drives them down the Stygian waves,     With this he seals in sleep the wakeful sight,     And eyes, though closed in death, restores to light."

    ÆNEID, iv. 242. (Dryden's Trans.)


[154] Mercury.

[155] Diomede, a tyrant of Thrace, who fed his horses with human flesh; a thing, says the grave Castera, almost incredible. Busiris was a king of Egypt, who sacrificed strangers.

    _Quis ... illaudati nescit Busiridis aras?_

    VIRG. Geor. iii.

Hercules vanquished both these tyrants, and put them to the same punishments which their cruelty had inflicted on others. Isocrates composed an oration in honour of Busiris; a masterly example of Attic raillery and satire.

[156] _i.e._ the equator.

[157] Hermes is the Greek name for the god Mercury.

[158] Having mentioned the escape of the Moorish pilots, Osorius proceeds: Rex deinde homines magno cum silentio scaphis et lintribus submittebat, qui securibus anchoralia nocte præciderent. Quod nisi fuisset à nostris singulari Gamæ industria vigilatum, et insidiis scelerati illius regis occursum, nostri in summum vitæ discrimen incidissent.

[159] Mercury.

[160] A city and kingdom of the same name on the east coast of Africa.

[161] Ascension Day.

[162] Jesus Christ.

[163]

    _Vimen erat dum stagna subit, processerat undis     Gemma fuit._

    CLAUD.

    _Sic et coralium, quo primum contigit auras,     Tempore durescit, mollis fuit herba sub undis._

    OVID.


[164] There were on board Gama's fleet several persons skilled in the Oriental languages.--OSOR.

[165] See the Eighth Odyssey, etc.

[166] Castera's note on this place is so characteristic of a Frenchman, that the reader will perhaps be pleased to see it transcribed. In his text he says, "_Toi qui occupes si dignement le rang supreme._" "_Le Poete dit_," says he, in the note, "_Tens de Rey o officio, Toi qui sais le metier de Roi_. (The poet says, _thou who holdest the business of a king_.) I confess," he adds, "I found a strong inclination to translate this sentence literally. I find much nobleness in it. However, I submitted to the opinion of some friends, who were afraid that the ears of Frenchmen would be shocked at the word _business_ applied to a king. It is true, nevertheless, that Royalty is a _business_. Philip II. of Spain was convinced of it, as we may discern from one of his letters. _Hallo_, says he, _me muy embaraçado_, &c. _I am so entangled and encumbered with the multiplicity of business, that I have not a moment to myself. In truth, we kings hold a laborious office_ (or trade); _there is little reason to envy us._"

[167] The propriety and artfulness of Homer's speeches have been often and justly admired. Camoëns is peculiarly happy in the same department of the Epopæa. The speech of Gama's herald to the King of Melinda is a striking instance of it. The compliments with which it begins have a direct tendency to the favours afterwards to be asked. The assurances of the innocence, the purpose of the voyagers, and the greatness of their king, are happily touched. The exclamation on the barbarous treatment they had experienced--"Not wisdom saved us, but Heaven's own care"--are masterly insinuations. Their barbarous treatment is again repeated in a manner to move compassion: Alas! what could they fear? etc., is reasoning joined with pathos. That they were conducted to the King of Melinda by Heaven, and were by Heaven assured of his truth, is a most delicate compliment, and in the true spirit of the epic poem. The apology for Gama's refusal to come on shore is exceeding artful. It conveys a proof of the greatness of the Portuguese sovereign, and affords a compliment to loyalty, which could not fail to be acceptable to a monarch.

[168] Rockets.

[169] The Tyrian purple, obtained from the _murex_, a species of shell-fish, was very famous among the ancients.--_Ed._

[170] A girdle, or ornamented belt, worn over one shoulder and across the breast.--_Ed._

[171] Camoëns seems to have his eye on the picture of Gama, which is thus described by _Faria y Sousa_: "He is painted with a black cap, cloak, and breeches edged with velvet, all slashed, through which appears the crimson lining, the doublet of crimson satin, and over it his armour inlaid with gold."

[172] The admiration and friendship of the King of Melinda, so much insisted on by Camoëns, is a judicious imitation of Virgil's Dido. In both cases such preparation was necessary to introduce the long episodes which follow.

[173] The Moors, who are Mohammedans, disciples of the Arabian prophet, who was descended from Abraham through the line of Hagar.--_Ed._

[174] The famous temple of the goddess Diana at Ephesus.--_Ed._

[175] Apollo.

[176] _Calliope._--The Muse of epic poesy, and mother of Orpheus. Daphne, daughter of the river Peneus, flying from Apollo, was turned into the laurel. Clytia was metamorphosed into the sun-flower, and Leucothoë, who was buried alive by her father for yielding to the solicitations of Apollo, was by her lover changed into an incense tree.

[177] A fountain of Boeotia sacred to the Muses.--_Ed._

[178] The preface to the speech of Gama, and the description of Europe which follows, are happy imitations of the manner of Homer. When Camoëns describes countries, or musters an army, it is after the example of the great models of antiquity: by adding some characteristical feature of the climate or people, he renders his narrative pleasing, picturesque, and poetical.

[179] The Mediterranean.

[180] The Don.--_Ed._

[181] The Sea of Azof.--_Ed._

[182] Italy. In the year 409 the city of Rome was sacked, and Italy laid desolate by Alaric, king of the Gothic tribes. In mentioning this circumstance Camoëns has not fallen into the common error of little poets, who on every occasion bewail the outrage which the Goths and Vandals did to the arts and sciences. A complaint founded on ignorance. The Southern nations of Europe were sunk into the most contemptible degeneracy. The sciences, with every branch of manly literature, were almost unknown. For near two centuries no poet of note had adorned the Roman empire. Those arts only, the abuse of which have a certain and fatal tendency to enervate the mind, the arts of music and cookery, were passionately cultivated in all the refinement of effeminate abuse. The art of war was too laborious for their delicacy, and the generous warmth of heroism and patriotism was incompatible with their effeminacy. On these despicable Sybarites{*} the North poured her brave and hardy sons, who, though ignorant of polite literature, were possessed of all the manly virtues in a high degree. Under their conquests Europe wore a new face, which, however rude, was infinitely preferable to that which it had lately worn. And, however ignorance may talk of their barbarity, it is to them that England owes her constitution, which, as Montesquieu observes, they brought from the woods of Saxony.

{*} _Sybaris_, a city in Magna Grecia (South Italy), whose inhabitants were so effeminate, that they ordered all the cocks to be killed, that they might not be disturbed by their early crowing.

[183] The river Don.

[184] This was the name of an extensive forest in Germany. It exists now under different names, as the _Black Forest_, the Bohemian and the Thuringian Forest, the Hartz, etc.--_Ed._

[185] The Hellespont, or Straits of the Dardanelles.--_Ed._

[186] The Balkan Mountains separating Greece and Macedonia from the basin of the Danube, and extending from the Adriatic to the Black Sea.--_Ed._

[187] Now Constantinople.

[188] Julius Cæsar, the conqueror of Gaul, or France.--_Ed._

[189] _Faithless to the vows of lost Pyrene_, etc.--She was daughter to Bebryx, a king of Spain, and concubine to Hercules. Having wandered one day from her lover, she was destroyed by wild beasts, on one of the mountains which bear her name.

[190] Hercules, says the fable, to crown his labours, separated the two mountains Calpe and Abyla, the one in Spain, the other in Africa, in order to open a canal for the benefit of commerce; on which the ocean rushed in, and formed the Mediterranean, the Ægean, and Euxine seas. The twin mountains Abyla and Calpe were known to the ancients by the name of the Pillars of Hercules.--See Cory's _Ancient Fragments_.

[191] The river Guadalquivir; _i.e._, in Arabic, _the great river_.--_Ed._

[192] Viriatus.--See the note on Book I. p. 9.

[193] The assassination of Viriatus.--See the note on Book I. p. 9.

[194] The name of _Saracen_ is derived from the Arabic _Es-shurk_, _the East_, and designates the Arabs who followed the banner of Mohammed.--_Ed._

[195] Don Alonzo, king of Spain, apprehensive of the superior number of the Moors, with whom he was at war, demanded assistance from Philip I. of France, and the Duke of Burgundy. According to the military spirit of the nobility of that age, no sooner was his desire known than numerous bodies of troops thronged to his standard. These, in the course of a few years, having shown signal proofs of their courage, the king distinguished the leaders with different marks of his regard. To Henry, a younger son of the Duke of Burgundy, he gave his daughter Teresa in marriage, with the sovereignty of the countries to the south of Galicia, commissioning him to enlarge his boundaries by the expulsion of the Moors. Under the government of this great man, who reigned by the title of Count, his dominion was greatly enlarged, and became more rich and populous than before. The two provinces of Entre Minho e Douro, and Tras os Montes, were subdued, with that part of Beira which was held by the Moorish king of Lamego, whom he constrained to pay tribute. Many thousands of Christians, who had either lived in miserable subjection to the Moors, or in desolate independency in the mountains, took shelter under the protection of Count Henry. Great multitudes of the Moors also chose rather to submit, than be exposed to the severities and the continual feuds and seditions of their own governors. These advantages, added to the great fertility of the soil of Henry's dominions, will account for the numerous armies, and the frequent wars of the first sovereigns of Portugal.

[196] Camoëns, in making the founder of the Portuguese monarchy a younger son of the King of Hungary, has followed the old chronologist Galvan. The Spanish and Portuguese historians differ widely in their accounts of the parentage of this gallant stranger. Some bring him from Constantinople, and others from the house of Lorraine. But the clearest and most probable account of him is in the chronicle of Fleury, wherein is preserved a fragment of French history, written by a Benedictine monk in the beginning of the twelfth century, and in the time of Count Henry. By this it appears, that he was a younger son of Henry, the only son of Robert, the first duke of Burgundy, who was a younger brother of Henry I. of France. Fanshaw having an eye to this history, has taken the unwarrantable liberty to alter the fact as mentioned by his author.

    _Amongst these Henry, saith the history,     A younger son of France, and a brave prince,     Had Portugal in lot.----     And the same king did his own daughter tie     To him in wedlock, to infer from thence     His firmer love._

Nor are the historians agreed on the birth of Donna Teresa, the spouse of Count Henry. Brandam, and other Portuguese historians, are at great pains to prove she was the legitimate daughter of Alonzo and the beautiful Ximena de Guzman. But it appears from the more authentic chronicle of Fleury, that Ximena was only his concubine. And it is evident from all the historians, that Donna Urraca, the heiress of her father's kingdom, was younger than her half-sister, the wife of Count Henry.

[197] The Mohammedan Arabs.

[198] _Deliver'd Judah Henry's might confess'd_.--His expedition to the Holy Land is mentioned by some monkish writers, but from the other parts of his history it is highly improbable.

[199] Jerusalem.

[200] Godfrey of Bouillon.

[201] Don Alonzo Enriquez, son of Count Henry, had only entered into his third year when his father died. His mother assumed the reins of government, and appointed Don Fernando Perez de Traba to be her minister. When the young prince was in his eighteenth year, some of the nobility, who either envied the power of Don Perez, or suspected his intention to marry the queen, and exclude the lawful heir, easily persuaded the young Count to take arms, and assume the sovereignty. A battle ensued, in which the prince was victorious. Teresa, it is said, retired into the castle of Legonaso, where she was taken prisoner by her son, who condemned her to perpetual imprisonment, and ordered chains to be put upon her legs. That Don Alonso made war against his mother, vanquished her party, and that she died in prison about two years after, A.D. 1130, are certain. But the cause of the war, that his mother was married to, or intended to marry, Don Perez, and that she was put in chains, are uncertain.

[202] Guimaraens was the scene of a very sanguinary battle.--_Ed._

[203] The Scylla here alluded to was, according to fable, the daughter of Nisus, king of Megara, who had a purple lock, in which lay the fate of his kingdom. Minos of Crete made war against him, for whom Scylla conceived so violent a passion, that she cut off the fatal lock while her father slept. Minos on this was victorious, but rejected the love of the unnatural daughter, who in despair flung herself from a rock, and in the fall was changed into a lark.

[204] Guimaraens, the scene of a famous battle.--_Ed._

[205] Some historians having related this story of Egas, add, "All this is very pleasant and entertaining, but we see no sufficient reason to affirm that there is one syllable of it true."

[206] When Darius laid siege to Babylon, one of his lords, named Zopyrus, having cut off his own nose and ears, persuaded the enemy that he had received these indignities from the cruelty of his master. Being appointed to a chief command in Babylon, he betrayed the city to Darius.--Vid. Justin's History.

[207] Spanish and Portuguese histories afford several instances of the Moorish chiefs being attended in the field of battle by their mistresses, and of the romantic gallantry and Amazonian courage of these ladies.

[208] Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons, who, after having signalized her valour at the siege of Troy, was killed by Achilles.

[209] The Greek name of Troy.--_Ed._

[210] The Amazons.

[211] Thermodon, a river of Scythia in the country of the Amazons.

    _Quales Threïciæ cum flumina Thermodontis     Pulsant et pictis bellantur Amazones armis:     Seu circum Hippolyten, seu cum se Martia curru     Penthesilea refert: magnoque ululante tumultu     Foeminea exsultant lunatis agmina peltis._ VIRG. Æn. xi. 659.


[212] It may, perhaps, be agreeable to the reader, to see the description of a bull-fight as given by Homer.

    _As when a lion, rushing from his den,     Amidst the plain of some wide-water'd fen,_     (_Where num'rous oxen, as at ease they feed,     At large expatiate o'er the ranker mead_;)     _Leaps on the herds before the herdsman's eyes:     The trembling herdsman far to distance flies:     Some lordly bull_ (_the rest dispers'd and fled_)     _He singles out, arrests, and lays him dead.     Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew     All Greece in heaps; but one he seiz'd, and slew     Mycenian Periphas.----_

    POPE, II. xv.


[213] A shirt of mail, formed of small iron rings.

[214] Mohammed.

[215] There is a passage in Xenophon, upon which perhaps Camoëns had his eye. [Greek: Epei de elêxen hê machê, parên idein, tên men gên haimati pephyrmenên], &c. "When the battle was over, one might behold through the whole extent of the field the ground purpled with blood; the bodies of friends and enemies stretched over each other, the shields pierced, the spears broken, and the drawn swords, some scattered on the earth, some plunged in the bosoms of the slain, and some yet grasped in the hands of the dead soldiers."

[216] This memorable battle was fought in the plains of _Ourique_, in 1139. The engagement lasted six hours; the Moors were totally routed with incredible slaughter. On the field of battle Alonzo was proclaimed King of Portugal. The Portuguese writers have given many fabulous accounts of this victory. Some affirm that the Moorish army amounted to 380,000, others, 480,000, and others swell it to 600,000, whereas Don Alonzo's did not exceed 13,000. Miracles must also be added. Alonzo, they tell us, being in great perplexity, sat down to comfort his mind by the perusal of the Holy Scriptures. Having read the story of Gideon, he sunk into a deep sleep, in which he saw a very old man in a remarkable dress come into his tent, and assure him of victory. His chamberlain coming in, awoke him, and told him there was an old man very importunate to speak with him. Don Alonzo ordered him to be brought in, and no sooner saw him than he knew him to be the old man whom he had seen in his dream. This venerable person acquainted him that he was a fisherman, and had led a life of penance for sixty years on an adjacent rock, where it had been revealed to him, that if the count marched his army the next morning, as soon as he heard a certain bell ring, he should receive the strongest assurance of victory. Accordingly, at the ringing of the bell, the count put his army in motion, and suddenly beheld in the eastern sky the figure of the cross, and Christ upon it, who promised him a complete victory, and commanded him to accept the title of king, if it were offered him by the army. The same writers add, that as a standing memorial of this miraculous event, Don Alonzo changed the arms which his father had given, of a cross azure in a field argent, for five escutcheons, each charged with five bezants, in memory of the wounds of Christ. Others assert, that he gave, in a field argent, five escutcheons azure in the form of a cross, each charged with five bezants argent, placed saltierwise, with a point sable, in memory of five wounds he himself received, and of five Moorish kings slain in the battle. There is an old record, said to be written by Don Alonzo, in which the story of the vision is related upon his majesty's oath. The Spanish critics, however, have discovered many inconsistencies in it. They find the language intermixed with phrases not then in use: and it bears the date of the year of our Lord, at a time when that era had not been introduced into Spain.

[217] Troy.

[218] The tradition, that Lisbon was built by Ulysses, and thence called _Olyssipolis_, is as common as, and of equal authority with, that which says, that Brute landed a colony of Trojans in England, and gave the name of Britannia to the island.

[219] The conquest of Lisbon was of the utmost importance to the infant monarchy. It is one of the finest ports in the world, and before the invention of cannon, was of great strength. The old Moorish wall was flanked by seventy-seven towers, was about six miles in length, and fourteen in circumference. When besieged by Don Alonzo, according to some, it was garrisoned by an army of 200,000 men. This is highly incredible. However, that it was strong and well garrisoned is certain, as also that Alonzo owed the conquest of it to a fleet of adventurers, who were going to the Holy Land, the greater part of whom were English. One Udal op Rhys, in his tour through Portugal, says, that Alonzo gave them Almada, on the side of the Tagus opposite to Lisbon, and that Villa Franca was peopled by them, which they called Cornualla, either in honour of their native country, or from the rich meadows in its neighbourhood, where immense herds of cattle are kept, as in the English Cornwall.

[220] Jerusalem.

[221] _Unconquer'd towers._--This assertion of Camoëns is not without foundation, for it was by treachery that Herimeneric, the Goth, got possession of Lisbon.

[222] The aqueduct of Sertorius, here mentioned, is one of the grandest remains of antiquity. It was repaired by John III. of Portugal about A.D. 1540.

[223] Badajoz.

[224] The history of this battle wants authenticity.

[225] As already observed, there is no authentic proof that Don Alonzo used such severity to his mother as to put her in chains. Brandan says it was reported that Don Alonzo was born with both his legs growing together, and that he was cured by the prayers of his tutor, Egas Nunio. Legendary as this may appear, this however is deducible from it, that from his birth there was something amiss about his legs. When he was prisoner to his son-in-law, Don Fernando, king of Leon, he recovered his liberty ere his leg, which was fractured in the battle, was restored, on condition that as soon as he was able to mount on horseback, he should come to Leon, and in person do homage for his dominions. This condition, so contrary to his coronation agreement, he found means to avoid. He ever after affected to drive in a calash, and would never mount on horseback more. The superstitious of those days ascribed this infirmity to the curses of his mother.

[226] _Phasis._--A river of Colchis.

[227] A frontier town on the Nile, bordering on Nubia.

[228] _Colchis._--A country of Asia Minor bordering on the Black Sea.--_Ed._

[229]

_Tu quoque littoribus nostris, Æneia nutrix, Æternam moriens famam, Caieta, dedisti._ VIRG. Æn. vii.

[230] _i.e._ Tangiers, opposite to Gibraltar.--_Ed._

[231] This should be _Emir el Moumeneen_, _i.e._, Commander of the Faithful.--_Ed._

[232] The Mondego is the largest river having its rise within the kingdom of Portugal and entering no other state.--_Ed._

[233] _Miramolin._--Not the name of a person, but a title, _quasi Sultan_; _the Emperor of the Faithful_.

[234] In this poetical exclamation, expressive of the sorrow of Portugal on the death of Alonzo, Camoëns has happily imitated some passages of Virgil.

        ----_Ipsæ te, Tityre, pinus,     Ipsi te fontes, ipsa hæc arbusta vocabant._

    ECL. i.

        ----_Eurydicen vox ipsa et frigida lingua,     Ah miseram Eurydicen, anima fugiente, vocabat:     Eurydicen toto referebant flumine ripæ._

    GEORG. iv.

    ----_littus, Hyla, Hyla, omne sonaret._

    ECL. vi.


[235] The Guadalquiver, the largest river in Spain.--_Ed._

[236] The Portuguese, in their wars with the Moors, were several times assisted by the English and German crusaders. In the present instance the fleet was mostly English, the troops of which nation were, according to agreement, rewarded with the plunder, which was exceeding rich, of the city of Silves. _Nuniz de Leon as cronicas dos Reis de Port_, A.D. 1189.--_Ed._

[237] Barbarossa, A.D. 1189.--_Ed._

[238] _Unlike the Syrian_ (rather _Assyrian_).--Sardanapalus.

[239] _When Rome's proud tyrant far'd._--Heliogabalus, infamous for his gluttony.

[240] Alluding to the history of Phalaris.

[241] Camoëns, who was quite an enthusiast for the honour of his country, has in this instance disguised the truth of history. Don Sancho was by no means the weak prince here represented, nor did the miseries of his reign proceed from himself. The clergy were the sole authors of his, and the public, calamities. The Roman See was then in the height of its power, which it exerted in the most tyrannical manner. The ecclesiastical courts had long claimed the sole right to try an ecclesiastic: and, to prohibit a priest to say mass for a twelve-month, was by the brethren, his judges, esteemed a sufficient punishment for murder, or any other capital crime. Alonzo II., the father of Don Sancho, attempted to establish the authority of the king's courts of justice over the offending clergy. For this the Archbishop of Braga excommunicated Gonzalo Mendez, the chancellor; and Honorius, the pope, excommunicated the king, and put his dominions under an interdict. The exterior offices of religion were suspended, the people fell into the utmost dissoluteness of manners; Mohammedanism made great advances, and public confusion everywhere prevailed. By this policy the Church constrained the nobility to urge the king to a full submission to the papal chair. While a negotiation for this purpose was on foot Alonzo died, and left his son to struggle with an enraged and powerful clergy. Don Sancho was just, affable, brave, and an enamoured husband. On this last virtue faction first fixed its envenomed fangs. The queen was accused of arbitrary influence over her husband; and, according to the superstition of that age, she was believed to have disturbed his senses by an enchanted draught. Such of the nobility as declared in the king's favour were stigmatized, and rendered odious, as the creatures of the queen. The confusions which ensued were fomented by Alonso, Earl of Bologna, the king's brother, by whom the king was accused as the author of them. In short, by the assistance of the clergy and Pope Innocent IV., Sancho was deposed, and soon after died at Toledo. The beautiful queen, Donna Mencia, was seized upon, and conveyed away by one Raymond Portocarrero, and was never heard of more. Such are the triumphs of faction!

[242] Alexander the Great.

[243] Mondego, the largest exclusively Portuguese river.--_Ed._

[244] The _baccaris_, or Lady's glove, a herb to which the Druids and ancient poets ascribed magical virtues.

    ----_Baccare frontem     Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro._

    VIRG. Ecl. vii.


[245] Semiramis, who is said to have invaded India.--_Ed._

[246] Attila, a king of the Huns, surnamed "The Scourge of God." He lived in the fifth century. He may be reckoned among the greatest of conquerors.

[247] _His much-lov'd bride._--The Princess Mary. She was a lady of great beauty and virtue, but was exceedingly ill used by her husband, who was violently attached to his mistresses, though he owed his crown to the assistance of his father-in-law, the King of Portugal.

[248]

    _By night our fathers' shades confess their fear,     Their shrieks of terror from the tombs we hear.--_

Camoëns says, "A mortos faz espanto;" to give this elegance in English required a paraphrase. There is something wildly great, and agreeable to the superstition of that age, to suppose that the dead were troubled in their graves on the approach of so terrible an army. The French translator, contrary to the original, ascribes this terror to the ghost of only one prince, by which this stroke of Camoëns, in the spirit of Shakespeare, is reduced to a piece of unmeaning frippery.

[249] The Muliya, a river of Morocco.--_Ed._

[250] See the first Æneid.

[251] Goliath, the Philistine champion.--_Ed._

[252] David, afterwards king of Israel.--_Ed._

[253] _Though wove._--It may perhaps be objected that this is ungrammatical. But--

         ----Usus     Quem penes arbitrium est, et jus et norma loquendi.

and Dryden, Pope, etc., often use _wove_ as a participle in place of the harsh-sounding _woven_, a word almost incompatible with the elegance of versification.

[254] Hannibal, who, as a child, was compelled to swear perpetual hostility to the Romans.--_Ed._

[255] Where the last great battle between Hannibal and the Romans took place, in which the Romans sustained a crushing defeat.--_Ed._

[256] When the soldiers of Marius complained of thirst, he pointed to a river near the camp of the Ambrones. "There," says he, "you may drink, but it must be purchased with blood." "Lead us on," they replied, "that we may have something liquid, though it be blood." The Romans, forcing their way to the river, the channel was filled with the dead bodies of the slain.--Vid. Plutarch's Lives.

[257] This unfortunate lady, Donna Inez de Castro, was the daughter of a Castilian gentleman, who had taken refuge in the court of Portugal. Her beauty and accomplishments attracted the regard of Don Pedro, the king's eldest son, a prince of a brave and noble disposition. La Neufville, Le Clede, and other historians, assert that she was privately married to the prince ere she had any share in his bed. Nor was his conjugal fidelity less remarkable than the ardour of his passion. Afraid, however, of his father's resentment, the severity of whose temper he knew, his intercourse with Donna Inez passed at the court as an intrigue of gallantry. On the accession of Don Pedro the Cruel to the throne of Castile many of the disgusted nobility were kindly received by Don Pedro, through the interest of his beloved Inez. The favour shown to these Castilians gave great uneasiness to the politicians. A thousand evils were foreseen from the prince's attachment to his Castilian mistress: even the murder of his children by his deceased spouse, the princess Constantia, was surmised; and the enemies of Donna Inez, finding the king willing to listen, omitted no opportunity to increase his resentment against the unfortunate lady. The prince was about his twenty-eighth year when his amour with his beloved Inez commenced.

[258]

    _Ad coelum tendens ardentia lumina frustra,     Lumina nam teneras arcebant vincula palmas._

    VIRG. Æn. ii.


[259] Romulus and Remus, who were said to have been suckled by a wolf.--_Ed._

[260] It has been observed by some critics, that Milton on every occasion is fond of expressing his admiration of music, particularly of the song of the nightingale, and the full woodland choir. If in the same manner we are to judge of the favourite taste of Homer, we shall find it of a less delicate kind. He is continually describing the feast, the huge chine, the savoury viands on the glowing coals, and the foaming bowl. The ruling passion of Camoëns is also strongly marked in his writings. One may venture to affirm, that there is no poem of equal length that abounds with so many impassioned encomiums on the fair sex as the Lusiad. The genius of Camoëns seems never so pleased as when he is painting the variety of female charms; he feels all the magic of their allurements, and riots in his descriptions of the happiness and miseries attendant on the passion of love. As he wrote from his feelings, these parts of his works have been particularly honoured with the attention of the world.

[261] To give the character of Alphonso IV. will throw light on this inhuman transaction. He was an undutiful son, an unnatural brother, and a cruel father, a great and fortunate warrior, diligent in the execution of the laws, and a Macchiavellian politician. His maxim was that of the Jesuits; so that a contemplated good might be attained, he cared not how villainous might be the means employed. When the enemies of Inez had persuaded him that her death was necessary to the welfare of the state, he took a journey to Coimbra, that he might see the lady, when the prince, his son, was absent on a hunting party. Donna Inez, with her children, threw herself at his feet. The king was moved with the distress of the beautiful suppliant, when his three counsellors, Alvaro Gonsalez, Diego Lopez Pacheco, and Pedro Coello, reproaching him for his disregard to the state, he relapsed to his former resolution. She was then dragged from his presence, and brutally murdered by the hands of his three counsellors, who immediately returned to the king with their daggers reeking with the innocent blood of his daughter-in-law. Alonzo, says La Neufville, avowed the horrid assassination, as if he had done nothing of which he ought to be ashamed.

[262] Pyrrhus, son of Achilles: he was also called Neoptolemus. He sacrificed Polyxena, daughter of Priam king of Troy, to the manes of his father. Euripides and Sophocles each wrote a tragedy having the sacrifice of Polyxena for the subject. Both have unfortunately perished.--_Ed._

[263] Hecuba, mother of Polyxena, and wife of Priam.--_Ed._

[264] The fair Inez was crowned Queen of Portugal after her interment.

[265] Atreus, having slain the sons of Thyestes, cut them in pieces, and served them up for a repast to their own father. The sun, it is said, hid his face rather than shine on so barbarous a deed.--Ed.

[266] At an old royal castle near Mondego, there is a rivulet called the fountain of Amours. According to tradition, it was here that Don Pedro resided with his beloved Inez. The fiction of Camoëns, founded on the popular name of the rivulet, is in the spirit of Homer.

[267] When the prince was informed of the death of his beloved Inez, he was transported into the most violent fury. He took arms against his father. The country between the rivers Minho and Doura was laid desolate: but, by the interposition of the queen and the Archbishop of Braga, the prince relented, and the further horrors of a civil war were prevented. Don Alonzo was not only reconciled to his son, but laboured by every means to oblige him, and to efface from his memory the injury and insult he had received. The prince, however, still continued to discover the strongest marks of affection and grief. When he succeeded to the crown, one of his first acts was a treaty with the King of Castile, whereby each monarch engaged to give up such malcontents as should take refuge in each other's dominions. In consequence of this, Pedro Coello and Alvaro Gonsalez, who, on the death of Alonzo had fled to Castile, were sent prisoners to Don Pedro. Diego Pacheco, the third murderer, made his escape. The other two were put to death with the most exquisite tortures, and most justly merited, if torture is in any instance to be allowed. After this the king, Don Pedro, summoned an assembly of the states at Cantanedes. Here, in the presence of the Pope's nuncio, he solemnly swore on the holy Gospels, that having obtained a dispensation from Rome, he had secretly, at Braganza, espoused the Lady Inez de Castro, in the presence of the Bishop of Guarda, and of his master of the wardrobe; both of whom confirmed the truth of the oath. The Pope's Bull, containing the dispensation, was published; the body of Inez was lifted from the grave, was placed on a magnificent throne, and with the proper regalia, crowned Queen of Portugal. The nobility did homage to her skeleton, and kissed the bones of her hand. The corpse was then interred at the royal monastery of Alcobaca, with a pomp before unknown in Portugal, and with all the honours due to a queen. Her monument is still extant, where her statue is adorned with the diadem and the royal robe. This, with the legitimation of her children, and the care he took of all who had been in her service, consoled him in some degree, and rendered him more conversable than he had hitherto been; but the cloud which the death of Inez brought over the natural cheerfulness of his temper, was never totally dispersed.---- A circumstance strongly characteristic of the rage of his resentment must not be omitted. When the murderers were brought before him, he was so transported with indignation, that he struck Pedro Coello several blows on the face with the shaft of his whip.

[268] _Pedro the Just._--History cannot afford an instance of any prince who has a more eminent claim to the title of just than Pedro I. His diligence to correct every abuse was indefatigable, and when guilt was proved his justice was inexorable. He was dreadful to the evil, and beloved by the good, for he respected no persons, and his inflexible severity never digressed from the line of strict justice. An anecdote or two will throw some light on his character. A priest having killed a mason, the king dissembled his knowledge of the crime, and left the issue to the ecclesiastical court, where the priest was punished by one year's suspension from saying mass. The king on this privately ordered the mason's son to revenge the murder of his father. The young man obeyed, was apprehended, and condemned to death. When his sentence was to be confirmed by the king, Pedro enquired, what was the young man's trade. He was answered, that he followed his father's. "Well then," said the king, "I shall commute his punishment, and interdict him from meddling with stone or mortar for a twelve-month." After this he fully established the authority of the king's courts over the clergy, whom he punished with death when their crimes were capital. When solicited to refer the causes of such criminals to a higher tribunal, he would answer very calmly, "That is what I intend to do: I will send them to the highest of all tribunals, to that of their Maker and mine." Against adulterers he was particularly severe, often declaring it as his opinion, that conjugal infidelity was the source of the greatest evils, and that therefore to restrain it was the interest and duty of the sovereign. Though the fate of his beloved Inez chagrined and soured his temper, he was so far from being naturally sullen or passionate, that he was rather of a gay and sprightly disposition; he was affable and easy of access; delighted in music and dancing; was a lover of learning, a man of letters, and an elegant poet.--Vide Le Clede, Mariana, Faria.

[269] This lady, named Leonora de Tellez, was the wife of Don Juan Lorenzo Acugna, a nobleman of one of the most distinguished families in Portugal. After a sham process this marriage was dissolved, and the king privately espoused to her, though, at this time, he was publicly married by proxy to Donna Leonora of Arragon. A dangerous insurrection, headed by one Velasquez, a tailor, drove the king and his adulterous bride from Lisbon. Soon after, he caused his marriage to be publicly celebrated in the province of Entre Douro e Minho. Henry, king of Castile, being informed of the general discontent that reigned in Portugal, marched a formidable army into that kingdom, to revenge the injury offered to some of his subjects, whose ships had been unjustly seized at Lisbon. The desolation hinted at by Camoëns ensued. After the subjects of both kingdoms had severely suffered, the two kings ended the war, much to their mutual satisfaction, by an intermarriage of their illegitimate children.

[270] Judges, chap. xix. and xx.

[271] Samuel, chap. xii. 10, "The sword shall never depart from thine house."

[272] Hercules.

[273] Love compelled Hercules to spin wool.--OVID.

[274] Hannibal.

[275] Dom John was a natural brother of Fernando, being an illegitimate son of Pedro.--_Ed._

[276] _A cradled infant gave the wondrous sign._--No circumstance has ever been more ridiculed by the ancient and modern pedants than Alexander's pretensions to divinity. Some of his courtiers expostulating with him one day on the absurdity of such claim, he replied, "I know the truth of what you say, but these," (pointing to a crowd of Persians) "these know no better." The report that the Grecian army was commanded by a son of Jupiter spread terror through the East, and greatly facilitated the operations of the conqueror. The miraculous speech of the infant, attested by a few monks, was adapted to the superstition of the age of John I. and, as he was illegitimate, was of infinite service to his cause. The pretended fact, however, is differently related.

[277] Lisbon, or Ulyssipolis, supposed to be founded by Ulysses.--_Ed._

[278] _The mitred head._--Don Martin, bishop of Lisbon, a man of exemplary life. He was by birth a Castilian, which was esteemed a sufficient reason to murder him, as of the queen's party. He was thrown from the tower of his own cathedral, whither he had fled to avoid the popular fury.

[279] _The queen beheld her power, her honours lost._--Possessed of great beauty and great abilities, this bad woman was a disgrace to her sex, and a curse to the age and country which gave her birth. Her sister, Donna Maria, a lady of unblemished virtue, had been secretly married to the infant, Don Juan, the king's brother, who was passionately attached to her. Donna Maria had formerly endeavoured to dissuade her sister from the adulterous marriage with the king. In revenge of this, the queen, Leonora, persuaded Don Juan that her sister was unfaithful to his bed. The enraged husband hastened to his wife, and, without enquiry or expostulation, says Mariana, dispatched her with two strokes of his dagger. He was afterwards convinced of her innocence. Having sacrificed her honour, and her first husband, to a king, (says Faria), Leonora soon sacrificed that king to a wicked gallant, a Castilian nobleman, named Don Juan Fernandez de Andeyro. An unjust war with Castile, wherein the Portuguese were defeated by sea and land, was the first fruits of the policy of the new favourite. Andeyro one day being in a great perspiration, by some military exercise, the queen tore her veil, and publicly gave it him to wipe his face. The grand master of Avis, the king's illegitimate brother, afterwards John I., and some others, expostulated with her on the indecency of this behaviour. She dissembled her resentment, but, soon after, they were seized and committed to the castle of Evora, where a forged order for their execution was sent; but the governor suspecting some fraud, showed it to the king. Yet, such was her ascendancy over Fernando, that though convinced of her guilt, he ordered his brother to kiss the queen's hand, and thank her for his life. Soon after, Fernando died, but not till he was fully convinced of the queen's conjugal infidelity, and had given an order for the assassination of the gallant. Not long after the death of the king, the favourite Andeyro was stabbed in the palace by the grandmaster of Avis, and Don Ruy de Pereyra. The queen expressed all the transport of grief and rage, and declared she would undergo the trial-ordeal in vindication of his, and her, innocence. But this she never performed: in her vows of revenge, however, she was more punctual. Don Juan, king of Castile, who had married her only daughter and heiress, at her earnest entreaties invaded Portugal, and was proclaimed king. Don John, grand master of Avis, was proclaimed by the people protector and regent. A desperate war ensued. Queen Leonora, treated with indifference by her daughter and son-in-law, resolved on the murder of the latter, but the plot was discovered, and she was sent prisoner to Castile. The regent was besieged in Lisbon, and the city reduced to the utmost extremities, when an epidemic broke out in the Castilian army, and made such devastation, that the king suddenly raised the siege, and abandoned his views on Portugal. The happy inhabitants ascribed their deliverance to the valour and vigilance of the regent. The regent reproved their ardour, exhorted them to repair to their churches, and return thanks to God, to whose interposition he solely ascribed their safety. This behaviour increased the admiration of the people; the nobility of the first rank joined the regent's party, and many garrisons in the interest of the king of Castile opened their gates to him. An assembly of the states met at Coimbra, where it was proposed to invest the regent with the regal dignity. This he pretended to decline. Don John, son of Pedro the Just and the beautiful Inez de Castro, was by the people esteemed their lawful sovereign, but was, and had been long, detained a prisoner by the King of Castile. If the states would declare the infant, Don John, their king, the regent professed his willingness to swear allegiance to him, that he would continue to expose himself to every danger, and act as regent, till Providence restored to Portugal her lawful sovereign. The states, however, saw the necessity that the nation should have a head. The regent was unanimously elected king, and some articles in favour of liberty were added to those agreed upon at the coronation of Don Alonzo Enriquez, the first king of Portugal.

Don John I., one of the greatest of the Portuguese monarchs, was the natural son of Pedro the Just, by Donna Teresa Lorenza, a Galician lady, and was born some years after the death of Inez. At seven years of age he was made grand master of Avis, where he received an excellent education, which, joined to his great parts, brought him out early on the political theatre. He was a brave commander, and a deep politician, yet never forfeited the character of candour and honour. To be humble to his friends, and haughty to his enemies, was his leading maxim. His prudence gained him the confidence of the wise; his steadiness and gratitude the friendship of the brave; his liberality the bulk of the people. He was in the twenty-seventh year of his age when declared protector, and in his twenty-eighth when proclaimed king.

The following anecdote is much to the honour of this prince when regent. A Castilian officer, having six Portuguese gentleman prisoners, cut off their noses and hands, and sent them to Don John. Highly incensed, the protector commanded six Castilian gentlemen to be treated in the same manner. But, before the officer, to whom he gave the orders, had quitted the room, he relented. "I have given enough to resentment," said he, "in giving such a command. It were infamous to put it in execution. See that the Castilian prisoners receive no harm."

[280] Beatrice.

[281] _By Rodrick given._--The celebrated hero of Corneille's tragedy of the Cid.

[282] [283] Cadiz: in ancient times a Phoenician colony, whose coins bear the emblem of two pillars--the pillars of Hercules (Alcides).--_Ed._

[284] The Gascons or Basques, a very ancient and singular people. Their language has no relation to that of any other people. They are regarded as the earliest inhabitants of the Spanish peninsula.--_Ed._

[285] See Judges xvi. 17-19.

[286] This speech in the original has been much admired by foreign critics, as a model of military eloquence. The critic, it is hoped, will perceive that the translator has endeavoured to support the character of the speaker.

[287] This was the famous P. Corn. Scipio Africanus. The fact, somewhat differently related by Livy, is this. After the defeat at Cannæ, a considerable body of Romans fled to Canusium, and appointed Scipio and Ap. Claudius their commanders. While they remained there, it was told Scipio, that some of his chief officers, at the head of whom was Cæcilius Metellus, were taking measures to transport themselves out of Italy. He went immediately to their assembly; and drawing his sword, said, _I swear that I will not desert the Commonwealth of Rome, nor suffer any other citizen to do it. The same oath I require of you, Cæcilius, and of all present; whoever refuses, let him know that this sword is drawn against him._ The historian adds, that they were as terrified by this, as if they had beheld the face of their conqueror, Hannibal. They all swore, and submitted themselves to Scipio.--Vid. Livy, bk. 22. c. 53.

[288] Sestos was a city of Thrace, on the Dardanelles, opposite Abydos.--_Ed._

[289] The Guadiana, one of the two great rivers of Spain.--_Ed._

[290] The Douro.

[291] Homer and Virgil have, with great art, gradually heightened the fury of every battle, till the last efforts of their genius were lavished in describing the superior prowess of the hero in the decisive engagement. Camoëns, in like manner, has bestowed his utmost attention on this his principal battle. The circumstances preparatory to the engagement are happily imagined, and solemnly conducted, and the fury of the combat is supported with a poetical heat, and a variety of imagery, which, one need not hesitate to affirm, would do honour to an ancient classic author.

[292] _And his own brothers shake the hostile lance._--The just indignation with which Camoëns treats the kindred of the brave Nunio Alvaro de Pereyra, is condemned by the French translator. "The Pereyras," says he, "deserve no stain on their memory for joining the King of Castile, whose title to the crown of Portugal was infinitely more just and solid than that of Don John." Castera, however, is grossly mistaken. Don Alonzo Enriquez, the first King of Portugal, was elected by the people, who had recovered their liberties at the glorious battle of Ourique. At the election the constitution of the kingdom was settled in eighteen short statutes, wherein it is expressly provided, that none but a Portuguese can be king of Portugal; that if an infanta marry a foreign prince, he shall not, in her right, become King of Portugal, and a new election of a king, in case of the failure of the male line, is, by these statutes, supposed legal. By the treaty of marriage between the King of Castile and Donna Beatrix, the heiress of Fernando of Portugal, it was agreed, that only their children should succeed to the Portuguese crown; and that, in case the throne became vacant ere such children were born, the Queen-dowager, Leonora, should govern with the title of Regent. Thus, neither by the original constitution, nor by the treaty of marriage, could the King of Castile succeed to the throne of Portugal. And any pretence he might found on the marriage contract was already forfeited; for he caused himself and his queen to be proclaimed, added Portugal to his titles, coined Portuguese money with his bust, deposed the queen regent, and afterwards sent her prisoner to Castile. The lawful heir, Don Juan, the son of Inez de Castro, was kept in prison by his rival, the King of Castile; and, as before observed, a new election was, by the original statutes, supposed legal in cases of emergency. These facts, added to the consideration of the tyranny of the King of Castile, and the great services which Don John had rendered his country, fully vindicate the indignation of Camoëns against the traitorous Pereyras.

[293] Near Pharsalus was fought the decisive battle between Cæsar and Pompey, B.C. 48.--_Ed._

[294] Ceuta, a small Spanish possession on the Mediterranean coast of Morocco.--_Ed._

[295] Tetuan, a city of Morocco.--_Ed._

[296] _Through the fierce Brigians._--The Castilians, so called from one of their ancient kings, named Brix, or Brigus, whom the monkish writers call the grandson of Noah.

[297] These lines are not in the common editions of Camoëns. They consist of three stanzas in the Portuguese, and are said to have been left out by the author himself in his second edition. The translator, however, as they breathe the true spirit of Virgil, was willing to preserve them with this acknowledgment.

[298] Massylia, a province in Numidia, greatly infested with lions, particularly that part of it called _Os sete montes irmaõs_, the seven brother mountains.

[299] _And many a gasping warrior sigh'd his last._--This, which is almost literal from--

    _Muitos lançaraõ o ultimo suspiro,--_

and the preceding circumstance of Don John's brandishing his lance four times--

    _E sopesando a lança quatro vezes,_

are poetical, and in the spirit of Homer. Besides Maldonat, Castera has, in this battle, introduced several other names which have no place in Camoëns. Carrillo, Robledo, John of Lorca, Salazar of Seville were killed, he tells us: And, "Velasques and Sanches, natives of Toledo, Galbes, surnamed the 'Soldier without Fear,' Montanches, Oropesa, and Mondonedo, all six of proved valour, fell by the hand of young Antony, who brought to the fight either more address, or better fortune than these." Not a word of this is in the Portuguese.

[300] _Their swords seem dipp'd in fire._--This is as literal as the idiom of the two languages would allow. Dryden has a thought like that of this couplet, but which is not in his original:--

    "Their bucklers clash; thick blows descend from high,     And flakes of fire from their hard helmets fly."

    DRYD. Virg. Æn. xii.


[301] Grand master of the order of St. James, named Don Pedro Nunio. He was not killed, however, in this battle, which was fought on the plains of Aljubarota, but in that of Valverda, which immediately followed. The reader may, perhaps, be surprised to find that every soldier mentioned in these notes is a Don, a _Lord_. The following piece of history will account for the number of the Portuguese nobles. Don Alonzo Enriquez, Count of Portugal, was saluted king by his army at the battle of Ourique; in return, his majesty dignified every man in his army with the rank of nobility.--Vide the 9th of the Statutes of Lamego.

[302] Cerberus.

[303] The Spaniards.

[304] This tyrant, whose unjust pretensions to the crown of Portugal laid his own, and that, kingdom in blood, was on his final defeat overwhelmed with all the frenzy of grief. In the night after the decisive battle of Aljubarota, he fled upwards of thirty miles upon a mule. Don Laurence, archbishop of Braga, in a letter written in old Portuguese to Don John, abbot of Alcobaza, gives this account of his behaviour: "The constable has informed me that he saw the King of Castile at Santaren, who behaved as a madman, cursing his existence, and tearing the hairs of his beard. And, in good faith, my good friend, it is better that he should do so to himself than to us; the man who thus plucks his own beard, would be much better pleased to do so to others." The writer of this letter, though a prelate, fought at the battle of Aljubarota, where he received on the face a large wound from a sabre.

[305] _The festive days by heroes old ordain'd._--As a certain proof of the victory, it was required, by the honour of these ages, that the victor should encamp three days on the field of battle. By this knight-errantry the advantages which ought to have been pursued were frequently lost. Don John, however, though he complied with the reigning ideas of honour, sent Don Nunio, with a proper army, to reap the fruits of his victory.

[306] John of Portugal, about a year after the battle of Aljubarota, married Philippa, eldest daughter of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, son of Edward III. who assisted the king, his son-in-law, in an irruption into Castile, and, at the end of the campaign, promised to return with more numerous forces for the next. But this was prevented by the marriage of his youngest daughter, Catalina, with Don Henry, eldest son of the King of Castile. The King of Portugal on this entered Galicia, and reduced the cities of Tui and Salvaterra. A truce followed. While the tyrant of Castile meditated a new war, he was killed by a fall from his horse, and, leaving no issue by his queen, Beatrix (the King of Portugal's daughter), all pretension to that crown ceased. The truce was now prolonged for fifteen years, and, though not strictly kept, yet, at last the influence of the English queen, Catalina, prevailed, and a long peace, happy for both kingdoms, ensued.

[307] The Pillars of Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar.--_Ed._

[308] The character of this great prince claims a place in these notes, as it affords a comment on the enthusiasm of Camoëns, who has made him the hero of his episode. His birth, excellent education, and masterly conduct when regent, have already been mentioned. The same justice, prudence, and heroism always accompanied him when king. He had the art to join the most winning affability with all the manly dignity of the sovereign. To those who were his friends, when a private man, he was particularly attentive. His nobility dined at his table, he frequently made visits to them, and introduced among them the taste for, and the love of, letters. As he felt the advantages of education, he took the utmost care of that of his children. He had many sons, and he himself often instructed them in solid and useful knowledge, and was amply repaid. He lived to see them men, men of parts and of action, whose only emulation was to show affection to his person, and to support his administration by their great abilities. One of his sons, Don Henry, duke of Viseo, was that great prince whose ardent passion for maritime affairs gave birth to all the modern improvements in navigation. The clergy, who had disturbed almost every other reign, were so convinced of the wisdom of his, that they confessed he ought to be supported out of the treasures of the church, and granted him the church plate to be coined. When the pope ordered a rigorous inquiry to be made into his having brought ecclesiastics before lay tribunals, the clergy had the singular honesty to desert what was styled the church immunities, and to own that justice had been impartially administered. He died in the seventy-sixth year of his age, and in the forty-eighth of his reign. His affection to his queen, Philippa, made him fond of the English, whose friendship he cultivated, and by whom he was frequently assisted.

[309] Camoëns, in this instance, has raised the character of one brother at the other's expense, to give his poem an air of solemnity. The siege of Tangier was proposed. The king's brothers differed in their opinions: that of Don Fernand, though a knight-errant adventure, was approved of by the young nobility. The infants, Henry and Fernand, at the head of 7000 men, laid siege to Tangier, and were surrounded by a numerous army of Moors, some writers say six hundred thousand. On condition that the Portuguese army should be allowed to return home, the infants promised to surrender Ceuta. The Moors gladly accepted of the terms, but demanded one of the infants as a hostage. Fernand offered himself, and was left. The king was willing to comply with the terms to relieve his brother, but the court considered the value of Ceuta, and would not consent. The pope also interposed his authority, that Ceuta should be kept as a check on the infidels, and proposed to raise a crusade for the delivery of Fernand. In the meanwhile large offers were made for his liberty. These were rejected by the Moors, who would accept of nothing but Ceuta, to whose vast importance they were no strangers. When negotiations failed, King Edward assembled a large army to effect his brother's release, but, just as he was setting out, he was seized with the plague, and died, leaving orders with his queen to deliver up Ceuta for the release of his brother. This, however, was never performed. Don Fernand remained with the Moors till his death. The magnanimity of his behaviour gained him their esteem and admiration, nor is there good proof that he received any very rigorous treatment; the contrary is rather to be inferred from the romantic notions of military honour which then prevailed among the Moors. Don Fernand is to this day esteemed as a saint and martyr in Portugal, and his memory is commemorated on the fifth of June. King Edward reigned only five years and a month. He was the most eloquent man in his dominions, spoke and wrote Latin elegantly, was author of several books, one on horsemanship, in which art he excelled. He was brave in the field, active in business, and rendered his country infinite service by reducing the laws to a regular code. He was knight of the Order of the Garter, which honour was conferred upon him by his cousin, Henry V. of England. In one instance he gave great offence to the superstitious populace. He despised the advice of a Jew astrologer, who entreated him to delay his coronation because the stars that day were unfavourable. To this the misfortune of Tangier was ascribed, and the people were always on the alarm, as if some terrible disaster were impending over them.

[310] The Moors.

[311] When Henry IV. of Castile died, he declared that the infanta Joanna, was his heiress, in preference to his sister, Donna Isabella, married to Don Ferdinand, son to the King of Arragon. In hopes to attain the kingdom of Castile, Don Alonzo, king of Portugal, obtained a dispensation from the pope to marry his niece, Donna Joanna. After a bloody war, the ambitious views of Alonzo and his courtiers were defeated.

[312] The Pyrenees which separate France from Spain.--_Ed._

[313] The Prince of Portugal.

[314] Julius Cæsar.

[315] Naples.

[316] Parthenope was one of the Syrens. Enraged because she could not allure Ulysses, she threw herself into the sea. Her corpse was thrown ashore, and buried where Naples now stands.

[317] The coast of Alexandria.

[318] Among the Christians of Abyssinia.

[319] Sandy, the French sable = sand.--_Ed._

[320] The Nabathean mountains; so named from Nabaoth, the son of Ishmael.

[321] _Beyond where Trajan._--The Emperor Trajan extended the bounds of the Roman Empire in the East far beyond any of his predecessors. His conquests reached to the river Tigris, near which stood the city of Ctesiphon, which he subdued. The Roman historians boasted that India was entirely conquered by him; but they could only mean Arabia Felix.--Vid. Dion. Cass. Euseb. Chron. p. 206.

[322] _Qui mores hominum multorum vidit._--HOR.

[323] Emmanuel was cousin to the late king, John II. and grandson to king Edward, son of John I.

[324] The river Indus, which gave name to India.

[325] Vasco de Gama, who is, in a certain sense, the hero of the Lusiad, was born in 1469, at Sines, a fishing town on the Atlantic, midway between Lisbon and Cape St. Vincent, where, in a small church on a cliff, built by the great navigator after his appointment as Viceroy of India, is an inscription to his memory.--_Ed._

[326] Hercules.

[327] _Orac'lous Argo._--According to the fable, the vessel of the Argonauts spoke and prophesied. See _The Argonautics_ of Apollonius Rhodius.--_Ed._

[328] This fact is according to history: Aberat Olysippone prope littus quatuor passuum millia templum sanè religiosum et sanctum ab Henrico in honorem Sanctissimæ Virginis edificatum.... In id Gama pridie illius diei, quo erat navem conscensurus, se recepit, ut noctem cum religiosis hominibus qui in ædibus templo conjunctis habitabant, in precibus et votis consumeret. Sequenti die cum multi non illius tantùm gratia, sed aliorum etiam, qui illi comites erant, convenissent, fuit ab omnibus in scaphis deductus. Neque solùm homines religiosi, sed reliqui omnes voce maxima cum lacrymis à Deo precabantur, ut benè et prosperè illa tam periculosa navigatio omnibus eveniret, et universi re benè gesta, incolumes in patriam redirent.

[329] By this old man is personified the populace of Portugal. The endeavours to discover the East Indies by the Southern Ocean, for about eighty years had been the favourite topic of complaint, and never was any measure of government more unpopular than the expedition of GAMA. Emmanuel's council were almost unanimous against the attempt. Some dreaded the introduction of wealth, and its attendants, luxury and effeminacy; while others affirmed, that no adequate advantages could arise from so perilous and remote a navigation. The expressions of the thousands who crowded the shore when GAMA gave his sails to the wind, are thus expressed by Osorius: "A multis tamen interim is fletus atque lamentatio fiebat, un funus efferre viderentur. Sic enim dicebant: En quo miseros mortales provexit cupiditas et ambitio? Potuitne gravius supplicium hominibus istis constitui, si in se scelestum aliquod facinus admisissent? Est enim illis immensi maris longitudo peragranda, fluctus immanes difficillima navigatione superandi, vitæ discrimen in locis infinitis obeundum. Non fuit multò tolerabilius, in terra quovis genere mortis absumi, quàm tam procul à patria marinis fluctibus sepeliri. Hæc et alia multa in hanc sententiam dicebant, cùm omnia multò tristiora fingere præ metu cogerentur." The tender emotion and fixed resolution of GAMA, and the earnest passion of the multitudes on the shore, are thus added by the same venerable historian: "Gama tamen quamvis lacrymas suorum desiderio funderet, rei tamen benè gerendæ fiducia confirmatus, alacriter in navem faustis ominibus conscendit.... Qui in littore consistebant, non prius abscedere voluerunt, quàm naves vento secundo plenissimis velis ab omnium conspectu remotæ sunt."

[330] More literally rendered by Capt. R. Burton:--

    "----He spoke     From a full heart, and skill'd in worldly lore,     In deep, slow tones this solemn warning, fraught     With wisdom, by long-suffering only taught:     'O passion of dominion! O fond lust     Of that poor vanity which men call fame!     O treach'rous appetite, whose highest gust     Is vulgar breath that taketh honour's name!     O fell ambition, terrible but just     Art thou to breasts that cherish most thy flame!     Brief life for them in peril, storm, and rage;     This world a hell, and death their heritage.

    "'Shrewd prodigal! whose riot is the dearth     Of states and principalities oppress'd,     Plunder and rape are of thy loathly birth,     Thou art alike of life and soul the pest.     High titles greet thee on this slavish earth,     Yet, none so vile but they would fit thee best.     But Fame, forsooth, and Glory thou art styl'd,     And the blind herd is by a sound beguil'd.'"


[331] The Moor.--_Ed._

[332] The Muses.--_Ed._

[333] Prometheus is said to have stolen fire from heaven.--_Ed._

[334] Alluding to the fables of Phaeton and Icarus; the former having obtained from Helios, his father, permission to guide the chariot of the sun for one day, nearly set the world on fire. He perished in the river Eridanus (the Po.) Icarus, the sun having melted the wax with which his wings were cemented, fell into that part of the Ægean which, from his misfortune, was called the _Icarian Sea_.--_Ed._

[335] The sun is in the constellation Leo in July.--_Ed._

[336] The Serra de Cintra, situated about 15 miles N.W. of Lisbon.--_Ed._

[337] See the life of Don Henry, prince of Portugal, in the preface.

[338] Morocco.

[339] The discovery of some of the West Indian islands by Columbus was made in 1492 and 1493. His discovery of the continent of America was not till 1498. The fleet of GAMA sailed from the Tagus in 1497.

[340] Called by the ancients _Insulæ Purpurariæ_. Now Madeira, and Porto Santo. The former was so named by Juan Gonzales, and Tristan Vaz, from the Spanish word _madera_, wood. These discoverers wens sent out by the great Don Henry.

[341] The Tropic of Cancer.--_Ed._

[342] Called by Ptolemy _Caput Assinarium_, now Cape Verde.

[343] The Canaries, called by the ancients _Insulæ Fortunatæ_.

[344] The province of Jalofo lies between the two rivers, the Gambia and the Zanago. The latter has other names in the several countries through which it runs. In its course it makes many islands, inhabited only by wild beasts. It is navigable for 150 leagues, at the end of which it is crossed by a stupendous ridge of perpendicular rocks, over which the river rushes with such violence, that travellers pass under it without any other inconvenience than the prodigious noise. The Gambia, or _Rio Grande_, runs 180 leagues, but is not so far navigable. It carries more water, and runs with less noise than the other, though filled with many rivers which water the country of Mandinga. Both rivers are branches of the Niger. Their waters have this remarkable quality; when mixed together they operate as an emetic, but when separate do not. They abound with great variety of fishes, and their banks are covered with horses, crocodiles, winged serpents, elephants, ounces, wild boars, with great numbers of others, wonderful for the variety of their nature and different forms.--FARIA Y SOUSA.

[345] _Timbuctu_, the mart of Mandinga gold, was greatly resorted to by the merchants of Grand Cairo, Tunis, Oran, Tlemicen, Fez, Morocco, etc.

[346] Contra hoc promontorium (Hesperionceras) Gorgades insulæ narrantur, Gorgonum quondam domus, bidui navigatione distantes a continente, ut tradit Xenophon Lampsacenus. Penetravit in eas Hanno Poenorum imperator, prodiditque hirta foeminarum corpora viros pernicitate evasisse, duarumque Gorgonum cutes argumenti et miraculi gratia in Junonis templo posuit, spectatas usque ad Carthaginem captam.--PLIN. Hist. Nat. l. 6. c. 31.

[347] Sierra Leone.

[348] Cape Palmas.--_Ed._

[349] During the reign of John II. the Portuguese erected several forts, and acquired great power in the extensive regions of Guinea. Azambuja, a Portuguese captain, having obtained leave from Caramansa, a negro prince, to erect a fort on his territories, an unlucky accident had almost proved fatal to the discoverers. A huge rock lay very commodious for a quarry; the workmen began on it; but this rock, as the devil would have it, happened to be a negro god. The Portuguese were driven away by the enraged worshippers, who were afterwards with difficulty pacified by a profusion of such presents as they most esteemed.

[350] The Portuguese, having brought an ambassador from Congo to Lisbon, sent him back instructed in the faith. By this means the king, queen, and about 100,000 of the people were baptized; the idols were destroyed and churches built. Soon after, the prince, who was then absent at war, was baptized by the name of _Alonzo_. His younger brother, Aquitimo, however, would not receive the faith, and the father, because allowed only one wife, turned apostate, and left the crown to his pagan son, who, with a great army, surrounded his brother, when only attended by some Portuguese and Christian blacks, in all only thirty-seven. By the bravery of these, however, Aquitimo was defeated, taken, and slain. One of Aquitimo's officers declared, they were not defeated by the thirty-seven Christians, but by a glorious army who fought under a shining cross. The idols were again destroyed, and Alonzo sent his sons, grandsons, and nephews to Portugal to study; two of whom were afterwards bishops in Congo.--_Extracted from_ Faria y Sousa.

[351] According to fable, Calisto was a nymph of Diana. Jupiter having assumed the figure of that goddess, completed his amorous desires. On the discovery of her pregnancy, Diana drove her from her train. She fled to the woods, where she was delivered of a son. Juno changed them into bears, and Jupiter placed them in heaven, where they form the constellations of Ursa Major and Minor. Juno, still enraged, entreated Thetis never to suffer Calisto to bathe in the sea. This is founded on the appearance of the northern pole-star, to the inhabitants of our hemisphere; but, when GAMA approached the austral pole, the northern, of consequence, disappeared under the waves.

[352] The Southern Cross.

[353] The constellation of the southern pole was called _The Cross_ by the Portuguese sailors, from the appearance of that figure formed by seven stars. In the southern hemisphere, as Camoëns observes, the nights are darker than in the northern, the skies being adorned with much fewer stars.

[354]

    _Non, mihi si linguæ centum sunt, oraque     centum, Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas._--ÆN. vi.


[355] _That living fire, by seamen held divine._--The sulphureous vapours of the air, after being violently agitated by a tempest, unite, and when the humidity begins to subside, as is the case when the storm is almost exhausted, by the agitation of their atoms they take fire, and are attracted by the masts and cordage of the ship. Being thus, naturally, the pledges of the approaching calm, it is no wonder that the superstition of sailors should in all ages have esteemed them divine, and--

    _Of heaven's own care in storms the holy sign._

In the expedition of the Golden Fleece, in a violent tempest these fires were seen to hover over the heads of Castor and Pollux, who were two of the Argonauts, and a calm immediately ensued. After the apotheoses of these heroes, the Grecian sailors invoked these fires by the names of Castor and Pollux, or _the sons of Jupiter_. The Athenians called them [Greek: Sôtêres], _Saviours_.

[356] In this book, particularly in the description of Massilia, the Gorgades, the fires called Castor and Pollux, and the water-spout, Camoëns has happily imitated the manner of Lucan. It is probable that Camoëns, in his voyage to the East Indies, was an eye witness of the phenomena of the fires and water-spout. The latter is thus described by Pliny, l. 2. c. 51. _Fit et caligo, belluæ similis nubes dira navigantibus vocatur et columna, cum spissatus humor rigensque ipse se sustinet, et in longam veluti fistulam nubes aquam trahit._ When the violent heat attracts the waters to rise in the form of a tube, the marine salts are left behind, by the action of rarefaction, being too gross and fixed to ascend. It is thus, when the overloaded vapour bursts, that it descends--

    _Sweet as the waters of the limpid rill._


[357] _That sage device._--The astrolabe, an instrument of infinite service in navigation, by which the altitude of the sun, and distance of the stars is taken. It was invented in Portugal during the reign of John II. by two Jewish physicians, named Roderic and Joseph. It is asserted by some that they were assisted by Martin of Bohemia, a celebrated mathematician.--_Partly from_ Castera. Vid. Barros, Dec. 1. lib. iv. c. 2.

[358] Arabic, one of the most copious and wide-spoken of languages.--_Ed._

[359] Camoëns, in describing the adventure of Fernando Velosó, by departing from the truth of history, has shown his judgment as a poet. The place where the Portuguese landed they named the Bay of St. Helen. They caught one of two negroes, says Faria, who were busied in gathering honey on a mountain. Their behaviour to this savage, whom they gratified with a red cap, some glasses and bells, induced him to bring a number of his companions for the like trifles. Though some who accompanied GAMA were skilled in the various African languages, not one of the natives could understand them. A commerce, however, was commenced by signs and gestures. GAMA behaved to them with great civility; the fleet was cheerfully supplied with fresh provisions, for which the natives received cloths and trinkets. But this friendship was soon interrupted by a young, rash Portuguese. Having contracted an intimacy with some of the negroes, he obtained leave to penetrate into the country along with them, to observe their habitations and strength. They conducted him to their huts with great good nature, and placed before him, what they esteemed an elegant repast, a sea-calf dressed in the way of their country. This so much disgusted the delicate Portuguese, that he instantly got up and abruptly left them. Nor did they oppose his departure, but accompanied him with the greatest innocence. As fear, however, is always jealous, he imagined they were leading him as a victim to slaughter. No sooner did he come near the ships, than he called aloud for assistance. Coëllo's boat immediately set off for his rescue. The Africans fled to the woods; and now esteeming the Portuguese as a band of lawless plunderers, they provided themselves with arms, and lay in ambush. Their weapons were javelins, headed with short pieces of horn, which they throw with great dexterity. Soon after, while GAMA and some of his officers were on the shore taking the altitude of the sun by the astrolabe, they were suddenly and with great fury attacked by the ambush from the woods. Several were much wounded, _multos convulnerant, inter quos Gama in pede vulnus accepit_, and GAMA received a wound in the foot. The admiral made a speedy retreat to the fleet, prudently choosing rather to leave the negroes the honour of the victory, than to risk the life of one man in a quarrel so foreign to the destination of his expedition, and where, to impress the terror of his arms could be of no service to his interest. When he came nearer to the East Indies he acted in a different manner. He then made himself dreaded whenever the treachery of the natives provoked his resentment.--_Collected from_ Faria and Osorius.

[360] The critics have vehemently declaimed against the least mixture of the comic, with the dignity of the epic poem. It is needless to enter into any defence of this passage of Camoëns, farther than to observe that Homer, Virgil, and Milton have offended the critics in the same manner, and that this piece of raillery in the Lusiad is by much the politest, and the least reprehensible, of anything of the kind in the four poets. In Homer are several strokes of low raillery. Patroclus having killed Hector's charioteer, puns thus on his sudden fall: _It is a pity he is not nearer the sea! He would soon catch abundance of oysters, nor would the storms frighten him. See how he dives from his chariot down to the sand! What excellent divers are the Trojans!_ Virgil, the most judicious of all poets, descends even to burlesque, where the commander of a galley tumbles the pilot into the sea:--

          ----_Segnemque Menoeten     In mare præcipitem puppi deturbat ab alta.     At gravis ut sundo vix tandem redditus imo est     Jam senior, madidaque fluens in veste Menoetes,     Summa petit scopuli siccaque in rupe resedit.     Illum et labentem Teucri, et risere natantem;     Et salsos rident revomentem pectore fluctus._

And, though the character of the speakers, the ingenious defence which has been offered for Milton, may, in some measure, vindicate the raillery which he puts into the mouths of Satan and Belial, the lowness of it, when compared with that of Camoëns, must still be acknowledged. Talking of the execution of the diabolical artillery among the good angels, they, says Satan--

    "Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell     As they would dance, yet for a dance they seem'd     Somewhat extravagant and wild, perhaps     For joy of offer'd peace.----     To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mood.     Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight,     Of hard contents, and full of force urg'd home,     Such as we might perceive amus'd them all,     And stumbled many----     ----this gift they have beside,     They show us when our foes walk not upright."


[361] The translator in reply to the critics will venture the assertion, that the fiction of the apparition of the Cape of Tempests, in sublimity and awful grandeur of imagination, stands unsurpassed in human composition.

[362] _The next proud fleet._--On the return of GAMA to Portugal, a fleet of thirteen sail, under the command of Pedro Alvarez Cabral, was sent out on the second voyage to India, where the admiral with only six ships arrived. The rest were mostly destroyed by a terrible tempest at the Cape of Good Hope, which lasted twenty days. "The daytime," says Faria, "was so dark that the sailors could scarcely see each other, or hear what was said for the horrid noise of the winds." Among those who perished was the celebrated Bartholomew Diaz, who was the first modern discoverer of the Cape of Good Hope, which he named the Cape of Tempests.

[363] _Behold a hero come._--Don Francisco de Almeyda. He was the first Portuguese viceroy of India, in which country he obtained several great victories over the Mohammedans and pagans. He was the first who conquered Quiloa and Mombas, or Mombaz. On his return to Portugal he put into the bay of Saldanha, near the Cape of Good Hope, to take in water and provisions. The rudeness of one of his servants produced a quarrel with the Caffres, or Hottentots. His attendants, much against his will, forced him to march against the blacks. "Ah, whither," he exclaimed, "will you carry the infirm man of sixty years?" After plundering a miserable village, on the return to their ships they were attacked by a superior number of Caffres, who fought with such fury in rescue of their children, whom the Portuguese had seized, that the viceroy and fifty of his attendants were slain.

[364] The crescent, the symbol of Mohammedanism.--_Ed._

[365] This poetical description of the miserable catastrophe of Don Emmanuel de Souza, and his beautiful spouse, Leonora de Sà, is by no means exaggerated. He was several years governor of Diu in India, where he amassed immense wealth. On his return to his native country, the ship in which was his lady, all his riches, and five hundred men, his sailors and domestics, was dashed to pieces on the rocks at the Cape of Good Hope. Don Emmanuel, his lady, and three children, with four hundred of the crew escaped, having only saved a few arms and provisions. As they marched through the wild uncultivated deserts, some died of famine, of thirst, and fatigue; others, who wandered from the main body in search of water, were murdered by the savages, or destroyed by the wild beasts. They arrived, at last, at a village inhabited by African banditti. At first they were courteously received, but the barbarians, having unexpectedly seized their arms, stripped the whole company naked, and left them destitute to the mercy of the desert. The wretchedness of the delicate and exposed Leonora was increased by the brutal insults of the negroes. Her husband, unable to relieve, beheld her miseries. After having travelled about 300 leagues, her legs swelled, her feet bleeding at every step, and her strength exhausted, she sunk down, and with the sand covered herself to the neck, to conceal her nakedness. In this dreadful situation, she beheld two of her children expire. Her own death soon followed. Her husband, who had been long enamoured of her beauty, received her last breath in a distracted embrace. Immediately, he snatched his third child in his arms, and uttering the most lamentable cries, he ran into the thickest of the wood, where the wild beasts were soon heard to growl over their prey. Of the whole four hundred who escaped the waves, only six and twenty arrived at another village, whose inhabitants were more civilized, and traded with the merchants of the Red Sea, from whence they found a passage to Europe, and brought the tidings of the unhappy fate of their companions. Jerome de Cortereal, a Portuguese poet, has written an affecting poem on the shipwreck, and deplorable catastrophe of Don Emmanuel, and his beloved spouse.--_Partly from_ Castera.

[366] The giants or Titans; called "sons of God" in Gen. vi. 2.--_Ed._

[367] Briareus.

[368] Doris, the sister and spouse of Nereus, and mother of the Nereides. By Nereus, in the physical sense of the fable, is understood the water of the sea, and by Doris, the bitterness or salt, the supposed cause of its prolific quality in the generation of fishes.

[369] _And give our wearied minds a lively glow._--Variety is no less delightful to the reader than to the traveller, and the imagination of Camoëns gave an abundant supply. The insertion of this pastoral landscape, between the terrific scenes which precede and follow, has a fine effect. "Variety," says Pope, in one of his notes on the Odyssey, "gives life and delight; and it is much more necessary in epic, than in comic or tragic, poetry, sometimes to shift the scenes, to diversify and embellish the story."

The Portuguese, sailing upon the Atlantic Ocean, discovered the most southern point of Africa: here they found an immense sea, which carried them to the East Indies. The dangers they encountered in the voyage, the discovery of Mozambique, of Melinda, and of Calecut, have been sung by Camoëns, whose poem recalls to our minds the charms of the Odyssey, and the magnificence of the Æneid.--MONTESQUIEU, Spirit of Laws, bk. xxi. c. 21.

[370] Virgil.

[371] A small island, named _Santa Cruz_ by Bartholomew Diaz, who discovered it. According to Faria y Sousa, he went twenty-five leagues further, to the river Del Infante, which, till passed by GAMA, was the utmost extent of the Portuguese discoveries.

[372] It was the force of this rushing current which retarded the further discoveries of Diaz. GAMA got over it by the assistance of a tempest. The seasons when these seas are safely navigable, are now perfectly known.

[373] The wise men of the East, or magi, whom the Roman Catholic writers will have to have been kings.--_Ed._

[374] The Epiphany.--_Ed._

[375] Dos Reis, _i.e._, of the kings.--_Ed._

[376] The frequent disappointments of the Portuguese, when they expect to hear some account of India, is a judicious imitation of several parts of Virgil; who, in the same manner, magnifies the distresses of the Trojans in their search for the fated seat of Empire:--

          ----_O gens     Infelix! cui to exitio fortuna reservat?     Septima post Trojæ excidium jam vertitur æstas;     Cum freta, cum terras omnes, tot inhospita saxa     Sideraque emensæ ferimur: dum per mare magnum     Italiam sequimur fugientem, et volvimur undis._ ÆN. v. 625.


[377] Hop.

[378] It had been extremely impolitic in GAMA to mention the mutiny of his followers to the King of Melinda. The boast of their loyalty, besides, has a good effect in the poem, as it elevates the heroes, and gives uniformity to the character of bravery, which the dignity of the epopea required to be ascribed to them. History relates the matter differently. In standing for the Cape of Good Hope, GAMA gave the highest proofs of his resolution. The fleet seemed now tossed to the clouds, _ut modo nubes contingere_, and now sunk to the lowest whirlpools of the abyss. The winds were insufferably cold, and, to the rage of the tempest was added the horror of an almost continual darkness. The crew expected every moment to be swallowed up in the deep. At every interval of the storm, they came round GAMA, asserting the impossibility to proceed further, and imploring him to return. This he resolutely refused. A conspiracy against his life was formed, but was discovered by his brother. He