[RIX-egil-saga  —  part 1 of 3]
============================================================

This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized  by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the  information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books 


https://books.google.com 


This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized  by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the  information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books 


https://books.google.com 


aie ad +  oe Pees rr F vee wr teem renee wr mote dae eet oh CPT garters  a 4 , ‘ ’ ot omy 9S ’ ~ Ter popere He) wT abe sab  « : ‘y w he 6 DA ew met’ Other ge ey at Mee ot)  aa = arg eheer” ie *ett 


aU tense Rh area weree sooty wh vi 6 - ' , ow pbele ; ere ‘  Pal eed he tr Pee bee dando etb ‘ ale rvietwre a ee eee! Ae me hm oer epi rma  7 - ¥ ~ «om r A - “ +o > *-equamre@ar rt and od © 

een er, Tart, Lak A Ae 1 nl eee poh ek ne og ee ea amie ary ree FP 

. ; oti) or ele 760 6 e rites op are poowe  ’ 


ve erry “oe yi rw or  6 il lg «le Op pas pete pererh eh mearre’s ‘ Were bd caper ee  «* jah bag 2 art eo on er” += a geese TT it age vars ees a?  heaton tank GHG) FOUR ERE en rer yy iarthre mete Fer | Pubes - po rdanagries bery ah BLE  ae treme ot pte et betes 4 hae fa pene O fetus Hy o8 aye free 4 veteey) eared’ ohne ,  he yh pmarrenre= bekee gerere este y tre apt bh dp AA vw hd OOF ghey eemanen sree at noe ate!  pe 94 . o> at r ep «v8 + op ee ee, He Se ee Lied veph gebawe rahe w seb\e  Sa, A ie ‘ 19+ « ore ree marohe! 048 eam iesae “* ee padeypegepenens Ot  on ee. v hr epee + a6 or 5 - are her bel pat be re ,  . ry oe ae nukes oo Uk anaes ae oebared yo 9" ne “ee ee nt ee heed  a 40° PE) epee ee me ol > aqohet evere ahaa ashaety + 4 )@  The Pe gyee 4 eer re ee i) ** im aus on ahs ran rege wey spe rmeree eth P por peneree dae tree 4!  + oom Oe “er bn + 49-0 te Datang 49 be" Od 0-4 4o> + ee pee ole YT TE Bad ath ounneve ~~ ove shesesopannegrane ier?  ae aed pager icy ea ap pe wrgt FOr 4 567 Bg abet + 940 He paegeyep erst’ * ! ys ny gg cabo tps ered OF Fe—a PF> ane whegetansnsge yeit®  ’ ae me rates oH hi nh oo ee ot Gh raere PE +t Pe dla vrhe+s gob hh yah began emer esener s " et ewer eegnert  Mev Ae TAT er bem 8 Obl = OePe a rE” 2 reread) -Oteet Te Tet te ee eres eb rhoy a be ¥ ey ie opt ope mete ore were 4  a Vee ae 6 ey Oe at erent © wren wleery Qetagh noo wD ocep and vee rt '¢ vee Te) 0o*  we ov Oo, Merewb or He" peg mage Out yrnoee et! 2: * VA eqn fete” Or pre be te 1p peeerer  Ch hat ate, Bet Oe a + Srpniiee) 100 ear Pree herpes  nm oe whee pin Gh Gite at ay or tye Te cniitead ey oe apet ve :  iso an tem eee . .  eS tee ag east +) CeO  —s cn aes) oe rer ’  pe 0 OO pee gels ahert ere ‘ ia ah o-  Pet etre ages hh Femmes oF med pnb? GOP v7  * ey > ores tome 0 O18 peer ort ye  re e- sad) 9m 9 bere OH “are  , eae S e 


“ane dahand + fayome 


Led 


aa ge! Bihan ely* . 

erertyr mpeg + who, 28 - OF COEF: + /  orgie aeer Bi phe 8 ve oy 4 

. +446) 6 artes oO a oo  * 


we ee PAN  yeni head oh 1 eek tere ene! w  ee hd . 

» oe a . ¢ " bh " owt" 

+" rope gl eer ayer os “ ‘ : ’ ¥ 7 rier . os pour perone eee sonepovers  4 , s ’ . ae ee  om a Jeet ws wer > sh ehe rN ; : rpgebeboyered ouphanede eng tpriene er heesnen’ eqreertere 

‘ = ’ wre .  wehetonei _ porn peraopet eerer ” 

. + gett an erent het ome gee paprt ot epeceme meets panes bene erepteeeatte -  on bod om ater party dv monets 


ae  » ebemasenenenns saemiwerrharyepint gir :  i gqen steer ete o Genre je hott  Laneennrseeey OP)"  * 


ri  ‘4 nat or rt  Ap elinadiion 


etal Y ses  * . * -*% owen? ’ tert  nem pis ar he ws 4 o “eo » ae daey oF ge vit? “ee * * wm 4  aie! as <bRns dre = 00s het te r died . . 7 4 “ tt  plenty 4! akoAy phe 8G oe 1D 09h odo! tr er ee o~ Ont 04 ’ * o her de <peae bob ene es ah ee eres a aeoen?, 

A tener Prat ee br ahabed op OO tet 4) wwe ee yre whaey i ee ed edet openekpasneyegededuenrees 94.06 vibetgaenrer ty > materi tite 

stokes Vaehck cnsaenpenene bres ie Pete te hoary oa yoree! piepareneieteye 

ve dy yop anwer ieee si eeelutenebe tepepenpengennen verenaesed +9280 2°25 gy va eh neenatey a” 

heneh et stenrhals tee eredershr neuer Soigarnahayeeeerey arate +e beorveyree 


y “rr oe et a ee  oe ee ~ ~e eererpe* res term Ce eres Wee  SP ober wwe equamelegs sep aide at fom reek oe raeey "~ sped ;  . ed” . +4 " * > 4 iy sau ver  « ea sote® tr * oot raw breet iat ane perebet  : op yw rarer OF  vyenvastetedayat opus oer beoreaDr Onell ODOT so sagnmr efOMeeT ys iet 


als a daeaieng ibd oo ~= +> bet Pan? i, ete rr ha av  9 ee a laanaeeneeene 2-00 sere rem r: 


“ tag — ee ee Fee Flat whe  all ot fe =  ye a oe hse deb : 4 +. an a oe meni 6 Be «Oe dies ae  ee ae ed , , - ee er pee hres ee a ee ee Wasteer ere laa ate  _ x -—- < fang wlpeba Pabst eta ee pap Hoe * = J ety OR eeepete” ee ey a bee e@eve se rett eles ee pot phen ab Sots pe be toaghe renee spate eeertstereenerr  ? ee - ~ bw 54 yond racete rer sren rm eneres eeeehe ‘ woete 4 eageeeteu  . es ode arr cad ya argennencta te YT fay | pega hey eter phuhs-roten reanee emgvere trae hepene irversir” ork pherer He pedaroonpecess homers resets repay wats jones  ciplatn hs 9 -aaieney iy paveeuary irt.— yO ey ah sheeted S An ieanist habs Fete en cehenuee? ves babeye cengoe@nne Wee Sebel eee ort estisearaerrerepennenet Memrreer’ Legs naetesengentt  - teen 84 hede peered ee ore rags ab piya/hedans bee berepeneady aretopede teh r iv. 1. Ab eeeeee cpepeseenenanene +e iets Petree tepanet reerel® ar ienehote hear,  * aed 4 « Lk ee on ¥ eeerk rte Beret: peta g nay! oe peas oped reeeel epet heme be otemesene tr ebobode pad ntocenee pgetwas rene fase s) ie aos somone gomosunavernnene lin  jo ge teeter wb va eabeeedade Hoechae ape icseeh ee Ped ets Vers fe hebeabngreeds tomepedabeie bree mea n/a" phe petenelepe te hehe ehaie peers reer tenede mbes sande henewrerernegy tOfetrOr Toa shee po sedene seapteer Sees:  op hem ete vet ot rt. \o) , an bh shone cérenbeeegricte 1! teers tho Pqgamer eohade reeytaee = O04 04 1tehets © Sent poderersteheiede psbodehene a habehepel ehete ret pert ob ah eter fp heheotaganel avete porenedahen  - hah erent Grn tds HE IP re thee ey hike 2. cineeehdeeed jepepetaaheunegrbeteorgenep ethene es |atete whe tens sapeathpbesemetebrterel {Ti ii tar ruppenanans ieet rey peartet  oe Ser oy eet op rented ee seupguteoedteeteree ree -npeeeey et ® proedategetrpeieie: t? ppotoyensdodelaeed eter? vide eeenererrt Tle  tvkebs wat cuvecpecenenan res +gbebrmerspaile cphohed paenesonenesenrt sy seseeTe’ © sossersapesenrtytt (on  oma per te yee sae ah petets na br genet ens Fr setatennteen! epea rennet PERS EY Shepanaerestitst tis  qatndute Leben aneprtobens bate ners? *irrt® tone’ oe bod sbepeee liner 4 eeoeseeee wretr het Loses  coledace tee tabs pphevebade reed chetenap rpaneneeas UL PEO) SATIN ORPOD DT 5 pat oe bODEE  pba byes un eeemapea ofr reesee oe pan wren} | peek mlpceesseainoe sented ys rer ine bees  dedee a onanaet ope hese ee ete™ eenrerr’ nore where  ate ehetige hiprist- daqeve aLaprstiey ant gra st spereesesesete inte Tel eage 


4 + te 4  PT ae dead re selisaneet eve 


gba heeg ious  “ . : - pr oohane peed ew ote Bi be pate!  > - ; & as abeg bate fore owe ‘ , .  aoe yy Poeat abe grapedkacep y aep enn ea ren nemrehet OF  ee ee el ae badiieg Alpe, eet aw eee sere wee Le hea at etered twee ines vette te ecu sobre pappracredwaens hr tanems tam Wr8P ty wr aneberebenebeters : paspaseqenes eiveaee?  60 ere etre ee Pe te nome epee nae ‘my o> wh aye peeghtie sah uliaty lugs | fF eee verte prea eRe Geeeee trier he apehemerier ner! Ly gapenaverqarreheneeree ve  SNEHt *tan'ot en * OL a eel ° a moQ * brew 4 eee ere Ss i $04 es Gem he abet ate rage Veeetn te: Of opr peer senee pnd row owent McGee 4H * av" puoeekelale  n ‘ oie , : peeatnas brerereeaere”*  +o nr «* A eR ase ee Oe hae) vind oot rr rd eee cod bahepguokasss +) phe anmme page tet Bart ihe bec rnenneeae tree rreaie pepe pr ust" ot ops OGOter er? sinoporbanerseoeprenrereseel tt, spr rete sonar tanepieere HEN ©  t+ te Qe ory ~ sane op RO Ihrer * 4 ROH rere 2b tee + Oe ped 08-7 - 2 yrh = eh oe reente SO ree bye & OO owe! oon oe begeere@eee eet Gree otreg er eurer! y' - . ove  yoy re ok ane . or ess Sagion de ce peta bee oe betede” iT chain aeacagh rahe e)) oe ens taRetry 140 (=) 54h? 9 abe o1qop ones mere 50 Hee aoe +7  ¥ mee reer. hee a » Hart § of ++ P «ree . fr wre ee '* - PE ° oe  ro rn et ory Le oe eT ” " be o * por saamehiedle d ay eduretynbie ts  pert | ili chinnh-uenan aera oe: ob pot > Nae ~~» a ary < - ote a aes a eohen teeeu  a ee ee hgh ow eh oe ee | ohh oe eee ae ong? «weer fF ‘ 14 0p etn be) ete seehs tere aye ”  Ww Me tert oem + Oo ee Ye ee ea " - a+ rg v4-ow eve «4 ‘ now are ereee 1 at eweerkers mete 'w  a —— « ae ge eee ee me rn ve F) ~ “? ’ . ” ate ore ‘* rua? ave  ial - pe ——— " et-ebethe . . - oi oe e te pane ~~  ee prty- 2 Spt © gy tee gh el cee om es emir eae pos é 9+ ; ’ ours oat ephrae 0P9  Porie HEE Fr oaty ee as ey Pag @ . ‘ ‘ re page he rete  Le tay a ee te. A ee koe ede Var ae + os a~a?* o*  ~ ———Y - “sy Oe ee ee ge 9 Lamy * ame yao : ~ ~ ms ye  oe ead a atdleks oklus ~ a ppeptorte givty oO ers ree mn dfs a . oe  ee ST adiked ee oat ae © ener py eer re ‘ gta ure aur + e  : ar 4 Y Cee ow at ut ww <p ent mr quite et, oh 4 wt yore ome + _ * ap re etary  oot uth enh Ghat eid gtage at ogee te we yor SF ge gf et grits + 4% ’ ’ ’ ¥ eet  Nae y etergOw eo peetepe Pere ‘9 we% ' . a yeare s¢ + .** o~« ‘ . ‘ ores mee  = CS . soraces; "a wae aps ’ w ‘4 *} . e~ or if: reer oso ety Pe ‘ go pectoris + oe  ion : epchab) bndbdes _ ‘oe : oapeters ghee greene  cn pyran eh eareele melt tetra lender beh ep nmn belgie! Pe ofa Gudstas Der) FEIT To oa a ah : ‘—e 7 we etesuneseae wie ™ dgiguwteuat  - peeps verre ae ts seks ro r ~ J  ; pete Poe pata apa ey ms Be Oree OYlG eM eA ae sane mene te beat oe elm -5 Os Soh abeats tamcatatrnry gde0 T+ eo resvecemret sk. treo 3 eeeeserien taney’ o%  > ~ 4 Re at rg rye ee! +4 Leyes a ae A apat oG = ver a a) weet et : 7 4  wi . 3 “be! z ‘ues * Shan taovy nd ie a ee aerk tat Tt ut Aas J <a diec bu byeieehareert chara PTT  - uk Daa a4 ee a * 8 be m ~" arin, 4 ahh ye Mle et hot Ohieg ay he ”~ my  ¢ . f 4: + > 4 ++ mre enw  = - ‘ : ot ae 2%  5 ~ -  c > ~-  =~  e —  ai. ee 


HARVARD  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 


FROM THE 


Subscription Fund 


BEGUN IN 1858 


THE STORY 


OF 


EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON: 


BEING 


an Scelandic aamily Sisfory of fhe  Minth and Tenfh Centuries, 


TRANSLATED FROM THE ICELANDIC, 


BY 


REV. W. C. GREEN, 


LATE FELLOW OF KING'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE }  EDITOR OF ‘ ARISTOPHANES ;’ AUTHOR OF ‘HOMERIC SIMILES,’ ETC. 


LONDON :  ELLIOT STOCK, 62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 


1893. 


t| 


| 


INTRODUCTION. 


T is now more than thirty years since Dasent by the story |  | of Burnt Njal delighted many readers and awakened in  England an interest in the Icelandic Sagas. The intro-  duction to Burnt Njal treats ably and fully of Icelandic history  and literature, pointing out their especial value to us English-  men. And this the same author has further done in his  introduction to Vigfusson’s Dictionary. Other Sagas have  since been made accessible in English: eg., the story of  Gisli the outlaw, by Dasent ; Grettir’s Saga, by Magnusson  and Morris ; and recently some others in the series entitled  ‘The Saga Library.’ 

Dasent put before us the best first, for of Iceland's Sagas  the Njala undoubtedly bears the palm. But the next best  has hitherto not been open to English readers—the Egils-  saga to wit. Second only to the Nijala in interest and  merit is the Egla, and second (in my judgment) after no  long interval. For though no one character enlists our  sympathy in Egil’s story so much as does the wise and good  Njal so undeservedly cut off, yet the whole story is in style  and force little, if at all, inferior. Nay it has more variety  of scene and adventure, more points of contact with history,  than has the Njala; it is to Englishmen especially interest- |  ing, aS one part of.it is much concerned with England.  The narrative takes us into many lands; all over Norway,  to Sweden, to Finmark, and the lands beyond, Kvenland,  Bjarmaland, the shores ‘of the. White Sea ; 3 in: company with  the Vikings we. go ‘the eastward way’ to the Baltic, to.  Courland in Russia ; we visit Holland, Friesland, ean, 


iv STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


westwards and southwestwards we cruise about Shetland,  the Orkneys, Scotland ; England is reached by our hero  Egil; York is the scene of his most perilous venture; he  comes even as far as London. 

The earlier part of the Saga, the scene of which is in  Norway, with the account of Harold Fairhair’s obtaining 


sole dominion there, is of great interest, and agrees with | 


other accounts of the same. It is well known that Harold’s  tyranny (as they deemed it) drove many Norsemen of good  family to seek Iceland and freedom. Among these were  Egil’s grandfather and father. We have a full account of  their settlement in the island, whither as yet few had gone,  and where land was to be had for the taking, but hard work 


was needed. We read of these early pioneers’ industries— © 


their farming, smithying, fishing on sea and river, seal-  hunting, whaling, egg-gathering. Minute descriptions there  are of the island, particularly of its western coast, its firths,  nesses, rivers, fells. 

No reader of this Saga can for a moment doubt the truth- 


fulness of the picture given of life and manners at that. 


time. A seafaring race were those Norsemen, both for trade  in their ships of burden and for freebooting in their long  ships ; bold and skilful mariners they are seen to be. We  read of a winter sledging journey in one most adventurous  episode. There are battles, some of great moment, by sea  and by land. One of the latter, the battle of Vinheath, in  England, is told with much detail, and is (one may venture  to say) as vivid an account of a battle as can be found any-  where in any language. Thereare single combats or wagers  of battle, about the manner and terms of which we learn  much that is noteworthy. There are also lawsuits in  Norway, and, towards the end of the story, one in Iceland,  whence we learn that the emigrants carried out with them  and established their civilization with all the machinery of 


courts and legal procedure. There is less litigation in the 


Egla than in the Njala, but few readers will regret this, for,  if there be anything in the story of Burnt Njal which one  would be inclined to skip, it is some of the long law-  pleadings. 

The home life of the North is in this Saga graphically set 


INTRODUCTION v 


before us. We see the men at their banquets; mighty  drinkings they held, with curious manners and rules. There  are feasts at harvest, at Yule-tide; they exchange visits at  each other’s houses ; hospitality is universal ; weddings there  are, burials. Of their halls, the arrangement thereof, their  order of sitting, their armour hanging ready above the  warriors, we can from scenes in this story form a complete  idea. Wewitness their amusements, their trials of strength ;  a certain game at ball is described in detail. 

Of their religion perhaps we do not read so much in the  Egla as might be expected. They were still heathens,  though Christianity was prevailing in the countries around.  That the Norwegians and Icelanders were familiar with their  own theology and mythology is, however, plain ; their know-  ledge of it is constantly assumed in the poetry. Of priests  the Egilssaga tells us, and of temples, and one great 


v 


4 


religious gathering is described. There is not much of the .. 


marvellous or supernatural in this Saga: no ghost, as in  Grettir’s Saga. Some superstitions appear: a belief in magic  and spells, in the force of runes graved rightly or wrongly.  Several women are spoken of as possessing magic skill,  especially queen Gunnhilda, who on one memorable occasion  exercises all but fatally for. Egil her power of shape-changing.  There is one remarkable instance of a solemn spoken and  written curse, with very curious accompaniments. But upon  the whole little happens that is beyond fair probability, or 


that does not spring from natural causes. Although, as we- 


have seen, Egil and his comrades were not Christians, the  Christian faith is incidentally mentioned as prevailing in  England, and towards the end of the Saga we read that  Thorstein, Egil’s youngest son, became eventually a  Christian. 

The characters in the Egilssaga are well marked and  forcibly drawn.. In. the house of Kveldulf, old Kveldulf  himself, Thorolf the elder, Skallagrim, Egil, stand forth as  real men with characters well-sustained throughout. Out-  side the family king Harold is well drawn, the able ruler,  generous in much, but suspicious, as a tyrant must needs  be. His son Eric is violent, but weaker, and swayed by  his wife Gunnhilda, who is to him somewhat as Jezebel 


ae 


vi STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


was to Ahab. Arinbjorn is perhaps the noblest .character  in the story, the brave, generous, true friend. But the  reader will estimate these and others for himself; of the  hero who gives his name to the Saga a few words will not  be out of place. Egil certainly must have been a remark-  able man. Strong in“ body beyond his fellows, he was no  less uncommonly gifted in mind, a poet as well as a soldier.  Brave he was even to foolhardiness, yet wary withal and  pradent ; full of. resource in danger, never giving up the  game however desperate ; a_born leader, liked and trusted  by his men. His character has its unpleasant side ; he was  headstrong, brutal at times when provoked, determined to  have his own way, and overbearing in pursuit of it. Yet  there is nothing mean or little about him; he does not  engage in petty quarrels, he helps or hinders kings and great  chiefs. He is outspoken and truthful, and his ire is espe-  cially stirred by meanness and falsehood in others. To  women he is pleasant and courteous, as appears on several  occasions. For the sake of his friend Arinbjorn and his  kin he risks his life more than once. 

- That the bad points in Egil’s character are not screened  is surely one proof of the truthfulness of the Saga-writer ;  a mere eulogist would have blazoned forth all his hero’s  noble exploits, but veiled the other side, and hardly would  anyone inventing a fictitious character have put such dark  blots in it. But some of Egil’s faults were rather those of  his time than of himself. A careful reading of the whole  Saga leaves us with a more favourable opinion of Egil than  we form at the beginning of his life. For most readers  will (I think) at the first dislike Egil; they will agree  with his father Skallagrim and his elder brother Thorolf,  who had not much affection for the boy. But as the  story goes on, one cannot but admire his bravery, his  resource, his indomitable resolution, his readiness to face  danger, not only for himself, but for others whom he really 

rized. 

- The Egla contains many wonderfully good descriptive  passages of the fiords, sounds, and islands of the North.  An instance is chapter xlv., which relates Egil’s first escape  from Eric. A most dramatic scene is that where Skallagrim 


INTRODUCTION Vil 


X  goes before king Harold in chapter xxv. So is chapter Ixii.,  where Egil and Arinbjorn are before king Eric Bloodaxe  in York. Very striking is the interview between Egil and his  daughter Thorgerdr, after Bodvar’s death, in chapter Ixxxi.  Looking at the vigour and beauty of the style i in these and  other passages, we agree with the judgment in Thordarson’ S  preface, that the Egilssaga was put into wmiting ‘in the  golden age of Icelandic literature.’ And for these excel-  lencles we must remember to give due credit and admira-  tiori to the Saga-writer. For though he was (as is generally  believed) describing real men, real scenes, real characters,  yet it is not everyone who, having the matter to hand, can  put it together and express it so well. 

About the truthfulness and historical value of the Egla  there has been some discussion and difference of opinion.  Is it in the main a true family history, or a romance? How  long after the events recorded was it written? And by  whom? These questions have been debated by northern  scholars, Icelanders and others. The balance of authority  and reason appears to be very much in favour of the general  truthfulness of the story. The writer surely wrote down  the facts as he heard or read them, not departing from the  truth as he knew it or believed it. But on this question let  us hear what the northern editors say. 

Finnur J6nsson (Copenhagen, 1888) gives hisjudgment thus: 

‘1. The Saga in what concerns persons and events in  Iceland and Norway may be considered true, with small and  unimportant exceptions. 

2. For what happens in other countries it cannot be  reckoned quite trustworthy. 

3. Its chronology is in several places faulty, which is not  to be wondered at. 

4. It shows extensive geographical knowledge, insight  into Icelandic and Norse law and culture. : 

5. The composer had partly written sources of informa-  tion, partly family traditions of the Moormen to go upon,  with much of Egil’s verses and poems. 

6. He is a master in the art of telling a story and deline-  ating character. 

7. He must have lived on the Borgar-firth.’ 


viii STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


The preface to Thordarson’s edition says: 

‘The Saga agrees well with other Icelandic Sagas, and  may be reckoned as one of the most truthful; but when it  is considered that it was kept in men’s memory for a very  long time—the events happening before the year 1000, and  the story not being put into writing till near the end of the  twelfth century—naturally every syllable of it will not be  true. Neither in this, however, nor in any of the best Ice-  landic Sagas do the writers thereof deliberately assert untruth  or mean to exaggerate.’ 

To the authority and judgment of these scholars an  Englishman can add little. Only, as regards historical  events foreign to Iceland and Norway, it may be remarked  that no one could reasonably expect Icelanders of the  eleventh and twelfth centuries to be infallible about them.  In the Egilssaga what is said about foreign countries appears  - generally like truth. What we read about England, eg.,  and what passed there at the beginning of Athelstan’s reign,  agrees fairly with what we know of that time from history ;  some facts are undoubtedly true, none palpably untrue,  though there are details. which present some difficulty.  But these will be better discussed in a note on that part  of the Saga. 3 

The date of the writing of Egilssaga is put between 1160  and 1200; probably near to the latter date. In chapter xc.  we read of the taking up of Egil’s supposed bones in the  time of Skapti the priest. He is known to have been priest  from 1143 onwards. Thordarson’s preface suggests as a  possible author Einar Skulason. He was a descendant of  Egil, being grandson of the grandson of Thorstein Egils-  son; he travelled much, knew well both Norway and Ice-  land, and was a good skald; he lived till late in the twelfth  century. But that he was the author is but a guess. 

Of the Egilssaga there are several editions. For this  translation the following have been used: The large edition,  with a Latin translation (Havnie, mpcccix); Einar Thor-  darson’s (Reykjavik, 1856); Finnur Jénsson’s (Copenhagen,  1888). Also Petersen’s Swedish translation (1862). ‘The  text of Thordarson’s little book has been followed in the  main; Jdnsson’s differs from it in many places, being 


INTRODUCTION ix 


generally shorter. Into the critical merits of these texts  I am not competent to enter; the variations are of no  importance to the story or to an English reader. 

The prose of the Saga presents few difficulties to a trans-  lator. Icelandic prose, as regards order of words, is simple,  and runs naturally enough into English. The sentences  are mostly short and plain. In Egilssaga the style for  Icelandic is pronounced by good authorities to be of the  best ; the translator can only hope that in its English dress  it may not have lost all its attractiveness. 

Of the verse in this Saga, and of the principles followed  in translating it, something must be said ; for peculiar diff-  culties beset the translator of Icelandic verses. Icelandic  poetry differs entirely from Icelandic prose. Whereas the  prose is simple, the poetry is highly artificial. Especially  so are the detached staves or stanzas sprinkled throughout  the Sagas. Of such the Egla has a great number, mostly  Egil’s own verses; and, as he is accounted one of the best  of Iceland’s ancient skalds, they are an interesting part of  the Saga and could not be omitted. But in rendering them  into English one meets with perplexing difficulties. 

These staves consist nearly always of eight lines each,  made up of two sets of four lines, the sense being usually  complete in each quatrain. As regards metre, the lines are  short, about of a length, not exactly so in syllables, but  alike in rhythm and number of accented syllables. No  doubt more exact rules about their metre are discoverable  and known to Icelanders, but for the English reader the  above description will suffice. The lines do not rhyme, or  very seldom do so, and (I believe) rhyme in these detached  stanzas is looked on as a mark of a later date than the tenth  century. The place of rhyme is taken by alliteration of  Initials. That is to say, in the second line must be repeated  the same initial consonant that has been used twice (or at  least once) in the first line, or else a vowel must be so  repeated. Anyone familiar with old English or Saxon  verses (such as occur in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, ¢g.,  the battle of Brunanburh) will understand the kind of  alliteration meant. 

Now, a translator has to choose between keeping this 


x STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


form as far as he may, or changing it into rhyme with strict  ‘syllabic metre. As the former method of alliteration with some  license as to length of line by unaccented syllables allows of  a closer rendering of the original, it has been preferred. 

But there are several puzzles to solve in Icelandic verse.  There is often a curiously complex order of words, an order  that sometimes ‘renders a sentence utterly unconstruable at  ‘first sight even to one accustomed to the involutions of  Latin and German. Were it not for the consentient  authority of Scandinavian interpreters, I could never have  imagined words to be meant so out of the order in which  they are written. To keep their rules of alliterative sound,  the skalds broke those of grammatical sense. The sub-  joined examples (by no means extreme ones) will give an  idea of the Icelandic practice in this kind. 

(1) ‘Now hath the lord of earth slain falls the land under  the descendant of Ella forward in fight of rule head-stem  three princes.’ 

Which being interpreted is: ‘ Ncw hath the lord of earth,  forward in fight, head-stem, slain three princes : the land  falls under the rule of the descendant of Ella.’ 

(2) ‘Let listen pleased to the stream of long- ‘haired friend  of altars take heed thane of silence thy people the king’s of  mine.’ 

Interpreted: ‘Let the king’s thane listen pleased to the  stream of my long-haired altar-friend (=to the stream of  song from Odin) ; let the people take heed of silence.’ 

The consenting voice of three gives (with hardly a varia-  tion in detail) these explanations. Now, these examples in  their original order sound much as if Scott had written in  the opening of the ‘ Lady of the Lake’: 


‘ At eve had drunk where danced his fill  The stag the moon on Monan’s rill.’ 


This feature of Icelandic verse plainly cannot be kept, nor  is it worth keeping. One must presume that somehow the  hearers (or most of them) did understand what was sung,  but no English hearer or reader could understand his own  language so treated. A translator must give up this artificial  order. But this peculiarity, besides making the sense hard 


INTRODUCTION . xi 


to unravel, may also cause additional trouble to the trans-  lator, who has to make new alliterations in place of old ones,  that were perhaps ready to hand, but have disappeared by  the rearranging of the words into something intelligible.  But the most curious characteristic of Icelandie poetry  and the most difficult to deal with is the ‘kenning,’ as it is  called. It means ‘a mark of recognition’; kennings are  descriptive names or periphrases. Such phraseology we  find, to some extent, in all ancient poetry, but it is most  artificial in the Northern poets. It seems a principle with  them seldom to call a thing or person by its plain name, but  to use a periphrasis. These kennings are of very different  kinds. Sometimes they are really poetical descriptions,  figurative, but easily understood and appreciated, and  apposite to the passage in which they occur. For instance,  anyone can understand a sword in action being called a  ‘wound-snake ’ or ‘ wound-wolf, arrows flying from the bow-  string ‘ wound-bees,’ a shield a ‘rimmed moon,’ a ship ‘sea-  swan,’ sea-horse ‘sea-king’s steed.’ ‘Willow-render’ (tree-  render) for wind recalls the sézifraga flabra of Lucretius.  But some kennings are extraordinary, especially when com-  pound, as: they often are. ‘ Dale-fish,’ for example, is a  curious roundabout for ‘serpent’; then built upon this we  find ‘ dale-fish-mercy,’ for the season that cheers or enlivens  the serpent, z.¢., ‘summer.’ We know that ‘it is the bright  day that brings forth the adder,’ but very cumbrous is this  kenning used in a verse of the Egla simply to mark the  time of an exploit. Numerous are the kennings for ‘ gold,’  ‘man,’ ‘woman,’ nor are these (as far as one can see) used  with any reference to the fitness of each for the occasion.  Again, some of the kennings seem meant to be rather  humorous than what we should call poetical, as when the  head is ‘hat-knoll,’ ‘ hat-stall’; the eyes ‘brow-pits’; the  tongue ‘song-pounder.’ And certainly some were pur-  posely enigmatical, meant to tax the ingenuity of the  hearer to solve. Names of persons are hidden. Egil is  supposed once to do this with the name of a woman; it is  hidden so carefully that his friend Arinbjorn cannot discover  it, nor have commentators satisfactorily found it yet. On  another occasion Egil describes Arinbjorn by a kind of pun 


xil STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


as ‘the bear’ (4jorz) of the birchwood’s terror (of aziz, ‘the  hearth,’ on which birchwood is burnt). 

ab his fondness for wrapping up wisdom in riddles we see  in Eastern nations. Solomon (Prov. 1. 6) puts it as a desir-  able learning ‘to understand a proverb and a figure, the  words of the wise and their dark sayings ’ (marg. ‘ riddles’) ;  the LXX. has tapaBorrjv xuiaxoreiviv Adyoy paces ré coPwv  xai aiviywara, There are phrases like Icelandic kennings in  Solomon ; e.g., in Eccles. xi. 3, 4, ‘ the keepers of the house,  the strong men, the grinders, those that look out of the  window,’ are of this kind, as also perhaps some of those  expressions that follow. And riddles of the older type are  so. ‘Take, for example, Samson’s riddle, ‘Out of the eater  came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness.’  What is this but describing what had happened with the  kennings, ‘eater’ and ‘strong’ for lion, ‘meat’ and ‘ sweet-  ness’ for honey ? 

In some respects the use of certain epithets in ancient  Greek poetry is like the use of kennings. We find in  Homer stock epithets, names, titles, repeatedly occurring  where they do not specially fit the passage. Men are 

‘articulating, enterprising’ (me pores, &Apnora:); the earth 

is ‘black, all-feeding, rye-giving’ (uerauver, movhuGéreipa,  Ceidwpos) ; the sea is ‘ divine, fishful’ (d7a, induéeroa) ; kings  and chiefs ‘ Jove’s nurslings, blameless’ (d:orpedees, duiuoves),  etc., without regard to the special citcumstances. But in  Greek with the epithet the noun is mostly expressed ; whereas  in Icelandic it has to be guessed. 

Very many kennings are based on mythology. This is 


not only true of the names of the gods, but also of other 


persons and things ; they are frequently described by peri-  phrases which can only be explained from the Edda, and  are therefore meaningless to those who are not well versed  in the details of that same. 

And now it will be seen that these various kennings  present a double difficulty, first to understand, then to deal  with in translation. Suppose them understood, still how  shall they be rendered? When they are poetical figures  appropriate to the passage they are fairly manageable, some-  times without change, sometimes by simile, sometimes as 


INTRODUCTION xiii 


epithet, adding the noun. But where they do not fit the  matter in hand, they are, if closely rendered, barely intel-  ligible ; to our notions they are unpoetical ; they will often  spoil the spirit and meaning of the whole verse to an  English reader by calling off his attention to a puzzle. The  substance of the entire passage will be lost by too much  particularity. They are cumbrous, there is no room in the  text to make them really clear, and to be continually putting  down obscurities and claiming space elsewhere in notes to  explain them seems undesirable. Therefore I elected to  give up many of the far-fetched kennings, putting the answer  instead of the riddle where the riddle seemed hardly worth  keeping. For one thing seemed most important in trans-  lating these staves, to make each stave fairly plain to be  understood by English readers as it was presumably by  Icelandic hearers. That my renderings will satisfy all I  do not suppose, either all learned Northern critics or all  English readers. Many of the original staves cannot be  made to satisfy modern taste, and, indeed, they are of very  unequal merit. Some of Egil’s verses are of great force  and spirit; he had a true poetic vein, and depends less on  artificialities than some of the Icelandic verse-writers ; but  the merit and attractiveness of the Saga does not rest on  these detached verses. Were they omitted most readers  would not miss much. But to omit them I could not  venture, so I have dealt with them as best I might. 

Besides these scattered stanzas the Egla contains Egil’s  three great poems. Jdnsson, indeed, banishes these to an  appendix. But there seems no doubt that they are genuine  compositions of Egil, though perhaps not included in the  . Saga in its earliest form. It appeared, therefore, better to  keep them in the place to which they have now by use a  prescriptive right. I shall say no more of them here than  that they are each remarkable in their way ; ‘Sonatorrek,’  for depth of feeling and poetry, I should rank first; it is  unlike the generality of Icelandic poems. 

And now pass we to the actual matter and outline of the  Story, which naturally falls into three divisions. 

I. The history of Kveldulf’s family, especially of Thorolf,  in Norway. 


xiv STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


II. The settlement of Skallagrim in Iceland, the birth of  Thorolf the younger, then of Egil, whose adventures (all  out of Iceland) are told up to his final return when fifty  years old. 

IIT. Egil’s later uneventful years in Iceland, his old age  and death, and a brief notice of his descendants. The out-  line of the story is this:— ae  ~ Kveldulf, a rich yeoman, marrying rather late in life, has  two sons. The younger son, Skallagrim, stays at home  with his father. Thorolf the elder goes freebooting. While  these two are young men, Harold Fairhair is winning to  himself the sole rule of Norway and putting down the petty  kings. Kveldulf refuses to leave home and help in fight  against Harold, yet will he not upon Harold’s success take  service under him. Thorolf, however, against his father’s  warning, does so, and wins favour and rank at court. Upon  the death of his friend Bard he inherits his wealth and  widow. Then two half-brothers of Bard’s father claim part  of the property. Being denied all share, they slander  Thorolf to the king. Harold is by degrees brought to  believe their charges; he deprives Thorolf of his honours  and his inheritance from Bard, then seizes Thorolf’s own  ship and cargo. Whereupon Thorolf retaliates on the king’s  property. Then king Harold goes against him with a large  force, burns his house, and in a desperate fight slays him. 

After awhile Harold is willing to make some amends; but  Kveldulf and Skallagrim refuse all overtures of reconcilia-  tion. They take what vengeance they can on some con-  cerned in Thorolf’s death, and resolve to seek Iceland.  Kveldulf dies on the way, but his coffin is cast upon Ice-  land’s shore, and found by the rest soon after their landing.  Near this spot on the Borgar Firth Skallagrim settles. He  and his company thrive. Two sons are born to him:  Thorolf, and about ten years later Egil. Thorolf grows to  be like his namesake and uncle; he soon takes to roving ;  visits Norway, where at the house of Thorir, his father’s  friend, he meets a son of Harold Fairhair, Eric, then but a  boy. They strike up a friendship, which continues when Eric  Bloodaxe becomes king ; and Thorolf is much with Eric and  queen Gunnhilda. After some years he returns to Iceland. 


INTRODUCTION XV" 


Meanwhile Egil has been growing up. As a child he  shows no common wit and strength, but is wilful, un-  manageable, agrees ill with his father, breaks out in acts of  violence. He goes out with Thorolf on his next voyage to  Norway; he and Arinbjorn, Thorir’s son, become friends.  But Egil soon provokes the wrath of Eric and Gunnhilda ;  Gunnhilda attempts his life; Egil retaliates, and the  brothers have to quit Norway. They seek England, serve  under king Athelstan, win for him a battle in Northumber-  land, in which Thorolf falls. Egil, though promised great  honours with Athelstan, goes to Norway to see after  Thorolf’s widow ; after awhile he marries her and returns  to Iceland. On tidings of his wife’s father’s death he goes  to Norway to claim her inheritance, which is unjustly and  violently kept from him. Egil narrowly escapes from Eric’s  ships, slays the man who holds the property, also slays a  son of Eric, and after solemnly cursing the king and queen  returns to Iceland. He finds his father ageing much; soon  Skallagrim dies. And now Hacon, Eric’s brother, foster-  son of king Athelstan, is recalled to Norway as king, and  Eric Bloodaxe is forced to flee. He with Arinbjorn goes to  Scotland, then to Northumberland, of which he is made  governor for Athelstan. Egil, resolving to revisit Athelstan  in England, is wrecked at Humbermouth, within Eric’s  dominion. At once he rides to York, seeks out Arinbjorn,  and they two go before Eric. Gunnhilda urges that Egil be  put to death; but for Arinbjorn’s sake, after recital of his  poem, he is spared. Going on to Athelstan, he is well  received, and urged to stay; but first he will go to Norway  after his wife’s property. From Hacon he wins a hearing,  brings a suit against Earl Atli, the holder of the property:  the matter is referred to wager of battle; Atli is slain,  whereupon Egil returns to Iceland; he is there twelve  years: sons and daughters are born to him. Athelstan  dies soon after Egil’s return to Iceland; some years later  Eric is killed in battle. Arinbjorn is again in Norway; so  Egil goes thither, is with him; they go harrying in Saxland  and Friesland, after which Arinbjorn joins Enric’s sons, in  Denmark; Egil returns to Thorstein, Arinbjorn’s nephew,  and he takes Thorstein’s place in a winter expedition to 


XVi STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Vermaland to gather the king’s tribute. From the perils of  this he escapes ; then in spring sails out to Iceland, where  he lives without further adventure. 

His daughters get husbands: of his sons, Gunnar dies  young of sickness ; Bodvar is drowned, aged about sixteen,  on which loss Egil composes a poem; and later one on ©  Arinbjorn. Upon the death of Asgerdr, his wife, he leaves  Borg, and retires to live at Mossfell with Grim and Thordisa  his niece and step-daughter. Thorstein, Egil’s youngest son,  has a lawsuit with an encroaching neighbour; the decision  of this, referred to Egil, is about his last public act. But  he lives on to be very old and blind, and dies of sickness. 

Grim and Thorstein afterwards become Christians. Many  famous men sprang from Skallagrim and Egil. Bones  believed to be Egil’s were found about a hundred and sixty  years after his death, and removed to the churchyard at  Mossfell. 


Through the whole Saga, as a connecting thread, runs the  family feud between the house of Kveldulf and the house of  Harold. Old Kveldulf’s prophecy that Harold will work  scathe on his kin comes true by Thorolf’s death. Venge-  ance for him is taken, and the feud sleeps awhile; nay,  against his father Harold’s warning, Eric accepts the younger  Thorolf as a friend. But Egil, going to Norway, by his  headstrong deeds reawakens the quarrel, being perhaps  nothing loth to do so, and following Skallagrim’s mood,  who had scorned king Eric’s gift sent by the hand of  Thorolf. The enmity is bitter between Egil and Eric stirred  by Gunnhilda; Egil however wins through all perils, and,  even as Harold Fairhair, chief of the feud on the other side,  had done, at last dies in his bed full of years. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF THE CHIEF EVENTS IN THE  SAGA OR CONNECTED WITH IT. 


A.D. 850. Birth of Harold Fairhair. 

860. Harold Fairhair comes to the throne. 

870. He becomes sole king of Norway. 

870 (circa). Thorolf, being about twenty-four years old,  goes to Harold. 


INTRODUCTION xvii 


. 872. Battle of Hafrsfirth. 


877. Death of Thorolf. 

878. Skallagrim emigrates to Iceland. 

886 (circa). Thorolf Skallagrimsson born. 

898-yor (circa). Egil born. 

898-go2. Bjorn’s abduction of Thora, marriage, visit  to Iceland. 

g03. Feast at Yngvar’s. Thorolf and Bjorn go to  Norway. 

904-14. Thorolf’s freebootings. Among these is put  Eric’s expedition to Bjarmaland, but this pro-  bably was in 918. 

906. Bjorn’s second marriage. 

906-15. Egil’s childhood and boyhood in Iceland. 

914. ‘Thorolf returns to Iceland. 

915. Thorolf goes to Norway with Egil; twelve years  pass before Egil] returns. 

916-23. Freebootings of Thorolf and Egil. 

923. Thorolf marries Asgerdr. Slaying of Bard. 

924. Fight with Eyvind Skreyja. Thorolf and Egil  go to England. 

925. Battle of Vinheath, where Thorolf falls. 

926. Egil goes to Norway. Marries Asgerdr next  winter. 

927. Returns to Iceland ; is there several years, during  which probably his eldest daughter is born. 

933. He goes to Norway. Harold Fairhair dies.  Fgil has a suit with Bergonund; returns to  Iceland. Skallagrim dies this winter. 

935. Hacon now king in Norway. Eric is in North-  umberland. Egil wrecked there. Hofudlausn.  Egil with Athelstan. 

937. He goes to Norway ; fights with Atli; returns to  Iceland. 

938-50. Egil is in Iceland. He has five children  in all. 

940. Death of king Athelstan. 

950 (ctrca). Eric falls in battle. Arinbjorn is back in  Norway ; Egil goes to him. 


STORY OF EGIL.SKALLAGRIMSSON 


. 951. They harry eastwards; Arinbjorn then joins 


Eric’s sons. Egil next winter goes to Verma-  land. 

952-60.: Marriages of FEgil’s step-daughter and 

daughters. 

g60. Bodvar’s drowning. Sona-torrek. 

961. Hacon’s death. 

962. Epic poem on Arinbjorn. 

967 (circa). Thorstein’s marriage. 

973 (circa). Asgerdr dies. Egil retires to Mossfell.  Thorstein lives at Borg. 

975-8. Dispute between Thorstein and Steinar. 

975. Earl Hacon becomes king. In his ‘early days’  Egil is past eighty. | 

983-8. Egil’s death. 

1000. Grim and Thorstein are baptized. 

1143. Skapti priest. Egil’s bones found. 


CHAPTER I. .  Of Kveldulf and his sons. 


HERE was a man named UIf, son of Byjalf, and Hall- 

3 bera, daughter of Ulf the fearless ; she was sister of 

Hallbjorn Half-giaf?fm Hrafnista, and he the father 

of Kettle Hzing. Ulf was a man so tall and strong that 

none could match him, and in his youth he roved the seas 

as a freebooter. In fellowship with him was one Kari of 

Berdla,.a man. of renown for strength and daring; he was 

a Berserk. Ulf and he had one common purse, and were  the dearest friends. 

But when they gave up freebooting, Kari went to his  estate at Berdla, being a man of great wealth. Three  children had Kari,“one son named Eyvind Lambi, another  Aulvir Hnuf, and a daughter Salbjorg, who was a most  beautiful woman of a noble spirit. .Her did Ulf take to  wife, and then he too went to his estates. Wealthy he was  both in lands and chattels ; he took baron’s rank as his fore-  . fathers had done, and became a great man. It is told of  Ulf that he was a good householder ; it was his wont to rise  _ up early, and then go round among his labourers or where  his smiths were, and to overlook his stock and fields, and  at times he would talk with such as needed his counsel, and  good counsel he could give in all things, for he was very  _wise. But everyday as evening drew on he became sullen,  so that few could come to speak with him. He was an  evening sleeper, and it was commonly said that he was very  shape-strong. He was called Kveldulf. 


I 


2 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Kveldulf and his wife had two sons, the elder was named  Thorolf, the younger Grim ; these, when they grew up, were  both tall men and strong, as was their father. (But Thorolf  was most comely as well as doughty, favouring his mother’s  kin; very cheery was he, liberal, impetuous in everything, a  good trader, winning the hearts of all men. Grim was  swarthy, ill-favoured, like his father both in face and mind;  he became a good man of business; skilful was he in wood  and iron, an excellent smith. In the winter he often went  to the herring fishing, and with him many house-carles,) 

But when Thorolf was twenty years old, then he made  him ready to go a harrying. Kveldulf gave him a long-ship,  and Kari of Berdla’s sons, Eyvind and Aulvir, resolved to go  on that voyage, taking a large force and another long-ship ;  and they roved the seas in the summer, and got them wealth,  and had a large booty to divide. For several summers they  were out roving, but stayed at home in winter with their  fathers. Thorolf brought home many costly things, and  took them to his father and mother ; thus they were well-to-  do both for possessions and honour. Kveldulf was now  well stricken in years, and his sons were grown men. 


CHAPTER II. 


Of Auluir Hnuf. 


UDBJORN was then king over the Firthfolk ; there was  A an earl of his named Hroald, whose son was Thorir.  Atli the Slim was then an earl, he dwelt.at Gaula; he  had sons—Hallstein, Holmstein, and Herstein ; andadaughter,  Solveig the Fair. -It happened one autumn that much people  were gathered at Gaula for a sacrificial feast, then saw Aulvir  Hnuf Solveig and courted her; he afterwards asked her to  wife. But the earl thought him an unequal match and would  not give her. Whereupon Aulvir composed many love-songs,  and thought so much of Solveig that he left freebooting, but  Thorolf and Eyvind Lambi kept it on. 


BEGINNING OF THE RULE OF HAROLD FAIRHAIR 3 


CHAPTER III.  The beginning of the rule of Harold Fairhair. 


AROLD, son of Halfdan Swarthy, was heir after his  H father. He had bound himself by this vow, not to let  his hair be cut or combed till he were sole king over  Norway, wherefore he was called Harold Shockhead. So first  he warred with the kings nearest to him and conquered them,  as is told at length elsewhere. Then he got possession of  Upland; thence he went northwards to Throndheim, and had  many battles there before he became absolute over all the  Thronds. After that he purposed to go north to Naumdale to  attack the brothers Herlaug and Hrollaug, kings of Naumdale.  But when these brothers heard of his coming, Herlaug with  twelve men entered the sepulchral mound which they had  caused to be made (they were three winters at the making),  and the mound then was closed after them. But king  Hrollaug sank from royalty to earldom, giving up his  ‘kingdom and becoming a vassal of Harold. So Harold  gained the Naumdalesmen and Halogaland, and he set  rulers over his realm there. Then went he southwards with  a fleet to Mera, where he fought a battle with king Hun-  thiof, and gained the victory, Hunthiof being slain. Thus  he won North Meera and Raumsdale. But Solvi Bandy-legs,  Hunthiof’s son, escaped thence, and going to king Arnvid,  in South Meera, he asked help, with these words: 

‘Though this danger now touches us, before long the  same will come to you; for Harold, as I ween, will hasten  hither when he has enthralled and oppressed after his will  all in North Mera and Raumsdale. Then will the same  need be upon you as was upon us, to guard your wealth  and liberty, and to try everyone from whom you may hope  for aid. And I now offer myself with my forces against this  tyranny and wrong. But, if you make the other choice,  you must do as the Naumdalesmen have done, and go of  your own will into slavery, and become Harold's thralls,  My father:thought it victory to die a king with honour 


4 ‘STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


rather than become in his old age another king’s subject.  Thou, as I judge, wilt think the same, and so will others  who have any high spirit and claim to be men of valour.’ 

By such persuasion king Arnvid was determined to gather 

his forces and defend his land. He and Solvi made a league,  and sent messengers to Audbjorn, king of the Firthfolk, that  he should come and help them. Audbjorn, after counsel  taken with friends, consented, and bade cut the war-arrow  and send the war-summons throughout his realm, with word  ‘to his nobles that they should join him.  _ But when the king’s messengers came to Kveldulf and  told him their errand, and that the king would have Kveldulf  come to him with all his house-carles, then answered he : 

_ ‘It is my duty to the king to take the field with him if  he have to defend his own land, and there be harrying  against the Firthfolk ; but this I deem clean beyond my  duty, to go north to Meera and defend their land. Briefly  ye may say when ye meet your king that Kveldulf will sit  at home daring this rush to war, nor will he gather forces  nor leave his home to fight with Harold Shockhead. For  I think that he has a whole load of good-fortune where our  king has not a handful.’ 

The messengers went back to the king, and told him  how their errand had sped; but Kveldulf sat at home on  his estates. 

e 


CHAPTER IV.  Battle of king Harold and Audbjorn. 


. d ING AUDBJORN went with his forces northwards 

to Mera; there he joined king Arnvid and Solvi  | Bandy-legs, and altogether they had a large host.  ‘King Harold also had come from the north with his forces,  and the armies met inside Solskel. There was fought a great  battle, with much slaughter in either host. Of the Merian  forces fell the kings Arnvid and Audbjorn, but Solvi escaped,  _and afterwards became a great sea-rover, and wrought much  ‘scathe on Harold’s kingdom, and was nicknamed Bandy-legs. 


BATTLE OF KING HAROLD AND AUDBFORN 5. 


On Harold’s side fell two earls, Asgaut and Asbjorn, and two.  sons of earl Hacon, Grjotgard and Herlaug, and many  other great men. After this Harold subdued South Mera.  Vemund Audbjorn’s brother still retained the Firthfolk,  being made king. It was now autumn, and king Harold  was advised not to go south in autumn-tide. So he set  earl Rognvald over North and South Mera and Raumsdale,  and kept a numerous force about himself. 

That same autumn the sons of Atli set on Aulvir Hnuf  at his home, and would fain have slain him. They had  such a force that Aulvir could not withstand them, but fled  for his life. Going northwards to Meera, he there found  Harold, and submitted to him, and went north with the  king to Throndheim, and he became most friendly with  him, and remained with him for a long time thereafter, and  was inade his skald. 

In- the winter following earl Rognvald went the inner  way by the Ejid-sea southwards to the Firths. Having  news by spies of the movements of king Vemund, he came  by night to Naust-dale, where Vemund was at a banquet,  and, surrounding the house, burnt within it the king and  ninety men. After that Kari of Berdla came to earl  Rognvald with a long-ship fully manned, and they two  went north to Mera. Rognvald took the ships that had  belonged to Vemund and all the chattels he could get.  Kari of Berdla then went north to king Harold at Thrond-  heim, and became his man. 

Next spring king Harold went southwards along the  coast with a fleet, and subdued firths and fells, and arranged  for men of his own to rule them. Earl Hroald he set over  the Firthfolk. King Harold was very careful, when he had  gotten new peoples under his power, about barons and rich  landowners, and all those whom he suspected of being at  all likely to raise rebellion. Every such man he treated in /  one of two ways: he either made him become his liege-man,  or go abroad ; or (as a third choice) suffer yet harder con-  ditions, some even losing life or limb. Harold claimed as  his own through every district all patrimonies, and all land  tilled or untilled, likewise all seas and freshwater lakes.  All landowners were to be his tenants, as. also all that 


6 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


worked in the forest, salt-burners, hunters and fishers by  land and sea, all these owed him duty. But many fled  abroad from this tyranny, and much waste land was then  colonized far and wide, both eastwards in Jamtaland and  Helsingjaland, and also the West lands, the Southern isles,  Dublin in Ireland, Caithness in Scotland, and Shetland.  And in that time Iceland was found. 


e  CHAPTER V.  The king’s message to Kveldulf. 


ING HAROLD lay with his fleet in the Firths, 

kK whence he sent messengers round the land to such 

as had not come to him, but with whom he thought 

he had business. The messengers came to Kveldulf, and 

were well received. They set forth their errand, said that  the king would have Kveldulf come to him. 

‘He has heard,’ said they, ‘that you are a man of renown  and high family. You will get from him terms of great  honour, for the king is very keen on this, to have with  him such as he hears are men of mark for strength and  bravery.’ 

Kveldulf answered that he was an old man, not fit for  war or to be out in warships. ‘I will now,’ said he, ‘sit at  home and leave serving kings.’ 

Upon this the messengers said, ‘Then let your son go to  the king; he is a tall man and a likely warrior. The king  will make you a baron,’ said they to Grim, ‘if. you will serve  him.’ 

‘I will be made baron under none,’ said Grim, ‘ while  my father lives; he, while he lives, shall be my liege-lord.’ 

The messengers went away, and when they came to the  king told him all that Kveldulf had said before them.  Whereat the king looked sullen, but he spoke little ; these  men, he said, were proud, or what were they aiming at?  Aulvir Hnuf was standing near, and he bade the king not  be wroth. ‘I will go,’ said he, ‘to Kveldulf; and he will 


THE KING’S MESSAGE TO KVELDULF 7 


consent to come to you, as soon as he knows that you think  it a matter of moment.’ 

- So Aulvir went to Kveldulf and told him that the king  was wroth, and it would not go well unless one of the two,  father or son, came to the king; he said, too, that he would  get them great honour from the king if they would but  pay homage. Further he told them at length, as was true,  that the king was liberal to his men both in money and 


honours.  Kveldulf said, [My foreboding is that-I and my sons shall  get no luck from king: and I will not goto him. But  if Thorolf returns this summer, he will be easily won to  this journey, as also to be made the king’s man. Say you  this to the king, that I will be his friend, and will keep to  his friendship all who heed my words ; I will also hold the  same rule and authority from his hand that I held before  from the former king, if he will that it continue so still, and  I will see how I and the king agree.’ 

Then Aulvir went back and told the king that Kveldulf  would send him his son, and he (said Aulvir) would suit  better ; but he was not then at home. The king let the  matter rest. In the summer he went inland to Sogn, but  in autumn made ready to go northwards to Throndheim. 


e 


CHAPTER VI.  Thorolf resolves to serve the king. 


: ‘HOROLF KVELDULF'’S son and Eyvind Lambi  came home from sea-roving inthe autumn. Thorolf  went to his father, and father and son had some 

talk together. Thorolf asked what had been the errand of 

the men whom Harold sent thither. Kveldulf said the king  had sent them with this message, that Kveldulf or else one  of his sons should become his man.  ‘How answeredst thou ?’ said Thorolf.  [I spake what was in my mind, that I would never take  .sérvice with king Harold; and ye two will both do the 


g STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON - 


same, if I may counsel: this I think will be the end, that  we shall reap ruin from that king.’  ‘That,’ said Thorolf, ‘is quite contrary to what my mind 


tells me, for I think I shall get from him much advance-_ 


ment. And on this I am resolved, to seek the king, and 


‘ become his man ; and this I have learnt for true, that his 


guard is made up of none but valiant men. ‘To join their  company, if they will have me, seems to me most desirable ;  these men are in far better case than all others in the land.  And ’tis told me of the king that he is most generous in  money gifts to his men, and not slow to give them promo-  tion and to grant rule to such as he deems meet for it.  Whereas I hear this about all that turn their backs upon  him and pay him not homage with friendship, that they all  become men of nought, some flee abroad, some are made  hirelings. It seems wonderful to me, father, in a man so  wise and ambitious as thou art, that thou wouldst not  thankfully take the dignity which the king offered thee.  But if thou thinkest that thou hast prophetic foresight of  this, that we shall get misfortune from this king, and that  he will be our enemy, then why didst thou not go to battle  against him with that king in whose service thou wert  before? Now, methinks it is most unreasonable neither to  be his friend nor his enemy.’ 

‘It went,’ said Kveldulf, ‘just as my mind foreboded,  that they marched not to victory who went northwards to  fight with Harold Shockhead in Meera; and equally true  will this be, that Harold will work much scathe on my kin.  But thou, Thorolf, wilt take thine own counsel in thine own  business ; nor do I fear, though thou enter into the company  of Harold’s guards, that thou wilt not be thought capable  and equal to the foremost in all proofs of manhood. Only  beware of this, keep within bounds, nor rival thy betters ;  thou wilt not, I am sure, yield to others overmuch.’ 

But when Thorolf made him ready to go, Kveldulf  accompanied him down to the ship and embraced him,  with wishes for his happy journey and their next merry 


meeting.  ' 


B¥ORGOLF, BRYN¥OLF, BARD, AND HILDIRIDA 9 


CHAPTER VII.  Of Byjorgolf, Brynjolf, Bard, and Hildirida. 


’ ‘HERE was a man in Halogaland named Bjorgolf ;  he dwelt in Torgar. He was a baron, powerful and  wealthy ; in strength, stature, and kindred half hill- 

giant. He had a son named Brynjolf, who was like his 

father. Bjorgolf was now old, and his wife was dead ; and  he had given over into his son’s hands all business, and  found him a wife, Helga, daughter of Kettle Hzing of 

Hrafnista. ‘Fheir son was named Bard ; he soon grew to 

be tall and handsome, and became a right doughty man. 

One autumn there was a banquet where many men were  gathered, Bjorgolf and his son being there the most honour-  able guests. In the evening they were paired off by lot to  drink together, as the old custom was. Now, there was at  the banquet a man named Hogni, owner of a farm in Leka, 

a man of great wealth, very handsome, shrewd, but of low 

family, who had made his own way. He had a most 

beautiful daughter, Hildirida by name; and it fell to her  lot to sit by Bjorgolf. They talked much together that  evening, and the fair maiden charmed the old man. Shortly  afterwards the banquet broke up. 

That same autumn old Bjorgolf journeyed from home in 

a cutter of his own, with thirty men aboard. He came to 

Leka, and twenty of them went up to the house, while ten 

guarded the ship. When they came to the farm, Hogni 

went out to meet him, and made him welcome, invited him  and his comrades to lodge there, which offer Bjorgolf  accepted, and they entered the room. But when they had  doffed their travelling clothes and donned mantles, then  Hogni gave orders to bring in a large bowl of beer; and  Hildirida, the daughter of the house, bare ale to the guests. -  Bjorgolf called to him Hogni the goodman, and said, 

‘My errand here is this: I will have your daughter to go 

home with me, and will even now make with her a hasty 

wedding.’ 


10 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Hogni saw no choice but to let all be as Bjorgolf would ;  so Bjorgolf bought her with an ounce of gold, and they  became man and wife, and Hildirida went home with  Bjorgolf to Torgar. Brynjolf showed him ill-pleased at  this business. Bjorgolf and Hildirida had two sons; one  was named Harek, the other Hrerek. 

Soon after this Bjorgolf died; but no sooner was he  buried than Brynjolf sent away Hildirida and her sons.  She went to her father at Leka, and there her sons were  brought up. They were good-looking, small of stature,  naturally shrewd, like their mother’s kin. They were com-  monly called Hildirida’s sons. Brynjolf made little count  _of them, and did not let them inherit aught of their father’s.  Hildirida was Hogni’s heiress, and she and her sons inherited  from him and dwelt in Leka, and had plenty of wealth.  Bard, Brynjolf’s son, and Hildirida’s sons were about of an  age. 

Bjorgolf and his son Brynjolf had long held the office of  going to the Finns, and collecting the Finns’ tribute, 

Northwards in Halogaland is a firth called Vefsnir, and  in the firth lies an island called Alost, a large island and  a good, and in this a farm called Sandness. There dwelt a  man named Sigurd, the richest man thereabouts in the  north ; he was a baron, and wise of understanding. He  had a daughter named Sigridr ; she was thought the best  match in Halogaland, being his only child and sole heiress  to her father. Bard Brynjolf’s son journeyed from home  with a cutter and thirty men aboard northwards to Alost,  and came to Sigurd at Sandness. There he declared his  business, and asked Sigridr to wife. This offer was well  received and favourably answered, and so it came about  that Bard was betrothed to the maiden. The marriage was  to take place the next summer. Bard was then to come  north for the wedding. 


OF BARD AND THOROLF Is 


CHAPTER VIII.  Of Bard and Thorolf. 


‘ ING HAROLD had that summer sent word to the  men of power that were in Halogaland, summon-  ing to him such as had not come to him before. 

Brynjolf resolved to go, and with him Bard his son; and  in the autumn they went southwards to Throndheim, and *  there met the king. He received them most gladly. Bryn-  jolf was made a baron of the king’s ; the king also gave him  large grants beside what he had before. He gave him withal  the right of journey to the Finns, with the king’s business  on the fells and the Finn traffic. Then Brynjolf went away  home to his estate, but Bard remained, and was made one  of the king’s guard. 

Of all his guard the king most prized his skalds; they  occupied the second high seat. Of these Audun IIl-skald  sat innermost, being the oldest; he had been skald to  Halfdan Swarthy, king Harold’s father. Next to him sat  Thorbjorn Raven, then Aulvir Hnuf, and next to him was  placed Bard; he was there by-named Bard the White or  Bard the Strong. He was in honour with everyone there,  but between him and Aulvir Hnuf was a close friendship. 

That same autumn came to king Harold Thorolf Kvei-  dulf’s son and Eyvind Lambi, Kari of Berdla’s son, and they  were well received. They brought thither a swift twenty-  benched long-ship well manned, which they had before used  in sea-roving. They and their company were placed in  the guest-hall ; but when they had waited there till they  thought it a fit time to go before the king, Kari of Berdla  and Aulvir Hnuf went in with them. ‘They greeted the  king. Then said Aulvir Hnuf, ‘Here is come Kveldulf’s  son, whom I told thee in the summer Kveldulf would send.  His promise to thee will now stand fast; for here thou  canst see true tokens that he will be thy friend in all when  he hath sent his son hither to take service with thee, a  stalwart man as thou mayest see. Now, this is the boon 


12, . STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


craved by Kveldulf and by us all, that thou receive Thorolf  with honour and make him a great man with thee.’ 

The king answered his. words well, promising that so he  would do, ‘ If,’ said he, ‘Thorolf proves himself as accom-  plished in deed as he is right brave in look.’ 

After this Thorolf was made of the king’s household, and  one of his guard. | 

But Kari of Berdla and his son Eyvind Lambi went  back south in the ship which Thorolf had brought north,  and so home to Kari’s farm. ‘Thorolf remained with the  king, who appointed him a seat between Aulvir Hnuf and  Bard ; and these three struck up a close friendship. And  all men said of Thorolf and Bard that they were a well-  matched pair for comeliness, stature, strength, and all  doughty deeds. And both were in high favour with the  king. 

But when winter was past and summer came, then Bard  asked leave to go and see to the marriage promised to him  the summer before. And when the king knew that Bard’s  errand was urgent, he allowed him to go home. Then  Bard asked Thorolf to go north with him, saying (as was  true) that he would meet there many of his.kin, men of  renown, whom he had not yet seen or known. ‘Thorolf  thought this desirable, so they got leave from the king for  this; then they made them ready, took a good ship and  crew, and went their way. 

When they came to Torgar, they sent word to Sigurd  that Bard would now see to that marriage on which they  had agreed the summer before. Sigurd said that he would  hold to all that they had arranged; so they fixed the  wedding-day, and Bard with his party were to come north to  sandness. At the appointed time Brynjolf and Bard set  out, and with them many great men of their kin and con-  nexions. And it was as Bard had said, that Thorolf met there  many of his kinsmen that’ he had not known before. They  journeyed to Sandness, and there was held the most splendid  feast. And when the feast was ended, Bard went home  with his wife, and remained at home through the summer,  and Thorolf with him. 

In the autumn they came. south to the king, and were 


—he- 


BATTLE IN HAFR'S FIRTH 13 


with him another winter. During that winter Brynjolf  died ; and when Bard learnt that the inheritance there was  open for him, he asked leave to go horne. This the king  granted, and befcre they parted Bard was made a baron, as  his father had been, and held of the king all those same  grants: that Brynjolf had held. Bard went home to his  estate, and at once became a great chief; but Hildirida’s  ~ sons got no more of the heritage than before. Bard had a  son by his wife; he was named Grim. Meanwhile Thorolf  was with the king, and in great honour. 


¢ 


CHAPTER IX.  Battle in Hafr’s Firth. 


ING HAROLD proclaimed a general levy, and  kK gathered a fleet, summoning his forces far.and wide  through the land. Hewent out from Throndheim,  and bent his course southwards, for he had heard that.a  large host was gathered throughout Agdir, Rogaland, and  Hordaland, assembled from far, both from the inland parts  above, and from the east out of Vik, and many great men  ‘were there met who purposed to defend their land from  the king. Harold held on his way from the north, with a  large force, having his guards on board. In the: forecastle  of the king’s ship were Thorolf Kveldulfsson, Bard the  White, Kari of Berdla’s sons, Aulvir Hnuf and Eyvind  Lambi, and in the prow were twelve Berserks of the king.  The fleets met south in Rogaland in Haft’s Firth.  There was fought the greatest battle that king Harold had  had, with much slaughter in either host. The king set his  own ship in‘the van, and there the battle was most stubborn,  but the end was that king Harold won the victory. Thorir  Longchin, king of Agdir, fell there, but Kjotvi the wealthy  fled with all his men that could ‘stand, save some that  surrendered after ‘the battle. When the roll of Harold’s  army was called, many were they that had fallen, and many  were sore wounded. Thorolf was badly wounded, Bard 


= 


14 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


even worse ; nor was there a man unwounded in the king’s  ' ship before the mast, except those whom iron bit not—to  wit the Berserks. 

Then the king had his men’s wounds bound up, and  thanked them for their valour, and gave them gifts, adding  most praise where he thought it most deserved. He  promised them also further honour, naming some to be  steersmen, others forecastle men, others bow-sitters. This  was the last battle king Harold had within the land ; after  this none withstood him ; he was supreme over all Norway. 

The king saw to the healing of his men, whose wounds  gave them hope of life, as also to the burial of the dead  with all customary honours. Thorolf and Bard lay wounded.  Thorolfs wounds began to heal, but Bard’s proved mortal.  Then Bard had the king called to him, and spoke thus: 

‘If it so be that I die of these wounds, then I would ask  this of thee, that I may myself name my heir.’ 

To this when the king assented, then said he: 

‘I will that Thorolf my friend and kinsman take all my  heritage, both lands and chattels. To him, also, will I give  my wife and the bringing up of my son, because I trust  him for this above all men.’ 

This arrangement he made fast, as the law was, with the  leave of the king. ‘Then Bard died, and was buried, and  his death was much mourned. Thorolf was healed of his  wounds, and followed the king, and had won great glory. 

In the autumn the king went north. to Throndheim.  Then Thorolf asked to go north to “Halogaland, to see after  those gifts which he had received in the summer from his  kinsman Bard. The king gave leave for this, adding a  message and tokens that Thorolf should take all that Bard  had given him, showing that the gift was with the counsel of  the king, and that he would have it so. Then the king  made Thorolf a baron, and granted him all the rights which  Bard had had before, giving him the journey to the Finns on  the same terms. He also supplied to Thorolf a good long-  ship, with tackling complete, and had everything made  ready for his journey thence in the best possible way. So  Thorolf set out, and he and the nue parted with great  affection. 


BATTLE IN HAFR’S FIRTH 15 


But when Thorolf came north to Torgar, he was well re-  ceived. He told them of Bard’s death; also how Bard had  left him both lands and chattels, and her that had been his  wife ; then he showed the king’s order and tokens. When  Sigridr heard these tidings, she felt her great loss in her  husband, but with Thorolf she was already well acquainted,  and knew him for a man of great mark; and this promise  of her in marriage was good, and besides there was the  king’s command. So she and her friends saw it to be the  best plan that she should be betrothed to Thorolf, unless  that were against her father’s mind. Thereupon Thorolf  took all the management of the property, and also the king’s  business. 

Soon after this Thorolf started with a long-ship and about  sixty men, and coasted northwards, till one day at eventide  he came to Sandness in Alost; there they moored the ship.  And when they had raised their tent, and made arrange-  ments, Thorolf went up to the farm buildings with twenty  men. Sigurd received him well, and asked him to lodge  there, for there had been great intimacy between them since  the marriage connection between Sigurd and Bard. Then  Thorolf and his men went into the hall, and were there  entertained. Sigurd sat and talked with Thorolf, and asked  tidings. Thorolf told of the battle fought that summer in  the south, and of the fall of many meh whom Sigurd knew  well, and withal how Bard his son-in-law had died of wounds  ‘received in the battle. This they both felt to be a great  loss. Then Thorolf told Sigurd what had been the cove-  nant between him and Bard before he died, and he declared  also the orders of the king, how he would have all this hold  good, and this he showed by the tokens. 

After this Thorolf entered on his wooing with Sigurd, and:  asked Sigridr, his daughter, to wife. Sigurd received the —  proposal well; he said there were many reasons for this:  first, the king would have it so; next, Bard had asked it;  and further he himself knew Thorolf well, and thought it  a good match for his daughter. Thus Sigurd was easily  won to grant this suit; whereupon the betrothal was made,  and the wedding was fixed for the autumn at Torgar. 

Then Thorolf went home to his estate, and his comrades 


16 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


with him. There he prepared a great feast, and bade many  thereto. Of Thorolt’s-kin many were present, men of  renown. Sigurd also came thither from the north witha  long-ship and a chosen crew. Numerously attended was  that feast,and it was at once seen that Thorolf was free-  handed and munificent. He kept about him a large follow-  ing, whereof the cost was great, and much provision was  needed ; but the year was good, and needful supplies were  easily found. 

During that winter Sigurd died at Sandness, and Thorolf  was heir to all his property ; this was great wealth. 

Now the sons of Hildirida came to Thorolf, and put in  the claim which they thought they had on the property  ithat had belonged: to . their father Bjorgolf.. ‘Thorolf  ‘answered them thus: 

‘This I knew of Brynjolf, and still ‘better of Bard, that  -they were men so generous that they would have let you have  of Bjorgolf’s heritage what share they knew to be your right.  ‘I was present when ye two put in this same claim on Bard,  and I heard what he thought, that there was no ground for 

it, for he called you illegitimate.’ 

Harek said that they would bring witnesses that their  mother was duly bought with payment. 

“It is true that we did not at first treat of this matter with  Brynjolf our brother—it was a case of sharing between kins-  -men—-but of Bard we hoped to get our dues in every respect,  though: our ‘dealings with him were not for long. Now  - however ‘this heritage has come to men who are in nowise  our kin, and we cannot be altogether silent about our wrong ; 


but it may :-be that, as before, might will so prevail that we - 


get not our right of thee in this, if thou refuse to hear the  “witness that we can bring to prove us honourably born.’ 

Thorolf then answered angrily : 

§So far.am I from thinking you legitimate heirs that I am  told your mother was taken by force, and carried home as a  captive.’. : 

After that they left talking fopernene 


CA 


g 


Sr 


-FHOROLF IN FINMARK- --~ 


CHAPTER x.  Thorolf i in Finmark. ese 


“TN the winter Thorolf took his way up to the fells with a  | ... large force of not less than ninety men, whereas before it  had been the wont of the king’s stewards to have thirty  men, and sometimes fewer. He took with him plenty of wares  for trading. At once he appointed a meeting with the Finns,  took of them the tribute, and held a fair with them. All  was managed with goodwill and friendship, though not with-  out fear on the Finns’ side. Far and wide about Finmark  did he travel ; but when he reached the fells eastward, he  heard that the Kylfings were come from the east, and were  there for trading with the Finns, but in some places for  plunder also. Thorolf set Finns to spy out the movements  of the Kylfings, and he followed after to search for them,  and came upon thirty men in one den, all of whom he slew,  letting none escape. Afterwards he found together: fifteen  or twenty. In all they slew near upon a hundred, and took  immense booty, and returned in the spring after doing this.  Thorolf then went to his estates at Sandness, and re-  mained there through the spring. He had a long-ship  built, large, and with a dragon’s head, fitted out in the best  style; this he took with him from the north. Thorolf  gathered great stores of what there was in Halogaland,  employing his men after the herrings and in other fishing ;  seal-hunting there was too in abundance, and egg-gather-  ing, and all such provision he had brought to him. Never  had he fewer freedmen about his home than a hundred; he.  was open-handed and liberal, and readily made friends with  the great, and with all that were near him. A mighty man  e became, and he bestowed much care on his mak equip  ment, and weapons. 


18 STORY. OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


CHAPTER XI.  The king feasts with Thorolf. 


‘ ING HAROLD went that summer to Halogaland,  and banquets were made ready against his coming,  both where his estates were, and also by barons and 

powerful landowners. Thorolf prepared a banquet for the 

king at great cost; it was fixed for when the king should  come there. To this he bade a numerous company, the  best men that could be found. The king had about three  hundred men with him when he came to the banquet, but 

Thorolf had five hundred present. Thorolf had caused a 

large granary to be fitted up where the drinking should be, 

for there was no hall large enough to contain all that multi-  tude. And all around the building shields were hung. 

_ The king sate in the high seat; but when the foremost 

bench was filled, then the king looked round, and he turned 

red, but spoke not, and men thought they could see he was  angry. The banquet was magnificent, and all the viands  of the best. The king, however, was gloomy; he remained  there three nights, as had been intended. On the day when  the king was to leave Thorolf went to him, and offered that 

they should go together down to the strand. The king did 

so, and there, moored off the land, floated that dragon-ship © 

which Thorolf had had built, with tent and tackling com-  plete. Thorolf gave the ship to the king, and prayed the  king to believe that he had gathered such numbers for this  end, to show the king honour, and not to enter into rivalry  with him. The king took Thorolf’s words well, and then  became merry and cheerful. Many added their good word,  saying (as was true) that the banquet was most splendid,  and the farewell escort magnificent, and that the king gained  much strength by such men. ‘Then they parted with much  affection. 

The king went northwards through Halogaland as he had  purposed, and returned south as summer wore on. He  went to yet other banquets there that were prepared for him. 


¢ 


HILDIRIDA’S SONS TALK WITH HAROLD -A9 


CHAPTER XII.  Hildirida’s sons talk with Harold. 


ILDIRIDA’S sons went to the king and bade him  to a three nights’ banquet. The king accepted  their bidding, and fixed when he would come. So 

at the appointed time he and his train came thither. The  ‘company was not numerous, but the feast went off very well,  and the king was quite cheerful. Harek entered into talk  with the king, and their talk turned on this, that he asked  about the king’s journeys in those parts during the summer. 

The king answered his questions, and said that all had  received him well, each after his means. 

‘Great will have been the difference,’ said Harek, ‘and  at Torgar the company at the banquet will have been the  most numerous.’ 

The king said that it was so. 

Harek said: ‘That was to be looked for, because on  that banquet most was spent; and thou, O king, hadst  great luck in matters so turning out that thy life was not  endangered. The end was as was likely ; thou wert very  ‘wise and very fortunate; for thou at once suspectedst all  was not for good on seeing the numerous company there  gathered ; but (as I am told) thou madest all thy men  remain armed constantly and keep watch and ward night  and day.’ 

The king looked at him and said: ‘ Why speakest thou  thus, Harek ? What canst thou tell of this ?’ 

Harek answered : ‘May I speak with permission what I -  please ?” 

‘Speak,’ said the king. 

‘This I judge,’ said Harek, ‘that thou wouldst not deem  it to be well, if thou, O king, heardest every one’s words,  what men say when speaking their minds freely at home,  how they think that it is a tyranny thou exercisest over all  people. But the plain truth is, O king, that to rise against  thee the people lack nothing but boldness and a leader.  Nor is it wonderful in a man like Thorolf that he thinks  himself above everyone; he wants not for strength and 


ee  * _, 


‘20 ‘--- STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 

comeliness; he keeps a guard round him like a king ; he  has wealth in plenty, even though he jhad but what is truly  his, but besides that he holds others’ property equally at  his disposal-with hisown. Thou, tao, hast bestowed on him  large grants, and he had now made all ready to repay. them  with ill. . For this is the truth that I tell thee :. when it was  learnt that thou wert coming north to Halogaland with no  more force than three hundred men, the counsel of people  here was that an army should assemble and take thy life,  O king, and the lives of all thy force. And Thorolf was  head of these counsels, and it was offered him that he  -should be king over the Halogalanders and Naumdalesmen.  “Then he. went in and out of each firth and round all the  -islands, and got together every man he could find and every  weapon, and it was no secret that this army was to muster  ‘for battle against king Harotd. But the truth is, O king, that  ‘though thou hadst somewhat less force than those who met  thee, yet the farmer folk took fright when they saw thy fleet.  Then this counsel was adopted, to meet thee with friendly  show and bid thee to a banquet: but it was intended, when  thou wert well drunk and lying asleep, to attack thee with  fire'and weapon. And here is a proof whether I am rightly  informed ; ye were led into a granary because Thorolf was  loth to burn up his new and beautitul hall; and a further  ‘proof is that every room was full of weapons and armour.  ‘But when all their devices against thee miscarried, then  they chose the best’course they could; they hushed up  their former purpose. And I doubt not "that all may deny  ‘this counsel, because few, methinks, know themselves guilt-  less, were the truth to come out. Now this is my counsel,  O king, that thou keep Thorolf near thee, and let him be  in thy guard, and bear thy standard, and be in the fore  castle of thy ship; for this duty no man is fitter. Or if  ‘thou wilt have him to be a baron, then give him a grant  southwards in the Firths, where are all his family: thou  mayest then keep an eye on him, that he make not himself  too great for thee. But the business here in Halogaland  -_put thou into the hands of men who are moderate and will  -serve thee faithfully, and have kinsfolk here, men whose  ‘relatives have had the same work here before. We two  - brothers are ready and willing for such service as thou wilt 


HILDIRIDA’S SONS TALK WITH HAROLD 21. 


use us in; our father long had the king’s business here, and  It prospered in his hands. It is difficult, O king, to place  men as managers here, because thou wilt seldom come  hither thyself. The strength of the land is too little to  need thy coming with an army, yet thou must not come.  hither again with. few followers, for there are. here many.  disloyal people.’ 

The king was very angry at these wande but he spoke:  quietly, as was always his wont when he heard tidings of  great import. He asked whether Thorolf were at home at*  Torgar. Harek said this was not likely. | . 

‘Thorolf,’ said he, ‘is too wise to be in the way of thy  followers, O king, for he must guess that all will not be so  close but thou wilt get to know these things. He went.  north to Alost as soon as he heard that thou wert on thy-  way south.’ 

-The king spoke little about- this ‘matter. before other  men ; but it was easy to see that he inclined to believe the  words that had been spoken. 

. After this the king went his way, Hildirida’s sons giving  him honourable escort with gifts at parting, while he-  promised them his. friendship. ‘The brothers made them--  selves an errand into Naumdale, and so went round about.  as to cross the king’s path now and again; he always  received their words well. 

e 


CHAPTER XIII.  Thorgils goes to the king. |  . ‘HERE was a man named Thorgils Yeller, a house-. 


| 


carle of Thorolf’s, honoured above all the rest of his 

household ; he had followed Thorolf in his roving.  voyages as forecastle man and standard-bearer. He had been  in Hafr’s Firth, in the fleet of king Harold, and was then  steering the very ship that Thorolf had used in his roving. -  Thorgils was strong of body and right bold of heart ; the:  king had bestowed on him friendly gifts after the battle, and  promised him his friendship. Thorgils was manager at.  Torgar, and bore rule there when Thorolf was not at home. 


22 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Before Thorolf went away this time he had counted over  all the king’s tribute that he had brought from the fells, and  he put it in Thorgils’ hand, bidding him convey it to the  king, if he himself came not home before the king returned  south. So Thorgils made ready a large ship of burden  belonging to Thorolf, and put the tribute on board, and  taking about twenty men sailed southward after the king, °  and found him in Naumdale. 

But when Thorgils met the king he gave him greeting:  from Thorolf, and said that he was come thither with the  Finns’ tribute sent by Thorolf. The king looked at him,  but answered never a word, and all saw that he was angry.  Thorgi ec went away, thinking to find a better time to  speak WYfth the king ; he sought Aulvir Hnuf, and told him  what had passed, and asked him if he’ knew what was the  matter. 

'©That do I not,’ said he; ‘but this I have marked, that,  since we were at Leka, the king is silent every time Thorolf  is mentioned, and I suspect he has been slandered. This  I know of Hildirida’s sons, that they were long in conference  with the king, and it is easy to see from their words that  they are Thorolf’s enemies. But I will soon be certain  about this from the king himself.’ 

' Thereupon Aulvir went to the king, and said: ‘Here is.  come Thorgils Yeller thy friend, with the tribute which  is thine; and the tribute is much larger than it has been  before, and far better wares. He is eager to be on his way ;  be so good, O king, as to go and see it; for never have  been seen such good gray furs.’ 

The king answered not, but he went to where the ship:  lay. Thorgils at once set forth the furs and showed them  to the king. And when the king saw that it was true, that’  the tribute was much larger and better, his brows somewhat  cleared, and Thorgils got speech with him. He brought  the king some bearskins which Thorolf sent him, and other |  valuables besides, which he had gotten upon the fells. So  the king brightened up, and asked tidings of the journey of  Thorolf and his company. Thorgils told it all in detail. _/ 

Then said the king: ‘Great pity is it Thorolf should be  . unfaithful to me and plot my death.’ 

' Then answered many who stood by, and all with one 


THOROLF AGAIN IN FINMARK — 23 


mind, that it was a slander of wicked men if such words had  been spoken, and Thorolf would be found guiltless. The  king said he would prefer to believe this. (Then was the king  cheerful in all his talk with Thorgils, and they parted friends.  But when Thorgils met Thorolf he told him all that had  happened.  _ 


CHAPTER XIV.  Thorolf again in Finmark. 


(- HAT winter Thorolf went again to Finmark, taking  with him about a hundred men. As before, ne held  a fair with the Finns, and travelled far and wide over  Finmark. But when he reached the far east, and his coming  was heard of, then came to him some Kvens, saying that they  were sent by Faravid, king of Kvenland, because the Kiriales  were harrying his land; and his message was that Thorolf  should go thither and bear him help; and further that  Thorolf should have a share of the booty equal to the king’s |  share, and each of his men as much as two Kvens. With  the Kvens the law was that the king should have one-third  as compared with his men when the booty was shared, and  beyond that, as reserved for him, all bearskins and sables.  Thorolf put this proposal before his men, giving them the  choice to go or not; and the more part chose to venture it,  as the prize was so great. Thus it was decided that they  should go eastwards with the messengers. 

Finmark is a wide tract ; it is bounded westwards by the  sea, wherefrom large firths run in; by sea also northwards  and round to the east; but southwards lies Norway; and  Finmark stretches along nearly all the inland region to the  south, as also does Halogaland outside. But eastwards from  Naummdale is Jamtaland, then Helsingjaland and Kvenland,  then Finland, then Kirialaland; along all these lands to  the north lies Finmark, and there are wide inhabited fell-  districts, some in dales, some by lakes. The lakes of Fin-  mark are wonderfully large, and by the lakes there are  extensive forests. But high fells lie behind from end to  end of the Mark, and this ridge is called Keels. 


24 STORY. OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


. But when Thorolf came to Kvenland and met king  Faravid, they made them ready for their march, being three  hundred of the king’s men and a fourth hundred Norse-  men. And they went by the upper way over Finmark, and  came where the Kiriales were on the fell, the same who had  before harried the Kvens. These, when they were aware of  the enemy, gathered themselves and advanced to meet them,  expecting victory as heretofore. But, on the battle being  joined, the Norsemen charged furiously forwards, bearing  shields stronger than those of the Kvens; the slaughter  turned to be in the Kiriales’ ranks—many fell, some fled.  King Faravid and Thorolf took there immense wealth of  spoil, and returned to Kvenland, whence afterwards Thorolf  and his men came to Finmark, he and Faravid parting in  friendship. 

Thorolf came down from the fell to Vefsnir ; ‘then went  first to his farm at Sandness, stayed there awhile, and in  spring went with his men north to Torgar. 

- But when he came there, it was told him how Hildirida’s  sons had been that winter at Throndheim with king  Harold, and that they would not spare to slander Thorolf  with the king ; and it was much questioned what grounds.  they had had for their slander. Thorolf answered thus =  “The king will not believe this, though such lies be laid.  before him ; for there are no grounds for my turning traitor  to him, when he has done me much good and no evil.’  And so far from wishing to do him harm (though I had the  choice), I would much rather be a baron of his than be  called king, when some other fellow-countryman might rise  and make me his thrall.’ 

_—_ ; 


_ CHAPTER XV.  King Harold and Harek. 


| ILDIRIDA’S sons had been that winter with king  H Harold, and in their company twelve men of their. 

own household and neighbours. The brothers  were often talking with the king, and they still spoke in the. 


KING HAROLD AND HAREK = ~~ 25 


same ‘way of Thorolf. © ‘Harek asked : ‘-Didst thou. like well,  O king, the Finns’ tribute which Thorolf sent thee ?”  , ‘I did,’ said the king, 

‘Then wouldst thou have been surprised,’ said he, “if  thou hadst received all:that belonged to thee! But it was  far from being so; Thorolf kept for himself the larger  share. He sent thee three bearskins, but I know for certain  that he kept back thirty that were by right thine; and I  guess it was the same‘with other things. This will prove  true, O king, that, if thou put the stewardship into the hand.  of myself and my brother, we shall bring thee more wealth.’  . And to all that they said about Thorolf their comrades  bore witness, wherefore the king was exceeding angry. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Thorolf and the king. 


N the summer Thorolf went south to king Harold at  Throndheim, taking with him all the tribute and  much wealth besides, and ninety men well arrayed. 

When he came to the king, he and his were placed in the  guest-hall and entertained magnificently. 

On the morrow Aulvir Hnuf went to his kinsman Thorolf;  they.talked together, Aulvir saying that Thorolf was much  slandered, and the king gave ear to such tales. Thorolf  asked Aulvir to plead his cause with the king, ‘ for,’ said  he, ‘I shall be short-spoken before the king if he choose  rather to believe the lies of wicked men than truth and  ‘honesty which he will find in me.’ 

The next day Aulvir came to see Thorolf, and told him.  he had spoken on his business with the king ; ‘but,’ said —  he, ‘I know no more than before what is in his mind.’ 

‘Then must I myself go to him,’ said Thorolf. 

He did so; he went to the king where he sat at meat,  and when he came in he greeted the king. The king  accepted his greeting, and bade them serve him with drink.  Thorolf said that he had there the tribute belonging to the 


ee nae 


26 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


king from Finmark ; ‘and yet a further portion of booty  have I brought as a present to thee, O king. And what I  bring will, I know, owe all its worth to.this, that it is given  out of gratitude to thee.’ 

The king said that he could expect nought but good from  Thorolf, ‘because,’ said he, ‘I deserve nought else; yet  men tell two tales of thee as to thy being careful to win  my approval.’ 

‘I am not herein justly charged,’ said Thorolf, ‘if any  . say I have shown disloyalty to thee. This I think, and  with truth: That they who speak such lying slanders of mé  will prove to be in nowise thy friends, but it is quite clear  that they are my bitter enemies; ’tis likely, however, that  they will pay dearly for it if we come to deal together.’ 

Then Thorolf went away. — 

But on the morrow Thorolf counted out the tribute in  the king’s presence; and when it was all paid, he then  . brought out some bearskins and sables, which he begged  the king to accept. Many of the bystanders said that this  was well done, and deserved friendship. The king said that  Thorolf had himself taken his own reward. Thorolf said  that he had loyally done all he could to please the king.  ‘But if he likes it not,’ said he, ‘I cannot help it: the  king knows, when I was with him and in his train, how I  bore myself; it is wonderful to me if the king thinks me.  other now than he proved me to be then.’ | 

The king answered: ‘Thou didst bear thyself well,  Thorolf, when thou wert with us; and this, I think, is best  to do still, that thou join my guard, bear my banner, be  captain over the guard; then will no man slander thee, if I  can oversee night and day what thy conduct is.’ 

Thorolf looked on either hand where stood his house-  carles ; then said he: ‘Loth were I to deliver up these my  followers : about thy titles and grants to me, O king, thou  wilt have thine own way, but my following I will not deliver  up while my means last, though I manage at my own sole  cost. My request and wish, O king, is this, that thou  come and visit me at my home, and then hear word of men  whom thou trustest, what witness they bear to me in this  matter ; thereafter do as thou findest proof to warrant.’ 


HILDIRIDA’S SONS IN FINMARK - 27 


The king answered and said that he would not again  accept entertainment from Thorolf; so Thorolf went out,  and made ready to return home. 

But when he was gone, the king put into the hands of  Hildirida’s sons his business in Halogaland which Thorolf  had before had, as also the Finmark journey. The king  claimed ownership of the estate at Torgar, and of all the  property that Brynjolf had had; and all this he gave into  the keeping of Hildirida’s sons. The king sent messengers  with tokens to Thorolf to tell him of this arrangement,  whereupon Thorolf took the ships belonging to him, put on  board all the chattels he could carry, and with all his men,  both freedmen and thralls, sailed northwards to his farm at  Sandness, where he kept up no fewer men and no less state  than before. :  | _ 


CHAPTER XVII.  Hildirida’s sons in Finmark and at Harold's court. 


: ILDIRIDA’S sons took the business in Halogaland ;  and none gainsaid this because of the king’s power,  but Thorolf’s kinsmen and friends were much dis- 

pleased at the change. The two brothers went on the fell  in the winter, taking with them thirty men. To the Finns  there seemed much less honour in these stewards than when  Thorolf came, and the money due was far worse paid. 

That same winter Thorolf went up on the fell with a  hundred men ; he passed on at once eastwards to Kvenland’  and met king Faravid. They took counsel together, and  resolved to go on the fell again as in the winter before ; and  with four hundred men they made a descent on Kiriala-  land, and attacked those districts for which they thought  themselves a match in numbers, and harrying there took  much booty, returning up to Finmark as the winter wore  on. In the spring Thorolf went home to his farm, and  then employed his men at the fishing in Vagar, and some  in iecring Hshing,. and had the of every kind brought  to his farm. 


28 STORY OF-EGIL-SKALLAGRIMSSON 


_ Thorolf had a large ship, which was waiting to put to séa.  It was elaborate in everything, beautifully painted down to-  the sea-line, the sails also carefully striped with blue and.  red, and all the tackling as elaborate as the ship. Thorolf  had this ship made ready, and put aboard some of his  house-carles as crew ; he freighted it with dried fish and  hides, and ermine and gray furs too in abundance, and  other peltry such as he had gotten from the fell; it was a  ‘ most valuable cargo. This ship he bade sail westwards for.  England to buy him clothes and other supplies that he-  needed ; and they, first steering southwards along the coast, :  then stretching across the main, came to England. There  they found a good market, laded the ship with wheat and  honey and wine and clothes, and sailing back in autumn with.  a fair wind came to Hordaland. © : 

That same autumn Hildirida’s sons carried the tribute to  the king. But when they paid it the king himself was  present and saw. He said: 

‘Ts this tribute now paid all that ye took i in Finmark a 

‘It is,’ they answered. 

‘Less by far,’ said the king, ‘and ‘auch worse paid is the  tribute now than when Thorolf gathered it; yet ye said that  he managed the business ill.’ 

“Tt is well, O king,’ said Harek, ‘that thou hast con-  sidered how large a tribute should usually come from-  Finmark, because thus thou knowest how much thou.  losest, if Thorolf waste all the tribute before thee. Last:  winter we were in Finmark with thirty men, as has been the’  wont of thy stewards. heretofore. Soon after came Thorolf  with a hundred men, and we learnt this, that he meant to:  take the lives of us two brothers and all our followers, his.  reason being that thou, O king, hadst handed over to us the  business that he wished to have. It was then our best.  choice to shun meeting him, and to save ourselves : therefore  we quickly left the settled districts, and went on the fell.  But Thorolf went all round Finmark with his armed  warriors ; he had all the trade, the Finns paid him tribute,  and he hindered thy stewards from entering Finmark. He.  means to be made king over the north there, both over  Finmark and Halogaland ; and the wonder is that thou wilt 


‘--- THOROLF’S SHIP IS TAKEN ~~ “29 


‘listen "to him in. anything whatever. Herein may true  evidence be found of Thorolfs ill-gotten gains from Fin-  mark ; for the largest merchant ship in Halogaland was made  “ready ‘for séa‘at Sandness in the spring, and all the cargo on  board was. said to..be Thorolf’s. _It was laden mostly, ‘T  ‘think, with gray furs; but there would be found there also  ‘bearskins and sables more-than Thorolf brought to thee.  And with that ship went Thorgils Yeller, and I believe  he sailed westwards for England. But if thou wilt know the  truth of this, set spies on the track of Thorgils when he  comes eastwards ; for I fancy that no trading-ship in our  _days has carried such store of wealth. And I am telling  thee what is true, O king, when I say that to thee belongs  every penny on board.’ | 

All that Harek said his companions confirmed, and none’  ‘there ventured to gainsay. 

, 


CHAPTER XVIII.  Thorolf’s ship ts taken. 


— 


“HERE were two brothers named Sigtrygg Swiftfarer  and Hailvard Hardfarer, kinsmen of king Harold  on the mother’s side; from their father, a wealthy 

man, they had inherited an estate in Hising. Four brothers  there were in all; but Thord and Thorgeir, the two younger,  were at home, and managed the estate. Sigtrygg and Hall-  vard carried all the king’s messages, both within and without  the land, and had gone on many dangerous journeys, both  for putting men out of the way and confiscating the goods of  ‘those whose homes the king ordered to be attacked. ‘They  kept about them a large following ; they were not generally  in favour, but the king prized them highly. None could  match them at travelling, either on foot or on snow-shoes |;  in voyaging also they were speedier than others—valiant  men they were, and very wary. 

These two men were with the king when those things  happened that have just beentold. Inthe autumn the king 


30 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


went to a banquet in Hordaland. And one day he  summoned to him the brothers Hallvard and Sigtrygg, and  when they came he bade them go with their following and  spy after the ship which Thorgils had taken westward to  England in the summer. 

Bring me,’ said he, ‘the ship and all that is in it, except '  the men ; let them go their way in peace, if they do not try  to defend the ship.’ 

The brothers made them ready for this, and, taking each  one his long-ship, went to seek ‘Thorgils, and learnt that he  was come from the west, and had sailéd northwards along  the coast. Northwards after him went they, and found him  in Fir Sound. They knew the ship at once, and laid one of  their ships on the seaward side of her, while some of them  landed, and thence went out on to the ship by the gang-  ways. ‘Thorgils’ crew, apprehending no danger, made no  defence ; they found out nothing till many armed men were  aboard, and so they were all seized, and afterwards put on  shore weaponless, with nothing but the clothes they wore. .  But Hallvard’s men drew out the gangways, loosed the  cables, and towed out the ship; then turned them about,  and sailed southwards along the coast till they met the king,  to whom they brought the ship and all that was in it. And  when the cargo was unloaded, the king saw that it was great  ‘wealth, and what Harek had said was no lie. 

But Thorgils and his comrades got conveyance, and went  to Kveldulf and his son, and told of the misadventure of  their voyage, yet were they well received. Kveldulf said all  was tending to what he had foreboded, that Thorolf would not  in the end have good luck in his friendship with king Harold. 

\‘ And I care little,’ said he, ‘for Thorolf’s money loss in  this;“if worse does not come after; but I misdoubt, as  before, that Thorolf will not rightly rate his own means  against the stronger power with which he has to deal.’ 

And he bade Thorgils say this to Thorolf: 

‘My counsel is that you go away out of the land, for  maybe you will do better for yourself if you serve under the  king of England, or of Denmark, or of Sweden.’ 

Then he gave Thorgils a rowing-cutter with tackling  ‘complete, a tent also, and provisions, and all things needful 


THOROLF RETALIATES 31 


for their journey. So they departed, and stayed not their  journey till they came to Thorolf and told him all that had  happened. < 

_ Thorolf took his loss cheerfully, and said that he should  not be short of money; ‘’tis good,’ said he, ‘to be in 


. partnership with a king.’ He then bought meal and all that 


he needed for the maintenance of his people; his house-  carles must for awhile, he said, be less bravely attired than  he had purposed. Some lands he sold, some he mortgaged,  but he kept up all expenses as before; he had no fewer men  with him than last winter, nay, rather more. And as to feasts  and friends entertained at his house, he had more means for  all this than before. He stayed at home all that winter. 


CHAPTER XIX.  Thorolf retaliates. 


| HEN spring came, and:the snow and ice were loosed,  \ \ then Thorolf launched a large warship of his own,  and he had it made ready, and equipped his house- 

carles, taking with him more than a hundred men; and a  goodly company they were, and weil weaponed. And whena  fair wind blew, Thorolf steered southwards along the coast till  he came to Byrda; then they held an outer course outside  the islands, but at times through channels between hill-slopes.  Thus they coasted on southwards, and had no tidings of men  till they came eastwards to Vik. There they heard that king  Harold was in Vik, meaning in the summer to go into  Upland. The people of the country knew nothing of  Thorolf’s voyage. With a fair wind he held on south to  Denmark, and thence into the Baltic, where he harried  through that summer, but got no good booty. In the  autumn he steered back from the east to Denmark, at the  time when the fleet at Eyrar was breaking up. In the  summer there had been, as was usual, many ships from  Norway. Thorolf let all these vessels sail past, and did not  show himself. One day at eventide he sailed into Mostrar- 


32 STORY: OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


sound, where iit the ‘haven was a large ship of burden that  had come from Eyrar: The steersman was. named Thorir-  Thruma ; he was a steward of king Harold's, manager of  his farm at Thruma, a large farm in “which. the king used to  make a long stay when he was in Vik. Much provision wag  needed for this farm, and Thorir had gone to Eyrar for this,  to buy a cargo, malt, ‘wheat, and honey ; and much wealth of  the king’s had he for that end. Thorolfmade for this ship,  and offered Thorir and his crew the choice to defend them-  selves, but, as they had no force to make defence against  such numbers, they yielded. The ship with all its freight  Thorolf took, but Thorir he put out on an island. 

Then he sailed northwards along the coast with both the’  ships ; but when they came to the mouth of the Elbe, they  lay there and waited for night. And when it was dark,  they rowed their long-ship up the river and stood in for the  farm-buildings belonging to Hallvard and Sigtrygg. They  came there before daybreak, and formed a ring of men  round the place,.then raised. a. war-whoop and wakened  those within, who quickly leapt up to their weapons.  Thorgeir at once fled from his bedchamber. Round the  farmhouse were high wooden palings: at these Thorgeir  leapt, grasping with his hand the stakes, and so swung  himself out of the yard. Thorgils Yeller was standing  near; he made a sweep with his sword at Thorgeir, and cut  off his hand along with the fence-stake. Then Thorgeir  escaped to the wood, but Thord, his brother, fell slain there,  and more than twenty men. Thorolf’s band plundered and.  burnt the house, then went back down the river to the sea. 

With a fair wind they sailed north to Vik; there again  they fell in with a large merchant-ship belonging to men of  Vik, laden with malt and meal. For this ship they made ;  but those on board, deeming they had no means of defence,  yielded, and were disarmed and put on shore, and Thorolf’ S.  men, taking the ship and its cargo, went on their way. 

Thorolf had now three ships, with which he sailed west-  wards by Fold. Then they took the high road of the sea  to Lidandisness, going with all despatch, but making raid  and lifting cattle on ness and shore. Northwards from  Lidandisness they held a course further out,’ but pillaged 


THOROLF RETALIATES ~— 33 


wherever they touched land. But when Thorolf came over  against the Firths, then he turned his course inward, and  went to see his father Kveldulf, and there they were made  welcome. Thorolf told his father what had happened in  his summer voyage; he stayed there but a short time, and  Kveldulf and his son Grim accompanied him to the ship.  But before they parted Thorolf and his father talked  together, and Kveldulf said: ‘I was not far wrong, Thorolf,  in telling thee, when thou wentest to join king Harold’s  guard, that neither thou nor we thy kindred would in the  long run get good-fortune therefrom. Now thou hast taken 


. up the very counsel against which I warned thee; thou 


matchest thy force against king Harold’s. But though  thou art well endowed with valour and all prowess, thou  hast not luck enough for this, to play on even terms with  the king—a thing wherein no one here in the land has  succeeded, though others have had great power and large  force of men. And my foreboding is that this is our last  meeting: it were in the course of nature from our ages  that thou shouldst overlive me, but I think it will be  otherwise.’ 

After this Thorolf embarked and went his way. And no  tidings are told of his voyage till he arrived home at Sand-  ness, and caused to be conveyed to his farm all the booty  he had taken, and had his ship set up upon land. There  was now no lack of provision to keep his people through  the winter. Thorolf stayed on at home with no fewer men  than in the winter before. 

, 


CHAPTER XxX.  Skallagrim’s marriage. 


HERE was a man named Yngvar, powerful and  wealthy. He had been a baron of the former kings. 

But after Harold came to the throne, Yngvar sate at 

home and served not the king. Yngvar was married and  had a daughter named Bera. Yngvar dwelt in the Firths,  Bera was his only child and heiress. Grim Kveldulf’s son 


3 


34 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


asked Bera to wife, and the match was arranged. Grim  took Bera in the winter following the summer when Thorolf  had parted from him and his father. 

Grim was then twenty-five years old, and was now bald,  wherefore he: was henceforth called Skallagrim. He had  then the management of all the farms belonging to his  father and himself and of all the produce, though Kveldulf  was yet a hale and strong man. They had many freed-  men about them, and many men who had grown up there  at home and were about Skallagrim’s equals in age. Men  of prowess and strength they were mostly, for both father  and son chose strong fellows to be their followers, and  trained them after their mind. Skallagrim was like his  father in stature and strength, as also in face and temper. 


_ 


CHAPTER XXI.  Hallvard and his brother go after Thorolf. 


ING HAROLD was in Vik while Thorolf was harry-  kK ing, and in the autumn he went to Upland, and  thence northward to Throndheim, where he stayed  through the winter with a large force. Sigtrygg and Hallvard  were with him: they had heard what Thorolf had done at  their house on Hising, what scathe he had wrought on men  and property. They often reminded the king of this, and  withal how Thorolf had plundered the king and his subjects,  and had gone about harrying within the land. They begged  the king’s leave that they two brothers might go with their  usual following and attack Thorolf in his home. 

The king answered thus: ‘Ye may think ye have good  cause for taking Thorolf’s life, but I doubt your fortune  falls far short of this work. Thorolf is more than your  match, brave and doughty as ye may deem yourselves.’ 

The brothers said that this would be put to the proof, if  the king would grant them leave ; they had often run great  risk against men on whom they had less to avenge, and  generally they had won the day. 

And when spring came, and men made ready to go their 


DEATH OF THOROLF KVELDULFSSON 35 


several ways, then did Hallvard and his brother again urge  their request that they might go and take Thorolf’s life.  So the king gave them leave. ‘And I know,’ he said, ‘ ye  will bring me his head and many costly things withal when  ye come back ; yet some do guess that if ye sail north ye  will both sail and row south.’ 

They made them ready with all speed, taking two ships  and two hundred men; and when they were ready they  sailed with a north-east wind out of the firth, but that is a  head-wind for those coasting northward. 


¢ 


CHAPTER XXII.  Death of Thorolf Kveldulfsson. 


ING HAROLD was at Hlada when the brothers went  kK away. Immediately after this the king made him  ready with all haste, and embarked his force on  four ships, and they rowed up the firth, and so by Beitis-sea  inwards to the isthmus of Elda. There he left his ships  behind, and crossed the isthmus northwards to Naumdale.  The king there took ships belonging to the landowners, and  embarked his force on them, having with him his guard; four -  hundred men they were. Six ships he had well equipped  both with weapons and men. They encountered a fresh  head-wind, and rowed night and day, making what progress  they could. The night was then light enough for travel. 

On the evening of a day after sunset they came to  Sandness, and saw lying there opposite the farm a long-  ship with tent spread, which they knew to be Thorolf’s. He  was even then purposing to sail away, and had bidden them  brew the ale for their parting carousal. The king ordered  his men to disembark and his standard to be raised. It  was but a short way to the farm buildings. 

Thorolf’s watchmen sate within drinking, and were not  gone to their posts; not a man was without ; all sate within  drinking. The king had a ring of men set round the hall:  they then shouted a war-whoop, and a war-blast was blown  on the king’s trumpet. On hearing which Thorolf’s men 


36 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


sprang to their weapons, for each man’s weapons hung  above his seat. The king caused some to make proclama-  tion at the door, bidding women, children, old men, thralls,  and bondmen to come out. Then came out Sigridr the  mistress, and with her the women that were within, and the  others to whom permission was given. Sigridr asked if the  sons of Kari of Berdla were there. They both came forward  and asked what she would of them. 

‘Lead me to the king,’ said she. " 

They did so. But when she came to the king, she said: 

‘Will anything, my lord, avail to reconcile thee and  Thorolf 

The king answered: ‘If Thorolf will yield him to my  mercy, then shall he have life and limb, but his men shall  undergo punishment according to the charges against  them.’ 

Upon this Aulvir Hnuf went to the room, and had  Thorolf called to speak with him, and told him what terms  the king offered them. 

Thorolf answered that he would not take of the king  compulsory terms or reconciliation. ‘Bid thou the king  allow us to go out, and then leave we things to go their  own course.’ 

The king said: ‘Set fire to the room ; I will not waste my  men by doing battle with him outside; I know that Thorolf  will work us great man-scathe if he come out, though he has  fewer men than we.’ 

So fire was set to the room, and it soon caught, because  the wood was dry and the walls tarred and the roof thatched  with birch-bark. Thorolf bade his men break up the wain-  scoting and get gable-beams, and so burst through the plank-  ing ; and when they got the beams, then as many men as  could hold on to it took one beam, and they rammed at  the corner with the other beam-end so hard that the clasps  flew out, and the walls started asunder, and there was a wide  outlet. 

First went out Thorolf, then Thorgils Yeller, then the  rest one after another. Fierce then was the fight; nor  for awhile could it be seen which had the better of it, for  the room guarded the rear of Thorolf’s force. The king 


DEATH OF THOROLF KVELDULFSSON 37 * 


lost many men before the room began to burn; then the fire  attacked Thorolf’s side, and many of them fell. Now Thorolt  bounded forwards and hewed on either hand; small need  to bind the wounds of those who encountered him. He  made for where the king’s standard was, and at this moment  fell Thorgils Yeller. But when Thorolf reached the shield-  wall, he pierced with a stroke the standard-bearer, crying,  ‘Now am I but three feet short of my aim.’ Then bore  at him both sword and spear; but the king himself dealt  him his death-wound, and he fell forward at the king’s  feet. The king called out then, and bade them cease further  slaughter ; and they did so. 

After this the king bade his men go down to the ships.  To Aulvir Hnuf and his brother he said: 

‘Take ye Thorolf your kinsman and give him honourable  burial; bury also the other men who have fallen, and see to  the binding of the wounds of those who have hope of life ;  but let none plunder here, for all this is my property.’ 

This said, the king went down to his ships, and most of  his force with him ; and when they were come on board  men began to bind their wounds. The king went round  the ship and looked at men’s wounds; and when he saw a  man binding a surface-wound, he said: ‘Thorolf gave not  that wound ; his weapon bites far otherwise ; few, methinks,  bind the wounds which he gave ; and great loss have we in  such men.’ 

As soon-as day dawned the king had his sail hoisted, and  sailed south as fast as he could. As the day wore on, they  came upon many rowing-vessels in all the sounds between  the islands; the forces on board them had meant to join  Thorolf, for spies of his had been southwards as far as  Naumdale, and far and wide about the islands. These had  got to know how Hallvard and his brother were come from  the south with a large force meaning to attack Thorolf.  Hallvard’s company had constantly met a head-wind, and  had waited about in various havens till news of them had  gone the upper way overland, and Thorolf’s spies had  become aware of it, and this gathering of force was on this  account. 

The king sailed before a stong wind till he came to 


38 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Naumdale; there he left the ships behind, and went by  land to Throndheim, where he took his own ships that he  had left there, and thence stood out to Hlada. These  tidings were soon heard, and reached Hallvard and his  men where they lay. They then returned to the king, and  their voyage was much mocked at. 

The brothers Aulvir Hnuf and Eyvind Lambi remained  awhile at Sandness and saw to the burial of the slain. To  Thorolf’s body they gave all the customary honours paid at  the burial of a man of wealth and renown, and set over him  a memorial stone. They saw also to the healing of the  wounded. They arranged also the house with Sigridr; ail  the stock remained, but most of the house-furniture and  table-service and clothing was burnt. And when this was  done, they went south and came to king Harold at Thrond-  heim, and were with him for awhile. 

They were sad, and spoke little with others. And it was  so that one day the brothers went before the king, and  Aulvir said : 

‘This permission we brothers claim of thee, O king, that  we go home to our farms; for such things have happened  here that we have no heart to share drink and seat with  those who drew weapon or. our kinsman Thorolf.’ 

The king looked at them, and answered curtly: 

‘TI will not grant you this; ye shall be here with me.’ 

They went back to their place. 

Next day, as the king sat in the audience hall, he had the  brothers called to him, and said: 

‘Now shall ye know of that your business which ye began  with me, craving to go home. Ye have been some while  here with me, and have borne you well, and always done  your duty. I have thought well of you in everything. Now  will I, Eyvind, that thou go north to Halogaland. I will  give thee in marriage Sigridr of Sandness, her that Thorolf  had to wife; and I will bestow on thee all.the wealth that  belonged to Thorolf; thou shalt also have my friendship if  thou canst keep it. But Aulvir shall remain with me; for  his skill as skald I cannot spare him.’ 

The brothers thanked the king for the honour granted to  them, and said that they would willingly accept it. 


a 


THE SLAYING OF HILDIRIDA’S SONS 39 


Then Eyvind made him ready for the journey, getting a  good and suitable ship. The king gave him tokens for this  matter. His voyage sped well, and he came north to Alost  and Sandness. Sigridr welcomed him; and Eyvind then  showed her the king’s tokens and declared his errand, and  asked her in marriage, saying that it was the king’s message  that he should obtain this match. But Sigridr saw that her  only choice, as things had gone, was to let the king rule it.  So the arrangement was made, and Eyvind married Sigridr,  receiving with her the farm at Sandness and all the property  that had been Thorolf’s. Thus Eyvind was a wealthy  man. 

The children of Eyvind and Sigridr were Fid Squinter,  father of Eyvind Skald-spoiler, and Geirlaug, whom Sighvat  Red had to wife. Fid Squinter married Gunnhilda, daughter  of earl Halfdan. Her mother was Ingibjorg, daughter of  king Harold Fairhair. Eyvind Lambi kept the king’s  friendship so long as they both lived. 


iva) 


e  CHAPTER XXIII.  The slaying of Hildirida’s sons. 


HERE wasa man named Kettle Hzing, son of Thorkel 

earl of Naumdale, and of Hrafnilda daughter of 

Kettle Hzing of Hrafnista. He was a man of 

wealth and renown; he had been a fast friend of Thorolf 

Kveldulf’s son, and was his near kinsman. He had been 

out on that expedition when forces gathered in Halogaland 

with intent to join Thorolf, as has been written above. But 

when king Harold went south, and men knew of Thorolf’s  slaying, then they called a gathering. 

Heeing took with him sixty men, and turned to Torgar.  Hildirida’s sons were there, and few men with them. He  went up to the farm, and made an attack on them; and  there fell Hiidirida’s sons, and most of those who were  there; and Heing and his company took all the wealth  they could lay hands on. After that Heing took two ships 


40 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


of burden, the largest he could get, and put on board all  the wealth belonging to him that he could carry ; his wife  and children also he took, and all the men that had been  with him in the late work. And when they were ready and  the wind blew fair, they sailed out to sea. A man named  Baug, Heeing’s foster-brother, of good family and wealthy,  steered the second ship. 

A few winters before Ingjolf and Hjorleif had gone to  settle in Iceland ; their voyage was much talked about, and  twas said there was good choice of land there. So Hazing  sailed west over the sea to seek Iceland. And when they  saw land, they were approaching it from the south. But  because the wind was boisterous, and the surf ran high on  the shore, and there was no haven, they sailed on westwards  along the sandy coast. And when the wind began to abate,  and the surf to calm down, there before them was a wide  river-mouth. Up this river they steered their ships, and lay  close to the eastern shore thereof. That river is now called  Thjors-river ; its stream was then much narrower and deeper  than it is now. They unloaded their ships, then searched  the land eastward of the river, bringing their cattle after  them. Heing remained for the first winter on the eastern  bank of the outer Rang-river. 

But in the spring he searched the land eastwards, and  then took land between Thiors-river and Mark-fleet, from  fell to firth, and made his home at Hofi by east Rang-river.  Ingunn his wife bare a son in this spring after their first  winter, and the boy was named Hrafn. And though the  house there was pulled down, the place continued to be  called Hrafn-toft. 

Heing gave Baug land in Fleet-lithe, down from Mark-  river to the river outside Breidabolstead ; and he dwelt at  Lithe-end. To his shipmates Heeing gave land or sold it  for a small price, and these first settlers are called land-  takers. Hzing had sons Storolf, Herjolf, Helgi, Vestar ;  they all had land. Hrafn was Heing’s fifth son. He was  the first law-man in Iceland; he dwelt at Hofi after his  father, and was the most renowned of Heeing’s sons. 


_ 


\ 


KVELDULF’S GRIEF 4l 


CHAPTER XXIV.  Kveldulf’s grief. 


VELDULEF heard of his son Thorolf’s death, and so  deeply grieved was he at the tidings that he took to  his bed from sorrow and age. Skallagrim came often 

to him, and talked with him ; he bade him cheer up. ‘ Any-  thing’ (he said) ‘was more fitting than to become worthless  and lie bedridden; better counsel is it that we seek to  avenge Thorolf. Maybe we shall come across some of those  who took part in his slaying ; but if not that, yet there will  be men whom we can reach, and thereby displease the king.” 

Kveldulf sang a stave : 

‘Thorolf in northern isle  (O cruel Norns !) is dead :  Too soon the Thunder-god  Hath ta’en my warrior son.  Thor’s heavy wrestler, age,  Holds my weak limbs from fray :  Though keen my spirit spurs,  No speedy vengeance mine.’ 

King Harold went that summer to Upland, and in the  autumn westwards to Valres, and as far as Vors. Aulvir  Hnuf was with the king, and often spoke with him about  whether he would pay atonement for Thorolf, granting to  Kveldulf and Skallagrim money compensation, or such  honour as would content them. The king did not alto-  gether refuse this, if father and son would come to him.  Whereupon Aulvir started northwards for the Firths, nor  stayed his journey till he came one evening to these twain.  They received him gratefully, and he remained there for  some time. Kveldulf questioned Aulvir closely about the  doings at Sandness when Thorolf fell, what doughty deeds  Thorolf had wrought before he fell, who smote him with  weapon, where he received most wounds, what was the  manner of his fall. Aulvir told him all that he asked; and  that king Harold gave him the wound that was alone enough  for his bane, and that Thorolf fell forward at the very feet  of the king. 


42 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Then answered Kveldulf: ‘Good is that thou tellest ; for  tis an old saw that he will be avenged who falls forward,  and that vengeance will reach him who stands before him  when he falls ; yet is it unlikely that such good-fortune will  be ours.’ . 

Aulvir told father and son that he hoped, if they would  go to the king and crave atonement, that it would be a  journey to their honour ; and he bade them venture this,  adding many words to that end. 

Kveldulf said he was too old to travel: ‘I shall sit at  home,’ said he. 

‘Wilt thou go, Grim?’ said Aulvir. 

‘I think I have no errand thither,’ said Grim ; ‘I shall  seem to the king not fluent in speech; nor do I think I  shall long pray for atonement.’ 

Aulvir said that he would not need to do so: ‘We will  do all the speaking for thee as well as we can.’ 

And seeing that Aulvir pressed this matter strongly, Grim  promised to go when he thought he could be ready. He  and Aulvir set them a time when Grim should come to the  king. Then Aulvir went away first, and returned to the king, 


e 


CHAPTER XXV.  Skallagrim’s journey to the king. 


KALLAGRIM made him ready for this journey,  S choosing out of his household and neighbours the  strongest and doughtiest that were to be found.  One was Ani, a wealthy landowner, another Grani, a third  Grimolf and his brother Grim, house-carles these of Skalla-  grim, and the two brothers Thorbjorn Krum and Thord  Beigaldi. These were called Thororna’s sons; she dwelt  hard by Skallagrim, and was of magic skill. Beigaldi was a  coal-biter. There was a man named Thorir Giant, and his  brother Thorgeir Earthlong,-Odd Lonedweller, and Griss  Freedman. ‘Twelve there were for the journey, all stalwart  men, and several of them shape-strong.  They took a rowing-ship of Skallagrim’s, went southwards 


SKALLAGRIM’S $OURNEY TO THE KING 43 


along the coast, stood in to Ostra Firth, then travelled by  land up to Vors to the lake there ; and, their course lying  so that they must cross it, they got a suitable rowing-ship  and ferried them over, whence they had not very far to go  to the farm where the king was being entertained. 

They came there at the time when the king was gone to  table. Some men they found to speak with outside in the  yard, and asked what was going on. This being told them,  Grim begged one to call Aulvir Hnuf to speak with him.  The man went into the room and up to where Aulvir sat,  and said: ‘There be men here outside newly come, twelve  together, if men one may call them, for they are liker to  giants in stature and semblance than to mortal men.’ 

Aulvir at once rose and went out, for he knew who they  were who had come. He greeted well his kinsman Grim,  and bade him go with him into the room. 

Grim said to his comrades: ‘’Tis the custom here that  men go weaponless before the king; six of us shall go in,  the other six shall bide without and keep our weapons.’ 

Then they entered, and Aulvir went up to the king,  Skallagrim standing at his back. Aulvir was spokesman :  ‘Here now is come Grim Kveldulf’s son; we shall feel  thankful to thee, O king, if thou make his journey hither a  good one, as we hope it will be. -Many get great honour  from thee to whom less is due, and who are not nearly so  accomplished as is he in every kind of skill. Thou wilt  also do this because it is a matter of moment to me, if that  is of any worth in thy opinion.’ 

Aulvir spoke fully and fluently, for he was a man ready  of words. And many other friends of Aulvir went before  the king and pleaded this cause. 

The king looked round, and saw that a man stood at  Aulvir’s back taller than the others by a head, and bald. 

‘Is that Skallagrim,’ asked the king, ‘that tall man?’ 

Grim said he guessed rightly. 

‘I will then,’ said the king, ‘if thou cravest atonement  for Thorolf, that thou become my liege-man, and enter my  guard here and serve me. Maybe I shall so like thy service  that I shall grant thee atonement for thy brother, or other  honour not less than I granted him; but thou must know 


c 


44 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


how to keep it better than he did, if I make thee as great a.  man as was he.’ 

Skallagrim answered: ‘It is well known how far superior  to me was Thorolf in every point, and he got no luck by  serving thee, O king. Now will I not take that counsel ;  serve thee I will not, for I know I should get no luck by  yielding thee such service as I should wish and as would be  worthy. Methinks I should fail herein more than Thorolf.’ 

The king was silent, and his face became blood-red.  Aulvir at once turned away, and bade Grim and his men  go out. They did so. ‘They went out, and took their  weapons, and Aulvir bade them begone with all haste. He  and many with him escorted them to the water-side.  Before parting with Skallagrim, Aulvir said: 

‘ Kinsman, thy journey to the king ended otherwise than  I would have chosen. I urged much thy coming hither ;  now, I entreat thee, go home with all speed, and come not  in the way of king Harold, unless there be better agreement  between you than now seems likely, and keep thee well from  the king and from his men.’ 

Then Grim and his company went over the water; but  Aulvir with his men, going to the ships drawn up by the  water-side, so hacked them about that none was fit to  launch. For they saw men coming down from the king’s  house, a large body well armed and advancing furiously.  These men king Harold had sent after them to slay Grim.  The king had found words soon after Grim went out, and said: 

‘This I see in that tall baldhead: that he is brim full of  - wolfishness, and he will, if he can reach them, work scathe  on men whom we should be loth to lose. Ye may be sure,  ye against whom he may bear a grudge, that he will spare  none, if he get a chance. Wherefore go after him and slay  him.’ 

Upon this they went and came to the water, and found  no ship there fit to launch. So they went back and told the  king of their journey, and that Grim and his comrades would  now have got clear over the lake. 

Skallagrim went his way with his comrades till he reached  home; he then told Kveldulf of this journey. Kveldulf  showed him well pleased that Skallagrim had not gone to  the king on this errand to take service under him; he still 


SKALLAGRIM’S FOURNEY TO THE KING 45 


said, as before, that from the king they would get only loss  and no amends. Kveldulf and Skallagrim spoke often of  their plans, and on this they were agreed, that they would  not be able to remain in the land any more than other men  who were at enmity with the king, but their counsel must  be to go abroad. And it seemed to them desirable to seek  Iceland, for good reports were given about choice of land  there. Already friends and acquaintances of theirs had  gone thither—to wit, Ingolf Arnarson, and his companions  —and had taken to them land and homestead in Iceland.  Men might take land there free of cost, and choose their  homestead at will. 

So they quite settled to break up their household and go  abroad. 

Thorir Hroaldson had in his childhood been fostered with  Kveldulf,-and he and Skallagrim were about of an age, and  as foster-brothers were dear friends. ‘Thorir had become a  baron of the king’s at the time when the events just told  happened, but the friendship between him and Skallagrim  continued. 

Early in the spring Kveldulf and his company made  ready their ships. They had plenty of good craft to choose  from ; they made ready two large ships of burden, and took  in each thirty able-bodied men, besides women and children.  All the movable goods that they could carry they took with  them, but their lands none dared buy, for fear of the king’s  power. And when they were ready, they sailed away : first  to the islands called Solundir, which are many and large,  and so scored with bays that few men (it is said) know all  their havens. 

¢ 


CHAPTER XXVI.  Of Guttorm. 


HERE was a man named Guttorm, son of Sigurd Hart. 

He was mother's brother to king Harold; also he had  been his foster-father, and ruler over his forces, for the 

king was a child when he first came to the throne. Guttorm  had commanded the army in all the battles which Harold had 


46 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


fought to bring the land under his sway. But when Harold  became sole king of all Norway, and sat in peace, then he  gave to his kinsman Guttorm Westfold and East-Agdir,  and Hringariki, and all the land that had belonged to  Halfdan Swarthy his father. Guttorm had two sons and  two daughters. His sons were named Sigurd and Ragnar ;  his daughters Ragnhildr and Aslaug. 

Guttorm fell sick, and when near his end sent to king  Harold, bidding him see to his children and his province.  Soon after this he died. On hearing of his death, the king  summoned Hallvard Hardfarer and his brother, and told  them to go on a message for him eastwards to Vik, he being  then at Throndheim. They made great preparations for  their journey, choosing them men and the best ship they  could get; it was the very ship they had taken from Thorgils  Yeller. But when they were ready, the king told them  their errand: they were to go eastwards to Tunsberg, the  market town where Guttorm had resided. ‘Ye shall,’ said  the king, ‘bring to me Guttorm’s sons, but his daughters shall  be fostered there till I bestow them in marriage. I will find  men to take charge of the province and foster the maidens.’ 

So the brothers started with a fair wind, and came in the  spring eastwards to Vik and to Tunsberg, and there declared  their errand. They took the sons of Guttorm, and much  movable property, and went their way back. The wind  was then somewhat slack, and their voyage slower, but  nothing happened till they sailed northwards over the Sogn-  sea, having now a good wind and bright weather, and being  in merry mood. 

o 


CHAPTER XXVIII.  Slaying of Hallvard and Sigtrygg. 


| LL through the summer Kveldulf and Skallagrim kept  A a look-out shorewards on the highway of vessels. 

' Skallagrim was very sharp-sighted. He saw Hallvard’s  company sailing by, and he knew the ship, for he had seen it  before when Thorgils went with it. Skallagrim watched their  course, and where they lay to in haven at eventide. Then  he went back to his own people, and told Kveldulf what he 


SLAYING OF HALLVARD AND SIGTRYGG 47 


had seen, and withal how he had recognised the ship,  being that which once was Thorolf’s, and was taken by  Hallvard from Thorgils, and doubtless there were some men  on board who would be worth catching. 

So they made them ready with both their boats, and  twenty men in each. Kveldulf steered one, Skallagrim the  other. Then they rowed and made for the ship. But when  they came where it lay, they put in to land. 

Hallvard’s men had set up the tent over their ship, and  laid them down to sleep. But when Kveldulf’s force came  upon them, then the watchmen who sat at the gangway-end  leapt up, and called out to the ship; they bade the men  rise, for an enemy was upon them. Hallvard’s party leapt  to their weapons. But when Kveldulf with his men came  to the gangway-end, he went out by the stern gangway, while  Skallagrim went forward to the other gangway. 

Kveldulf had in his hand a battle-axe ; but when he got  on board, he bade his men go along the outer way by the  gunwale and cut the tent from its forks, while he himself  rushed aft to the stern-castle. And it is said that he then  had a fit of shape-strength, as had also several of his com-  rades. They slew all that came in their way, the same did  Skallagrim where he boarded the ship; nor did father and  son stay hands till the ship was cleared. When Kveldulf  came aft to the stern-castle, he brandished high his battle-  axe, and smote Hallvard right through helm and head, so  that the axe sank in even to the shaft; then he snatched it  back towards him so forcibly that he whirled Hallvard aloft,  and slung him overboard. Skallagrim cleared the forecastle,  slaying Sigtrygg. Many men plunged into the sea; but  Skallagrim’s men took one of the boats, and rowed after and  slew all that were swimming. 

There were lost with Hallvard fifty men in all. The ship  and the wealth that was in it Skallagrim’s men took. Two  or three men whom they deemed of least note they seized,  and gave them their lives, asking of them who had been in  the ship, and what had been the purport of the voyage.  After learning all the truth about this, they looked over the  slain who lay on ship-board. It was found that more had  leapt overboard, and so perished, than had fallen on the ship.  The sons of Guttorm had leapt overboard and perished. 


48 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Of these, one was twelve years old, the other ten, and both  were lads of promise. 

Then Skallagrim set free the men whose lives he had  spared, and bade them go to king Harold and tell him the  whole tale of what had been done there, and who had been  the doers of it. ‘Ye shall also,’ said he, ‘ bear to the king  this ditty : 

‘For a noble warrior slain  Vengeance now on king is ta’en :  Wolf and eagle tread as prey  Princes born to sovereign sway.  Hallvard’s body cloven through  Headlong in the billows flew ;  Wounds of wight once swift to fare  Swooping vulture’s beak doth tear.’ 


After this Skallagrim and his men took out to their ships  the captured ship and her cargo. And then they made an  exchange, loading the ship they had taken, but emptying  one of their own which was smaller ; and in this they put  stones, and bored holes and sank it. Then, as soon as ever  the wind was fair, they sailed out to sea. 

It is said of shape-strong men, or men with a fit of  Berserk fury on them, that while the fit lasted they were so  strong that nought could withstand them; but when it  passed off, then they were weaker than their wont. Even  so it was with Kveldulf. When the shape-strong fit went  from him, then he felt exhaustion from the onset he had  made, and became so utterly weak that he lay in bed. 

And now a fair wind took them out to sea. Kveldulf  commanded the ship which they had taken from Hallvard.  With the fair wind the ships kept well together, and for  long time were in sight of each other. 

But when they were now far advanced over the main,  Kveldulf’s sickness grew worse. And when it came to this,  that death was near, then he called to him his shipmates,  and told them that he thought it likely they and he would  soon take different ways. ‘I have never,’ he said, ‘ been  an ailing man ; but if it so be (as now seems likely) that I  die, then make me a coffin, and put me overboard: and it  will go far otherwise than I think if I do not come to Ice-  land and take land there. Ye shall bear my greeting to my  son Grim, when ye meet, and tell him withal that if he 


SLAYING OF HALLVARD AND SIGTRYGG 49 


come to Iceland, and things so turn out that—unlikely as  it may seem—lI be there first, then he shall choose him a  homestead as near as may be to where I have come ashore.’.  - Shortly after this Kveldulf died. 

His shipmates did as he had bidden them do; they laid  him in a coffin, and shot it overboard. There was a man  named Grim, son of Thorir Kettlesson Keel-fare, of noble  kin and wealthy. He was in Kveldulf’s ship ; he had been  an old friend of both father and son, and a companion both  of them and of ‘Thorolf, for which reason he had incurred.  the king’s anger. He now took command of the ship after  Kveldulf was dead. | 

But when they were come to Iceland, approaching the  land from the south, they sailed westwards along the coast,  because they had heard that Ingolf had settled there. But  coming over against Reykja-ness, and seeing the firth open  before them, they steered both ships into the firth. 

_ And now the wind came on to blow hard,: with much  rain and mist. Thus the ships were parted. 

Grim the Halogalander and his crew sailed in up the  Borgar Firth past all the skerries; then they cast anchor  till the wind fell and the weather cleared. They waited for  the flood-tide, and then took their ship up into a river-’  mouth ; it is called Gufu-river. They drew the ship up  this river as far as it could go; then unshipped the cargo,  and remained there for the first winter. ‘They explored the-  land along the sea both inwards and outwards, and they  had not gone far before they found Kveldulf’s coffin cast  up in a creek. They carried the coffin to the ness hard by,  set it down there, and raised thereover a pile of stones. 


_ 


CHAPTER XXVIII.  Of Skallagrim’s land-taking. 


““ KALLAGRIM came to Jand where a large ness ran 

G out into the sea, and above the. ness was a narrow. 

isthmus ; and there they put out their lading. That 

ness they called Ship-ness. Then Skallagrim spied out the  os Se a ‘ ; . es e . . ‘ ‘ 4 


LXe) ' STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


land: there was much moorland and wide woods, and a  broad space between fells and firths, seal-hunting in plenty,  and good fishing. But as they spied out the land south-  wards along the sea, they found before them a large firth ;  arid, turning inwards along this firth, they stayed not their  going till they found their companions, Grim the Haloga-  lander and the rest. A joyful meeting was there. They told  Skallagrim of his father’s death, and how Kveldulf had come  to land there, and they had buried him. Then they led.  Skallagrim to the place, and it seemed to him that there-—  abouts would be.a good spot to build a homestead. He .  then went away, and back to his shipmates; and for that  winter each party remained where they had come to land.  Then Skallagrim took land between fells and firths, all  the moors out to Seal-loch, and the upper land to Bor-  garhraun, and southwards to Hafnar-fell, and all that land  from the watershed to the sea. Next spring he moved his —  snip southwards to the firth, and into the creek: close to  where Kveldulf came to land ; and there he set his home-  stead, and'called it Borg, and the firth Borgar-firth, and so  too the country-side further up they named after the firth. 

_ To Grim the Halogalander he gave dwelling-place south  of Borgar-firth, on the shore named Hvann-eyrr. A little  beyond this a bay of no great size cuts into the land. There  they found many ducks, wherefore they called it Duck-kyle,  and the river that fell into the sea there Duck-kyle-river.  From this river to the river called Grims-river, the land  stretching upwards between them Grim had. That same  spring, as Skallagrim had his cattle driven inwards along the  sea, they came to’a small ness where they caught some  swans, so they called it Swan-ness. Skallagrim gave land  to his shipmates. The land between Long-river and Hafs-  brook he gave to Ani, who dwelt at Anabrekka. His son  was Aunund Sjoni. About this was the controversy of  Thorstein and Tongue Odd. 

Grani dwelt at Granastead on Digraness. To Thorbjorn  Krum he. gave the land by Gufu-river upward, and to  Thord of Beigaldi.. Krum dwelt at Krums- hills, but  Thord at Beigaldi. To Thorir Giant and his brothers he  gave land upwards from Einkunnir and the outer part by  Long-river. Thorir Giant dwelt at Giantstead. His 


‘OF SKALLAGRIM'S LAND-TAKING. ‘51 


daughter was Thordis Staung, who afterwards dwelt at  Stangerholt. Thorgeir dwelt at Earthlongstead. 

Skallagrim spied out the land upwards all round the  country-side. First he went inwards along the Borgar-firth  to its head; then followed the west bank of the river, which  - he called White-river, because he and his companions had 

never before seen waters that fell out of glaciers, and the  colour of the river seemed to them wonderful. 

They went up along White-river till a river was before  them coming down from the fells to the north; this they  called North-river. And they followed it up till yet again  before them was a river bringing down but little water.  ‘This river they crossed, and still went up along North-  river; then they soon saw where the little river fell out of  a cleft, and they called it Cleave-river. Then they crossed  North-river, and went back to White-river, and followed  that upwards. Soon again a river crossed their way, and  fell into White-river; this they called Cross-river. They  learnt that every river was full of fish. After this they  returned to Borg. ¢ 


CHAPTER XXIX. »  Of Skallagrim’s industry. 


“* KALLAGRIM was most industrious. He had about  S him always many men, whom he set to seek dili-  w gently all such provisions as could be got there for  man’s sustenance, because at first they had but little live-  stock compared with the needs of their numerous company.  But what live-stock they had went every winter self-feeding  in the woods. 

- Skallagrim was a good shipwright, and westwards of  Myrar was no lack of driftwood. He had buildings set up  on Swan-ness, and had another house there. This he  made a starting-point for sea-fishing, seal-hunting, and egg-  gathering ; in all these kinds there was plenty of provisions  to get, as well as driftwood to bring to him. Whales also  often came in there, and whoso would might shoot them.  All such creatures were then fame on the hunting-ground, 


52 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


as they-were unused to man. His third house he had on  the sea in Western Myrar. This was even a better place to  look out for driftwood. There, too, he had land sown, and  called it Acres. Over against it lay islands, among which  whales were found ; these they called Whale-islands. 

Skallagrim also sent his men up on the salmon-rivers to  fish. He set Odd Lonehouse by Cleave-river to see to the  salmon-fishing there. Odd dwelt under Lonehouse. ~Lone-  house-ness has its name from him. Sigmund was the name  of the man whom Skallagrim set by North-river ; he dwelt  at what was then called Sigmundstead, but now Hauga.  Sigmundar-ness takes its name from him. He afterwards  moved his homestead to Munodar-ness, that being thought  more convenient for salmon-fishing. 

But as Skallagrim’s live-stock multiplied, the cattle used  to go up to the fells in the summer. And he found that  the cattle that went on the heath were by far better and  fatter ; also that sheep did well through the winters in the  fell-dales without being driven down. So Skallagrim set up  buildings close to the fell, and had a house there; and  there he had his sheep kept. Of this farm Griss was the  overlooker, and after him was called Grisartongue. ‘Thus  Skallagrim’s wealth had many legs to stand on. 

Some time after Skallagrim’s coming out, a ship put into  Borgar-firth from the main, commanded by a man named  Oleif Halt. With him were his wife and children and other  of his kin, and the aim of his voyage was to get him a home  in Iceland. Oleif was a man wealthy, high-born, and fore-  seeing. Skallagrim asked Oleif and all his company to his  house for lodging. Oleif accepted this, and was with Skalla-  grim for his first winter in Iceland. 

But in the following spring Skallagrim showed him to  choice land south of White-river upwards from Grims-  river to Flokadale-river. Oleif accepted this, and moved  thither his household, and set there his homestead by  Warm-brook as it is called. He was a man of renown; his  sons were Ragi in Hot-spring-dale, and Thorarin, Ragi’s  brother, who took the law-speakership next after Hrafn  Heengsson. Thorarin dwelt at Warm-brook; he had to  wife ‘Thordis, daughter of Olaf Shy, sister of Thord Yeller. 


QF THE COMING OUT OF YNGVAR. 53 


CHAPTER XXX. 


of the coming out of Yngvar, and of ai Lae S  . tron-forging. 


ING HAROLD FAIR-HAIR took for his own all  those lands that Kveldulf and Skallagrim had left  behind them in Norway, and all their other 

property that he could lay hands on. He also sought dili-  gently after those men who had been in the counsels or  confidence or in any way helpers of Skallagrim and his folk  in the deeds which they wrought before Skallagrim went  abroad out of the land. And so far stretched the enmity of  the king against father and son, that he bore hatred against  their kith and kin, or any whom he knew to have been their  dear friends. Some suffered punishment from him, many  fled away and sought refuge, some within the land, some  out of the land altogether. Yngvar Skallagrim’s wife’s father  was one of these men aforesaid. This rede did he take,  that he turned all his wealth that he could into movables,  then gat him a sea-going ship and a crew thereto, and made  ready to go to Iceland, for he had heard that Skallagrim had  taken up his abode there, and there would be no lack of  choice land there with Skallagrim. So when they were ready  and a fair wind blew, he sailed out to sea, and his voyage  sped well. He came to Iceland on the south coast, and  held on westwards past Reykja-ness, and sailed into Borgar-  firth, and entering Long-river went up it even to the Falls.  There they put out the ship’s lading. 

But when Skallagrim heard of Yngvar’s coming, he at  once went to meet him and bade him to his house with as  many men as he would. Yngvar accepted this offer. The  ship was drawn up, and Yngvar went to Borg with many  men, and stayed that winter,with Skallagrim. In the spring  Skallagrim offered him choice land. He gave Yngvar the  farm which he had on’ Swan-ness, and land’ inwards to  Mud-brook and outwards to Strome-firth, Thereupon Yngvar  went out to this farm and took possession, and he was a  most able man and a wealthy. Skallagrim then built a  house on Ship-ness, and this he kept for a long time thereafter, 


54 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON: 


Skallagrim was a good iron-smith, and in winter wrought  much in red iron ore. He had a smithy set up some way  out from Borg, close by the sea, at a place now called  Raufar-ness.. ‘The woods he thought were not too far from  thence. “But since he could find no stone there so hard or  smooth as he thought good for hammering iron on (for  there are no beach pebbles, the seashore being all fine  sand), one evening, when others were gone to sleep, Skalla-  grim went to the sea, and pushed out an eight-oared boat  he had, and rowed out to the Midfirth islands. ‘There he  dropped an anchor from the bows of the boat, then stepped  overboard, and dived down to the bottom, and brought up ~  a large stone, and lifted it into the boat. Then he himself  climbed into the boat and rowed to land, and carried the  stone to the smithy and laid it down before the smithy  door, and thenceforth he hammered iron on it. That stone  lies there yet, and much slag beside it; and the marks of  the hammering may be seen on its upper face, and it is a .  surf-worn boulder, unlike the other stones that are there.  Four men nowadays could not lifta larger mass. Skallagrim  worked hard at smithying, but his house-carles grumbled  thereat, and thought it over early rising. Then Skallagrim.  composed this stave : 

‘Who wins wealth by iron  Right early must rise :  Of the sea’s breezy brother  Wind-holders need blast.  On furnace-gold glowing  My stout hammer rings, 


While heat-feeding bellows  A whistling storm stir.’ 


¢ 


CHAPTER XXXI.  Of Skallagrim’s children. 


'* KALLAGRIM and Bera had a great many children,  S but at first they all died. Then they had a son, who  was sprinkled with water and named Thorolf. Asa 

child he soon grew to be tall and was fair of countenance. 


' OF SKALLAGRIM'S CHILDREN - - 55 


It was thé talk of all that he would be just such another as  Thorolf Kveldulf’s son, after whom he was named. Thorolf  was far beyond children of his own age in strength. And  as he grew to manhood he became doughty-in most accom-  plishments then in vogue among those who were well trained.’  Thorolf was of a right cheery mood. Early did he come to  such full strength as to be deemed fit for warlike service with  other men. He was soon a favourite with all, and his father  and mother loved him well. Skallagrim and his wife had  two daughters ; one was named Szunn, the other Thorunn.  They also were of great promise as they grew up. Then  Skallagrim and his wife had yet another son. He was  sprinkled with water and named, and his name was Egil.  But as he grew up it was soon seen that he would. be ill+  favoured, like his father, with black hair. When but three  years old he was as tall and strong as other boys of six or  seven. He was soon talkative and word-wise. Somewhat  ill to manage was he when at play with other. lads. 

That spring Yngvar went to Borg, his errand being to bid  Skallagrim to a feast at his house, he also named for the  party his daughter Bera and Thorolf her son, and any others  that Skallagrim liked to bring. Skallagrim promised to  come. Yngvar then went home, prepared for the banquet,  and had ale brewed. But when the set time came that  Skallagrim and Bera should go to the feast, Thorolf made  him ready to go with them, as also some house-carles, so  that they were fifteen in all. Egil told his father that he  wished to go. 

‘I am,’ said he, ‘ as snc akin to Yngvar as'is' Thorolf.’ 

‘You shall not go,’ said Skallagrim, ‘for you know not how  to behave yourself in company where there is much drinking, |  you who are not good to deal with though you be sober.’ 

Then Skallagrim mounted his horse and rode away, but  Egil was ill content with his lot. 

He went out of the yard, and found a draught horse of  Skallagrim’s, got on its back and rode after Skallagrim’s  party. No easy way had he over the moor, for he did not  know the road ; but he kept his eyes on the riders before  him when copse or wood were not in the way. And this is  to tell of his journey, that late in the evening he came to 


+ 


56 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Swan-ness, when men sat there a-drinking. He went into  the room, but when Yngvar saw Egil he received him joyfully,  and asked why he had come so late. Egil told of his words  with Skallagrim. Yngvar made Egil sit by him, they two sat  opposite Skallagrim and Thorolf. For merriment over their  ale they fell to reciting staves, Then Egil recited a stave : 


‘ Hasting I came to the hearth fire :  Of Yngvar, right fain so to find him,  Him who on heroes bestoweth  Gold that the heather-worm guardeth.  Thou, of the snake's shining treasure  Alway a generous giver, 

Wilt not than me of three winters  Doughtier song-smith discover.’ 


Wags praised this stave, and thanked Egil much therefor,  but on the morrow he brought to Egil as reward for the  poem three sea-snail shells and a duck’s egg. And next  day at the drinking Egil recited another stave about his  poem’s reward : 

‘ The wielder of keen-biting wound-fowl 

Gave unto Egil the talker 

- Three silent dogs of the surf-swell,  Meet for the praise in his poem. 

He, the skilled guide of ‘the sea-horse, 

Knowing to please with a present,  Gave as fourth gift to young Fgil  Round egg, the brook-bird’s bed-bolster.’ 


Egil’s poetry won him thanks from many men. No more  tidings were there of that journey. Egil went home with  Se 


CHAPTER XXXII.  Of lord Brynjolf and Bjorn, his son. 


HERE was in Sogn a lord named Bjorn, a rich man ;  he dwelt at Aurland. His son was Brynjolf, who  was sole heir to all his father’s wealth. Brynjolf’s 

sons were Bjorn and Therd.’ They were young when what 

has been just told happened. Bjorn was a great traveller,  sometimes on free-booting, sometimes on trading voyages. 


qt 


rd 


OF LORD BRYNFOLF AND BFORN, HIS SON 57. 


He was ‘a right doughty man. It so chanced that one  summer Bjorn was present at a banquet attended by many.  He saw there a fair maiden who pleased him well. He  asked of what family she was, and was told that she was sister  of lord Thorir Hroaldsson, and was named Thora, with the  by-name Lacehand. Bjorn made his suit and asked Thora  to wife. But Thorir refused his offer, and with this they  parted. But that same autumn Bjorn took men and went  with a cutter well equipt northwards to the Firths, and  came to Thorir’s when he was not at home. Bjorn took  Thora away thence, and home with him to Aurland. They  two were there for the winter, and Bjorn would fain hold a  wedding with her. Brynjolf his father ill liked what Bjorn  had done ; he thought there was dishonour therein, whereas  there had been ere this long friendship between Thorir and  Brynjolf. 

‘So far,’ said he, ‘ Bjorn, from your holding a wedding  with Thora here in my house without the leave of her  brother, she shall be here as well respected as if she were  my daughter and your sister.’ And all had to be as  Brynjolf ordered in his household, whether Bjorn liked it  well or ill. Brynjolf sent men to Thorir to offer him  atonement and redress for what Bjorn had done. Thorir  bade Brynjolf send. Thora home ; no atonement could there  be else. But Bjorn would in no wise let her go away,  though Brynjolf begged it. And so the winter wore on. 

But when spring came, then Brynjolf and Bjorn were  talking one day, of their matters. Brynjolf asked what  Bjorn meant to do. Bjorn said ’twas likeliest that he should  go away out of the’ land. 

‘Most to my mind is it,’ said he, ‘that you should give ©  me a. long-ship and crew therewith, and I go a free-  booting.’ 

‘No hope is there of this,’ said Bjorn, ‘that I shall sue in  your hands a warship and strong force, for I know not but  you will go about just what is against my wish; why even  now already I have enough trouble from you. A merchant-  ship I will give you, and wares withal: go you then south-  wards to Dublin. That voyage | is now most highly one  of. I will get you a good crew.’ 


58 ' STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Bjorn said he would take this as his father willed. So he  had a good merchant-ship made ready, and got men for it.  Bjorn now made him ready for this voyage, but was some  time about it. But when he was quite ready and a fair  wind blew, he embarked in a boat with twelve men and  rowed in to Aurland, and they went up to the homestead  and to his mother’s bower. She was sitting therein with  many women. Thora was there. Bjorn said Thora must  go with him, and they led her away. But his mother bade  the women not dare to let them know this within in the  hall: Brynjolf, she said, would be in a sad way if he knew  it, and this would bring about great mischief between father  and son. But Thora’s clothes and trinkets were all laid there  ready to hand, and Bjorn and his men took all with them. 

Then they went that night out to their ship, at once hoisted  their sail, and sailed out by the Sogn-sea, and so to the main.  They had an ill wind, before which they must needs run,  and were long tossed about on the main, because they were  bent on shunning Norway at all hazards. And so it was  that one day they were sailing off the east coast of Shetland  during a gale, and brake their ship in making land at  Moss-ey. ‘They got out the cargo, and went into the town  that was there, carrying thither all their wares, and they  drew up their ship and repaired damages. 


e 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


Bjorn goes to Iceland. 


LITTLE before winter came a ship from the south  A . out of the Orkneys, with the tidings that a long-ship  had come in autumn to those islands. Therein were  messengers of king Harold, with this errand to earl Sigurd, .  that the king would have Bjorn Brynjolfsson slain wherever  he might be found, and the same message Harold sent to  the Southern Isles and even to Dublin. Bjorn heard these  tidings, and withal that he was outlawed in Norway.  Forthwith on reaching Shetland Bjorn had held his wed-  ding with Thora, and through the winter they stayed at  Moss-ey-town. 


B¥ORN GOES TO ICELAND. © 59 


But in spring, as soon as ever the sea began to calm,  Bjorn drew forth his ship, and made him ready with all  speed. And when he was ready and got a wind, he sailed  out to the main. They had a strong breeze, and were but  little time out ere they came to the south coast of Iceland.  The wind was blowing on the land; then it bore them  westwards along the coast, and so out to sea. But when  they got a shift of wind back again, then they sailed for the  land. There was not a single man on board who had been  in Iceland before. They sailed into a wondrous large firth,  the wind bearing them towards its western shore. Land-  wards nothing was seen but breakers and harbourless shore.  Then they stood slant-wise across the wind as they might  (but still eastwards), till a firth lay over against them, into  which they sailed, till all the skerries and the surf were  passed. Then they put in by a ness. An island lay out  opposite this, and a deep sound was between them: there  they made fast the ship. A bay ran up west of the ness,  and above this bay stood a good-sized rocky hill. : 

Bjorn and some men with him got into a boat, Bjorn  telling his comrades to beware of saying about their voyage  aught that might work them trouble. ‘They rowed to the  buildings, and found there men to speak to. First they  asked where they had come to land. The men told them  that this was named Borgar-firth; that the buildings they -  saw were called Borg ; that the goodman was Skallagrim. 

Bjorn at once remembered about hjm, and he went to.  meet Skallagrim, and they talked together. Skallagrim  asked who they were. Bjorn named himself and his father,  but Skallagrim knew Brynjolf well, so he offered to Bjorn  such help as he needed. This Bjorn accepted thankfully.  Then Skallagrim asked what others there were in the ship,  persons of rank. Bjorn said there was Thora, Hroald’s  daughter, sister of lord Thorir. Skallagrim was right glad  for that, and said that it was his. bounden duty to give to  the sister of Thorir his own foster-brother such help as she  needed or he could supply ; and he bade her and Bjorn  both to his house with all his shipmates. Bjorn accepted  this. So the cargo was moved from the ship up to the  homestead at Borg. There they set up their booths; but  the ship was drawn up into the brook hard by. And 


60 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


where Bjorn’s party had their booths is still called Bjorn’s  home-field. Bjorn and his shipmates all took up their  abode with Skallagrim, who never had about him fewer than  sixty stout fellows. 

| o 


CHAPTER XXXIV.  Of Skallagrim ana Bjorn. 


T befell in autumn, when ships had come to Iceland 

| from Norway, that this report came over, how Bjorn 

had run away with Thora without the consent of her 

kin, and for that the king had made him an outlaw from 

Norway. But when Skallagrim got to know this, he called 

Bjorn to him, and asked how it had been with his marriage ;  had it been made with the consent of his wife’s kin. 

‘I never looked for this,’ said he, ‘in a son of Brynjolf,  that I should not know the truth from him.’ 

Bjorn answered, ‘Truth only told I to you, Grim, and you  may not rebuke me for this, though I told you no further  than you asked. But now I must own this, which is true,  that you have heard truth about this match not being made  with the agreement of Thorir, my wife’s brother.’ | 

Then spake Skallagrim in great wrath, ‘ How dared you  come to meet me? Did you not know what friendship was  between me and Thorir ? 

Bjorn answered, ‘I knew that between you two was  foster-brotherhood and close friendship; but I sought your  home because I was driven ashore here, and I knew it  would avail naught to shun you. Now will it be for you to  _ rule what my lot shall be, but I hope for good from you as 

I am of your household.’ 

' Then came forward Thorolf Skallagrim’s son, and added  many a word, and begged his father not to lay this to Bjorn’s  charge after once receiving him, Several others spoke to  the same end. And so it came that Skallagrim was  appeased, and said that Thorolf should have his way here. 

‘Take you Bjorn,’ said he, ‘and deal with him as may  best prove your manhood.’ 


THOROLF GOES ABROAD 61 


CHAPTER XXXV.  Thorolf goes abroad, 


‘ | ‘HORA bare a child in the summer; it was a girl. 

She was sprinkled with water, and named Asgerdr.  . Bera got a woman to look after the girl. Bjorn  stayed for the winter with Skallagrim as did all his shipmates.  Thorolf struck up a friendship with Bjorn, and was ever in  his company. But when spring came, one day Thorolf hada  talk with his father, and asked him what counsel he would  give about Bjorn his winter guest, or what help he would  lend him. Grim asked Thorolf what Bjorn had in view. . 

‘I think,’ said Thorolf, ‘that Bjorn would soonest go to  Norway, if he could he there in peace. Methinks, father,  this plan lies before us, that you send men to Norway to  offer atonement for Bjorn; Thorir will greatly honour your  word.’ 

Thorolf by his persuasion so managed that Skallagrim  yielded and gave men for the outward voyage that summer.  ‘These went with message and tokens to Thorir Hroaldsson,  and sought atonement between him and Bjorn. But no  sooner did Brynjolf hear this than he, too, set his whole  mind to offer atonement for Bjorn. And the end of this  matter was that Thorir took atonement for Bjorn, because  he saw that it had come to this now that Bjorn had nothing  to fear. Thus Brynjolf got atonement accepted for Bjorn,  and Skallagrim’s messengers abode with Thorir for the  winter. In the summer following they went back; and on  their coming back in autumn they told their tidings that  Bjorn was admitted to atonement in Norway. Bjorn was  with Skallagrim for yet a third winter. But next spring he  made him ready for departure with his following. And  when Bjorn was ready for going, then Bera said she would  fain have Asgerdr, her foster-child, left behind. This Bjorn  accepted, and the girl was left behind and brought up with  Skallagrim’s family. Thorolf, Skallagrim’s son, settled to go  with Bjorn, and Skallagrim gave him means for the journey.  So he went abroad in the summer with Bjorn. Their 


62 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


voyage sped well, and they came off the main into Sogn-sea.  Bjorn then sailed into Sogn, and thence on home to his  father, and Thorolf with him. Brynjolf received them joy-  fully. Then word was sent to Thorir Hroaldsson. He and  Brynjolf set a time for a meeting; to this meeting Bjorn  also came. He and Thorir there ratified their atonement.  Then Thorir paid out of hand such property in his house as  belonged to ‘Thora; and thereafter Thorir and Bjorn were  good brothers-in-law and friends. Bjorn then stayed at home  at Aurland with Brynjolf, Thorolf also being there in much  favour both with father and son. 


e 


CHAPTER XXXVI.  Of Eric Bloodaxe and Thorolf. 


ING HAROLD long held his residence in Horda- 

kK Jand or Rogaland, at those large estates that he 

owned, at Outstone or Augvalds-ness, or at Afrek- 

sted i in Fitjar, or at Seaham in Lygra. But this winter the  king was in the north part of the land. 

Now, when Bjorn and Thorolf had been one winter in  Norway and spring came, they made ready a ship and  gathered men. and in the summer they went a-freebooting  eastwards, and came home in the autumn, having won  much wealth. But when they came home they heard that  king Harold was in Rogaland and would remain there for  the winter. King Harold was beginning to age much and  fail in strength, but many of his sons were come to vigour.  His son Eric, by-named Bloodaxe, was then quite young.  He was being fostered with lord Thorir Hroaldsson. The  king loved Eric above all his sons. Thorir was on most  intimate terms with the king then. 

Bjorn and Thorolf, when they came home, went first to  Aurland, but afterwards turned their way northwards to  visit lord Thorir at his home. They had a certain galley  rowed by thirteen or fourteen oarsmen on either side, and  they had about thirty men with them. This ship they had  taken in. their summer freebooting. It was gaily painted 


OF ERIC BLOODAXE AND THOROLF — -63 


above the sea-line, and was very beautiful. But when they  came to Thorir they were made welcome, and abode there  some time ; while the ship, tented over, floated opposite the  house. It happened one day that, as Thorolf and Bjorn  were going down to the ship, they saw that Eric, the king’s  son, was there; he went now out on to the ship, now up  to the land, and stood there looking at the ship. Then said  _ Bjorn to Thorolf : 

‘The king’s son admires the ship much; do you offer it  to him as a present, for I know it will much help us with  the king if Eric be our pleader with him. I have heard it  said that the king bears a heavy grudge against you for your  father’s sake.’ 

Thorolf said that this would be a good plan. 

They then went down to the ship, and Thorolf spoke : 

‘Thou regardest the ship carefully, prince ; how dost ce  like it ? 

‘Right well,’ said he, ‘it is a perfect beauty.’ 

‘Then will I give it thee,’ said Thorolf, ‘if thou wilt take  the present.’ 

‘Take it I will,’ said Eric, ‘and thou wilt deem it but  poor payment therefor though I should offer thee my  friendship ; but this thou mayest look for if I live.’ 

Thorolf said that he thought the ship were thus far over-  paid. 

Then they separated. But thenceforward the king’s son  was right cheerful with Thorolf and his friend. 

Bjorn and Thorolf, talking with Thorir, asked him whether  he thought it true that the king bore a heavy grudge against  Thorolf. 

Thorir did not dene that he had heard so. 

‘Then I would fain,’ said Bjorn, ‘that you should go and  plead Thorolf’s cause’ before him, for one lot shall befall  me and Thorolf; he did as much for me when I was in Ice-  land.’ 

The end was that Thorir promised to go to the king, and  bade them try whether the king’s son would go with him.  But when Thorolf and Bjorn spake of this with Eric, he  promised his influence with his father. 

After that Thorolf and Bjorn went their way to Sogn. 


64 ‘STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


But Thorir and Eric the king’s son set in order the newly-  given galley, and went south to meet the king, and found  him in Hordaland. He received them joyfully. They  remained there for awhile, watching for a fit time to  approach the king when he should be in a good humour.  ‘Then they opened this matter before the king, and said that  a certain man had come named Thorolf, Skallagrim’s son.  * We would pray thee,’ they said, ‘O king, to bear in mind  this: that his kinsmen have done good to thee, and not to  make him pay for what his father did in avenging his  brother.’ 

Thorir spoke herein soft words, but the king answered  rather shortly that to him and his much mischance had  come from Kveldulf and his sons, and ’twas to be looked  for that this Thorolf would be like-minded with his kin.  ‘They are all,’ said he, ‘overbearing men, who know ‘no  measure, and care not with whom they have to deal.’. 

Then Eric took the word. He said that Thorolf had  made friends with him, and given him a noble present—  that ship which they had there. ‘I have,’ said he, ‘pro-  mised him my hearty friendship. There will be few’ to  become friends with me if this man get nothing by it. Thou  wilt not let it be so, father, with him who has been the first  to give me such a treasure.’ 

The end was that the king promised them before they  parted that Thorolf should be in peace with him. ‘ But I  will not,’ said he, ‘that he come into my presence. And  thou, Eric, mayst make him as close to thee as thou wilt,  him or more of his kin. But one of two things will happen,  either they will be softer to thee than to me, or thou wilt  rue this thy intercession, and that thou lettest them be long  in thy company.’ 

Thereafter went Eric Bloodaxe and Thorir home to the  Firths ; then they sent word to Thorolf how their errand to  the king had sped. Thorolf and Bjorn were for that winter  with Brynjolf. Many summers they were out a- freebooting,  but the winters they ape with Brynjolf, or sometimes with  Thorir, 


THE JOURNEY TO BHARMALAND. 68 


CHAPTER XXXVII.  The journey to Bjarmaland, 


RIC BLOODAXE now took a share in the realm.  KR He held oversight in Hordaland and the Firths ; 

he took and kept about him a body-guard. And  one spring Eric Bloodaxe made ready to go to Bjarmaland,  and chose him much people for that voyage. Thorolf betook  him to this voyage with Eric, and was in the forecastle of his  ship, and bare his standard. Thorolf was then taller and  stronger than other men, and herein like his father. In that  expedition befell much tidings. Eric had a great battle by  the river Dvina in Bjarmaland, wherein he won the victory,  as is told in the lays about him. And in that voyage he took  Gunnhilda, daughter of Auzur Toti, and brought her home  with him. Gunnhilda was above all women beautiful and  shrewd, and of magic cunning. There was great intimacy  between Thorolf and Gunnhilda. Thorolf ever spent the  winters with Eric, the summers in freebooting. 

The next tidings were that Thora Bjorn’s wife fell sick  and died. But some while after Bjorn took to him another  wife; she was named Alof, the daughter of Erling the  wealthy of Ostr. They two had a daughter named Gunn-  hilda. 

There was a man named Thorgeir Thornfoot ; he dwelt  in Fenhring of Hordaland, at a place called Askr. He  had three sons—one named Hadd, another Bergonund, the  third Atli the short. Bergonund was beyond other men  tall and strong, and he was grasping and ungentle; Atli the  short was of small stature, square-built, of sturdy strength.  Thorgeir was a very rich man, a devoted heathen wor-  shipper, of magic cunning. Hadd went out freebooting,  and was seldom at home. on 


e 


66 STORY OF EGIL: SKALLAGRIMSSON 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


Thorolf comes out to Iceland. 


HOROLF Skallagrim’s son made him ready one  summer for a trading voyage; he purposed what  he also performed, to go to Iceland and see his 

father. He had now been long abroad. By this he had got  great store of wealth and many costly things. When ready  for the voyage, he went to king Eric. And at their parting  the king delivered to Thorolf an axe, which he said he wished  to giveto Skallagrim. The axe was snag-horned, large, gold-  mounted, the hilt overlaid’ with silver; it was most valuable  and costly. 

Thorolf went his way as soon as he was ready, and his  voyage sped well; he came with his ship into Borgar-firth,  and at once hastened home to his father. A right joyful  meeting was theirs. Then Skallagrim went down to  Thorolf’s ship, and had it drawn up, and Thorolf went  home to Borg with twelve men. But when he came home,  he gave Skallagrim King Eric’s greeting, and delivered to  him the axe which the king had sent him. Skallagrim took  the axe and held it up, looked at it awhile, but said nothing.  He fixed it up by his seat. 

It chanced one day in the autumn at Borg that Skalla-  grim had several oxen driven home which he meant to  slaughter. Two of these he had led under the house-wall,  and placed with heads crossing. He took a large fiat stone,  and pushed it under their necks. Then he went near with  the axe—the king’s gift—and hewed at the oxen both at  once, so that he took off the heads of the two. But the  axe smote down on the stone, so that the mouth broke, and  was rent through all the tempered steel. Skallagrim looked  at the edge, said nothing, but went into the fire-hall, and,  mounting to the wall-beam, thrust the axe up among the  rafters above the door. There it lay in the smoke all the  winter. 

But in the spring Thorolf declared that he meant to go  abroad that summer. 

Skallagrim forbade him, saying: ‘’Tis good to drive 


‘THOROLF COMES OUT TO ICELAND 67 


‘home with your wain whole. You have,’ said he, ‘gotten  great honour by travel; but there is the old saw, ‘“ Many  farings, many fortunes.” Take you now here as much  share of the property as you think will make you a great  man.’  Thorolf said he would make yet one journey more. ‘And  I have,’ he said, ‘an urgent errand for the journey. But  when I come back next time I shall settle here. But  Asgerdr, your foster-child, shall go out with me to her father.  ‘This he bade me when I came west.’  Skallagrim said Thorolf would have his way.  Thereafter Thorolf went to his ship, and put it in order.  . And when all was ready they moved the ship out to Digra-  ness, and it lay there waiting a wind. Then Asgerdr went  to the ship with him. But before Thorolf left Borg Skalla-  grim went and took down from the rafters over the door  the axe—the king’s gift—and came out with it. The haft  was now black with smoke, and the blade rusted. Skalla-  grim looked at the axe’s edge. ‘Then he handed it to  Thorolf, reciting this stave :  ‘ The fierce wound-wolf’s tooth-edge  Hath flaws not a few,  An axe all deceitful,  A wood cleaver weak.  Begone ! worthless weapon,  With shaft smoke. begrimed :  A prince ill-beseemed it  Such present to send.’ 


? 


CHAPTER XXXIX.  Kettle Blund comes out to Iceland. 


HIS had happened while Thorolf was away, that one  summer a merchant ship from Norway came ‘into  Borgar-firth. Merchant-ships used then commonly 

to be drawn up into rivers, brook-mouths, or ditches. This  ship belonged to a man named Kettle, and by-named Blund ;  he was a Norwegian of noble kin and wealthy. His son,  named Geir, who was then of full age, was with him in the 


68 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


ship. Kettle meant to make his home in Iceland ; he came  ‘Jate in the summer. . Skallagrim knew all about him, and  offered him lodging for himself and all his company. This  Kettle took, .and was with Skallagrim for the winter. That  winter Geir, Kettle’s son, asked to wife Thorunn, Skallagrim’s  ‘daughter, and the match was made, and Geir took her. 

Next spring Skallagrim showed Kettle to land above  -Oleif’s land, by White-river, from Flokadale-river mouth to  -Reykjadale-river mouth, and all the tongue that lay between  the rivers up to Redgill, and all Flokadale above the slopes.  Kettle dwelt.at Thrandarholt ; Geir at Geirs-lithe; he had  another farm in Reykjadale at Upper Reykir. He was  called Geir the wealthy; his sons were Blund-Kettle and  Thorgeir-blund, <A third was Hrisa-blund, who first dwelt  at Hrisa. P 


CHAPTER XL.  (Of Egil’s and S kallagrim’s games. 


KALLAGRIM took much pleasure in trials of “een  S and games ; he liked to talk about such. Ball-play  was then a common game. Plenty of strong men  there were at that time in the neighbourhood, but not one of  strength to match with Skallagrim. He was now somewhat  stricken in years. There was a man named Thord, son of  Grani, at Granastead, who was of great promise ; he was then  young ; very fond he was of Egil, Skallagrim’s son. Egil often  engaged in wrestling ; he was headstrong and hot-tempered,  but all had the sense to teach their sons to give way to Egil.  A game of ball was held at White-river-dale in the early  winter, to which was a great gathering of people from all the  country-side. ‘Thither went many of Skallagrim’s household _  to the game. Chief among them was Thord, Grani’s son.  Egil asked Thord to let him go with him to the game ; he  was then in his seventh winter. Thord let him do so, and  Egil mounted behind him. But when they came to the  play-meeting, then the men made up sides for the play.  Many small boys had come there too, and they made up a  game for themselves. For this also sides were chosen.  Egil was matched to play against a boy named Grim, son 


OF EGIL’S AND SKALLAGRIM’S GAMES 69: 


of Hegg, of Hegg-stead. Grim was ten or eleven years old,  and strong for his age. But when they played together Egil  got the worst of it. And Grim made all he could of his.  advantage. Then Egil got angry and lifted up the bat and  struck Grim, whereupon Grim seized him and threw him  down with a heavy fall, and handled him rather roughly,  and said he would thrash him if he did not behave. But  when Egil got to his feet, he went out of the game, and the  boys hooted at him. 

- Egil went to Thord and told him what had been done,  Thord said : 

~ J will go with you, and we will be avenged on them.’ 

He gave into his hands a halberd that he had been carry-  ing. Such weapons were then customary. They went where.  the boys’ game was. Grim had now got the ball and was  running away with it, and the other boys after him. Then  Egil bounded upon Grim, and drove the axe into his head,  so that it at once pierced his brain. After this Egil and  Thord went away to their own people. The Myramen ran  to their weapons, and so did either party. Oleif Halt, with  his following, ran to help the Borgarmen, who were thus far  the larger number, and they parted without doing more.  But hence arose a quarrel between Oleif and Hegg. They.  fought at Laxfit, by Grims-river ; there seven men fell, but  Hegg was wounded to death, and his brother Kvig fell.  But when Egil came home, Skallagrim said little abaut it;  but Bera said Egil had in him the makings of a freebooter,.  and that ’twould be well, so soon as he were old enough, to  give him a long-ship. Then Egil made a stave: | 


‘Thus counselled my mother,  For me should they purchase 

eo A galley and good oars 

To go forth a-roving. 

So may I high-standing, 

A noble barque steering, 

Hold course for the haven, 

Hew down many foemen.’ - 


When Egil was twelve years old, he was grown so big  that there were but few men howso large and strong that he  eould not overcome in games. In his twelfth winter he was  often at games. ‘Thord Grani’s son was then twenty years 


70 - STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


cld ; he was very strong. As the winter wore on, it often  chanced that the two, Egil and Thord, were matched against  Skallagrim. And once in the winter it so befell that there  was ball-play at Borg, southwards in Sandvik. Thord and  Egil were set against Skallagrim in the game; and he  became weary before them, so that they had the best of it.  But in the evening after sunset it began to go worse with  Egil and his partner. Skallagrim then became so strong  that he caught up Thord and dashed him down so violently  that he was all bruised and at once got his bane. Then he  seized Egil. Now there was a handmaid of Skallagrim’s  named Thorgerdr Brak, who had nursed Egil when a child ;  she was a big woman, strong as a man, and of magic  cunning. Said Brak: 

‘Dost thou turn thy shape-strength, Skallagrim, against  thy son?’ 

Whereat Skallagrim let Egil loose, but clutched at her.  She broke away and took to her heels with Skallagrim after  her. So went they to the utmost point of Digra-ness. Then  she leapt out from the rock into the water. Skallagrim  hurled after her a great stone, which struck her between the  shoulders, and neither ever came up again. The water  there’ is now called Brakar-sound. But afterwards, in the  evening, when they came home to Borg, Egil was very  angry. Skallagrim and everybody else were set at table,  but Egil had not yet come to his place. He went into the  fire-hall, and up to the man who there had the overseeing  of work and the management of moneys for Skallagrim, and  was most dear to him. Egil dealt him his deathblow, then,  went to his seat. Skallagrim spoke not a word about it  then, and thenceforward the matter was kept quiet. But  father and son exchanged no word good or bad, and so  that winter passed. 

The next summer after this Thorolf came out, as was told  above. And when he had been in Iceland one winter, in  the spring following he made ready his ship in Brakar-  sound. But when he was quite ready, then one day Egil  went to his father, and asked him to give him an outfit. 

‘I wish,’ said he, ‘to go out with Thorolf.’ 

' Skallagrim asked if he had spoken at all on that matter:  with Thorolf. Egil said he had not. Skallagrim bade him 


OF EGIL’S AND SKALLAGRIM’S GAMES v1 


do that first. But when Egil started the question with  Thorolf, he said : 

“Tis not likely that I shall take you abroad with me;  if your father thinks he cannot manage you here in his  house, I have no confidence for this, to take you with me  to foreign lands; for it will not do to show there such  temper as you do here.’ 

‘ Maybe,’ said Egil, ‘neither of us will go.’ 

In the night came on a furious gale, a south-wester. But  when it was dark, and now flood-tide, Egil came where the  ship lay. He went out on to the ship, and outside the  tenting ; he cut asunder the cables that were on the seaward  side ; then, hurrying back to land by the bridge, he at once  shot out the bridge, and cut the cables that were upon land.  Then the ship was driven out into the firth, But when  Thorolf’s men were aware that the ship was adrift, they  jumped into the boat ; but the wind was far too strong for  them to get anything done. The ship drifted over to Duck-  kyle, and on the islands there; but Egil went home to —  Borg. - 

. And when people got to know of the trick that Egil had  played, the more part blamed it. Egil said he should before  long do Thorolf more harm and mischief if he would not  take him away. But then others mediated between them,  and the end was that Thorolf took Egil, and he went out  with him that summer. 

When Thorolf came on shipboard, at once taking the axe  which Skallagrim had given into his hands, he cast it over-  board into the deep so that it nevermore came up. _- Thorolf  went his way in the summer, and his voyage sped well, and  they came out to Hordaland. He at once stood northwards  to Sogn. There it had happened in the winter that Brynjolf  had fallen sick and died, and his sons had shared the  heritage. Thord had Aurland, the estate on which his  father had dwelt. He had become a liege-man of the king,  and was made a baron. Thord’s daughter was named  Rannveig, the mother of Thord and Helgi, this Thord  being father of Ingiridr whom king Olaf had to wife.  Helgi was father of Brynjolf, father of Serk, Sogn, and Svein. 


? 


72 ‘STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


CHAPTER XLI.  Of Bjorn. 


JORN got for his portion another good and valuable  homestead. He did not become a liege-man of the 


king, wherefore he was called Bjorn Yeoman. He. 


was right wealthy, and a great man. No sooner did Thorolf  come off the sea than he went at once to Bjorn, and brought 


him Asgerdr his daughter. There was a joyful meeting. © 


Asgerdr was a most beautiful and accomplished woman, wise  and right skilful. 

Thorolf went to see king Eric. And when they met,  Thorolf greeted Eric from Skallagrim, and said that he had  thankfully received the king’s gift. He then brought out a  good long-ship’s sail, which he said Skallagrim had sent to  the king. King Eric received the gift well, and bade Thorolf  be with him for the winter. For this Thorolf thanked the 


king, but said: ‘I must first go to Thorir ; with him I have > 


an urgent errand.’ 


-Then Thorolf went to Thorir, as he had said, and met ;  there a right hearty welcome. Thorir bade him be with 


him. This Thorolf said he would accept; ‘and there is,’ 


said he, ‘one with me who must have lodging where I am ; 


he is my brother, and he has never before been away from  home, and he needs that I look after him.’  Thorir said that Thorolf had every right, if he would, to 


bring more men with him thither. ‘Your brother, too,’ 


said he, ‘we think, betters our company if he be at all like  you.’ 

Then Thorolf went to his ship, and had it drawn up and  made snug, whereafter he and Egil went to lord Thorir.  Thorir had a son named Arinbjorn, who was somewhat  older than Egil. Arinbjorn early showed himself a manly  fellow and a doughty. With Arinbjorn Egil struck up a  friendship, and was ever his follower. But between the  brothers was rather a coolness. 


e 


THOROLF ASKS ASGERDR TO WIFE. 73 


CHAPTER XLII. 


Thorolf asks Asgerdr to wife. 


HOROLF Skallagrim’s son now sounded Thorir  | as to how he would take the matter should  Thorolf ask in marriage Asgerdr his kinswoman.  Thorir welcomed this readily, saying that he would be his  pleader in this suit. Soon after Thorolf went north to Sogn  with a goodly company. He came to Bjorn’s house, and  was well received there. Bjorn bade him be with him as  long as he would. Thorolf speedily opened to Bjorn his  errand, and made his offer, asking Bjorn’s daughter Asgerdr  to wife. This proposal Bjorn took well, his consent was  easily won ; and it was settled that the betrothal should be  there, and 4 day was fixed for the wedding. The feast was  to be at Bjorn’s in the autumn. 

Then Thorolf went back to Thorir, and told Hin what  had been done in his journey. Thorir was glad that the  match was to be made. But when the time came that  Thorolf should go to the feast, he bade men to go with  him. First bade he Thorir and Arinbjorn and their house-  carles, and some rich yeomen; and for the journey there  was a large and goodly company. 

But when the appointed day was near at hand that  Thorolf should leave home, and the bridesmen were now  come, then Egil fell sick, so that he could not go. Thorolf  and his company had a large long-ship well equipt, and  went on their way as had been agreed. 


e 


CHAPTER XLIII.  Of Aulvir and Egil. 


| HERE was a man named Aulvir, a house-carle of  Thorir’s, who was manager and bailiff over his 

= estate. He had the getting in of debts, and was 

_ treasurer. Aulvir was past his youth, but was still quite a  hale man. It so happened that Aulvir had to leave home °  to get in some rents of Thorir’s that had stood over from 


74 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


the spring. He had a row-boat, on board which went  twelve of Thorir’s house-carles. Just then Egil began to  recover, and rose from his bed. He thought it was dull  work at home when everybody was gone away. So he  spoke with Aulvir, and said he would like to go with him.  But Aulvir thought one good comrade would not overload  them, as there was enough ship-room. So Egil prepared to  go. He had his weapons, sword, halberd, and buckler. 

They went their way when they were ready. They had  the wind blowing hard against them, a sharp gale and  troublesome; but they pursued their journey vigorously,  taking to their oars. And their progress was such, that on  the evening of a day they came to Atla-isle, and there put  in to land. In this island, not far up from the shore, was a  large farm belonging to king Eric. The overlooker thereof  was aman named Bard. He was called Bard of Atla-isle,  and was a good business man and worker; not of high  birth, but much prized by the king and Gunnhilda. 

Aulvir and his men drew up their ship beyond flood-tide  mark. They then went to the farm buildings, and found  Bard outside, and told him of their journey, and withal that  they would fain be there for the night. Bard saw that they  were very wet, and led them to a fire-hall that stood apart  from the other buildings. There he had a large fire made  for them, at which their clothes were dried. When they  had put them on again, Bard came in. ‘Now will we,’ said  he, ‘set you a table here. I know you will be glad to  sleep ; you are weary from your wetting.’ 

Aulvir liked that well. Soon the table was set, and food  given them, bread and butter and large bowls of curds set  forth. Bard said: ‘Right sorry am I that there is no ale  in the house, that I might receive you as I would ; you will  have to make out with what there is.’ 

Aulvir and his folk were very thirsty, and drank up the  curds. Then Bard had oat-drink brought in, and they  drank that. ‘I should like,’ said Bard, ‘to give you better  drink if I had any.’ 

There was no lack of straw in the room. Then he bade  them lie down to sleep. 

o 


THE SLAYING OF BARD. * 7 


CHAPTER XLIV.  The slaying of Bard. 


| ‘ ING ERIC and queen Gunnhilda came that same  evening to Atla-isle, and Bard had prepared there  a banquet for the king ; and there was to be there 

a sacrifice to the guardian spirits. Sumptuous was the  banquet, and great the drinking within the hall. 

‘Where is Bard ?’ asked the king ; ‘I see him not.’ 

Someone said: ‘ Bard is outside supplying his guests.’ 

‘Who be these guests,’ said the king, ‘that he deemeth  this more a duty than to be here within waiting on us ?’ 

The man said that some house-carles of lord Thorir  were come thither. 

The king said: ‘Go after them at once, and call them in  hither.’ 

And so it was done, with the message that the king would  fain see them. | 

Whereupon they came. The king received Aulvir well,  and bade him sit in the high-seat facing himself, and his  comrades outside him. They did so, Egil sitting next to  Aulvir. Ale was then served to them to drink. Many  toasts went round, and a horn should be drunk to each toast. 

But as the evening wore on, many of Aulvir’s companions  became helpless. Some remained in the room, though sick,  some went out of doors. Bard busily plied them with drink.  Then Egil took the horn which Bard had offered to Aulvir,  and drank it off. Bard said that Egil was very thirsty, and  brought him at once the horn again filled, and bade him  drink it off. Egil took the horn, and recited a stave: 


§ Wizard-worshipper of cairns !  Want of ale thou couldst allege,  Here at spirits’ holy feast. 

False deceiver thee I find. *  Stranger guests thou didst beguile,  Cloaking thus thy churlish greed.  Bard, a niggard base art thou,  Treacherous trick on such to play.’ 


Bard bade him drink and stop that jeering. Egil drained.  every cup that came to him, drinking for Aulvir likewise. 


76. STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Then Bard went to the queen and told her there was a man  there who put shame on them, for, howsoever much he  drank, he still said he was thirsty. The queen and Bard  then mixed the drink with poison, and bare it in. Bard  consecrated the cup, then gave it to the ale-maid. She  carried it to Kgil, and bade him drink. Egil then drew his  knife and pricked the palm of hishand. He took the horn, 