[RIX-egil-saga  —  part 3 of 3, continuation of part 2]
============================================================

another son named Gunnar, who had died  a short time before. 

So then Egil began the poem, and this is the beginning. 


SONA-TORREK (SONS’ LOSS).  I 2 


‘Much doth it task me ‘Forth it flows but hardly; —  My tongue to move, For within my breast  Through my throat to utter Heavy sobbing stifles  The breath of song. Hindered stream of song—  Poesy, prize of Odin, Blesséd boon to mortals  Promise now I may not, Brought from Odin’s kin, 

A draught drawn. not lightly Goodly treasure, stolen 


From deep thought’s dwelling. From Giant-land of yore. . 


172 


STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


3.  ‘He, who so blameless  Bore him in life,  O’erborne by billows  With boat was whelmed.  Sea-waves—flood that whilom  Welled from giant’s wound—  Smite upon the grave-gate  Of my sire and son. 


8. 


‘ Sure, if sword could venge  Such cruel wrong,  Evil times would wait | °.  /Egir, ocean-god. =  That wind-giant’s brother  Were I strong to slay,  ’Gainst him and his sea-brood  Battling would I go. 


4. 9.  ‘ Dwindling now my kindred ‘ But I in no wise |  Draw near to their end, Boast, as I ween, a 


Ev’n as forest-saplings  Felled or tempest-strown.  Not gay or gladsome  Goes he who beareth  Kody of kinsman 

On funeral bier. 


5.  ‘ Of father fallen  First I may tell ;  Of much-loved mother .  Must mourn the loss.  Sad store hath memory  For minstrel skill, 


Strength that may strive .  With the stout ships’ Bane.  For to eyes of all 

Easy now ’tis seen 

How the old man’s lot  Helpless is and lone. 


10. Se 


_ ©Me hath the main 


Of much bereaved ;  Dire isthe tale, ~  The deaths of kin: ee  Since he the shelter 

And shield of my house 


Hied him from life  To heaven’s glad realm. 


: ‘, - . : f  ow, a Y t  6. I I. U \ re SE 


A wood to bloom leafy 


With words of song. me he ee 


‘Most woful the breach,  Where the wave in-brake  On the fenced hold  Of my father’s kin.  Unfilled, as I wot, 

And open doth stand  The gap of son rent  By the greedy surge. 


7°  ‘Me Ran, the sea-queen,  Roughly hath shaken :  I stand of beloved ones  Stript and all bare.  Cut hath the billow  The cord of my kin,  Strand of mine own twisting  So stout and strong. 


‘ Full surely I know,  In my son was waxing  The stuff and the strength  Of a stout-limbed wight :  Had he reached but ripeness  To raise his shield,  And Odin laid hand  On his liegeman true. 


12. 


‘Willing he followed  His father’s word,  Though all opposing  Should thwart my rede:  He in mine household  Mine honour upheld,  Of my power and rule  The prop and the stay. 


DEATH OF BODVAR: EGIL'S POEM THEREON 173 


13.  ‘Oft to my mind  My loss doth come,  How I brotherless bide  Bereaved and lone.  Thereon I bethink me,  When thickens the fight  Thereon with much searching  My soul doth muse: 


14. :  ‘Who staunch stands by me  In stress of fight,  Shoulder to shoulder,  Side by side?  Such want doth weaken  In war’s dread hour ;  Weak-winged I fly,  Whom friends all fail. 


15. 

*Son’s place to his sire  (Saith a proverb true)  Another son born .  Alone can fill. ae 8  Of kinsmen none  (Though ne’er so kind)  To brother can stand  In brother’s stead. 


16. 


‘O’er all our ice-fields,  Our northern snows,  Few now I find  Faithful and true. 

Dark deeds men love,  Doom death to their kin,  A brother’s body 

Barter for gold. 


17. 

‘ Unpleasing to me 

Our people’s mood, 

Each seeking his own  _ Inselfish peace.  To the happier bees’ home  Hath passed my son,  My good wife’s child  To his glorious kin. 


18  ‘Odin, mighty monarch,  Of minstrel mead the lord,  On me a heavy hand  Harmful doth lay.  Gloomy in unrest  Ever I grieve,  Sinks my drooping brow, = «  Seat of sight and thought. 


19. 

‘ Fierce fire of sickness  First from my home _'  Swept off a son  With savage blow : 

One who was heedful,  Harmless, I wot, 

In deeds unblemished,  In words unblamed. 


20, 

* Still do I mind me,  When the Friend of men  High uplifted  To the home of gods  That sapling stout  Of his father’s stem, 

Of my true wife born  A branch so fair. 


21.  ‘Once bare I goodwill  To the great spear-lord,  Him trusty and true  I trowed for friend :  Ere the giver of conquest,  The car-borne god,  Broke faith and friendship  False in my need. 


22. 

‘ Now victim and worship  To Vilir’s brother,  The god once honoured,  I give no more. !  Yet the friend of Mimir  On me hath bestowed  Some boot for bale,  If all boons I tell. 


874 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


23. - 24. 

‘Yea he, the wolf-tamer, ~ ‘Hard am I beset ; 

. The war-god skilful, . Whom Hela, the sister —  Gave poesy faultless Of Odin’s fell captive,  To fill my soul = On Digra-ness waits.  Gave wit to know well Yet shall I gladly 

Each wily trickster, With right good welcome  And force him to face me . Dauntless in bearing 

As foeman in fight. Her death-blow bide.’ 


Egil began to cheer up as the composing of the poem  went on; and when the poem was complete, he brought it  before Asgerdr and Thorgerdr and his family. He rose  from his bed, and took his place in the high-seat. This  poem he called ‘Loss of Sons.’ And now Egil had the  funeral -feast of his son held after ancient custom. But  when Thorgerdr went home, Egil enriched her with good 


gifts.  ? 


CHAPTER LXXXII.  Hacon’s wars and death. Poem on Arinbjorn. 


ONG time did Egil dwell at Borg, and became an old  .man. But it is not told that he had lawsuits with  any here in the land ; nor is there a word of: single 

combats, or war and slaughter of his after he settled down  here in Iceland. ‘Ihey say that Egil never went abraad out  of Iceland after the events already ‘related. And for this  the main cause was that Egil might not be in Norway, by  reason of the charges which (as has been told before) the  kings there deemed. they had against him. He kept house  in munificent style, for there was no lack of money, and his  disposition led him to munificence. 

King Hacon, Athelstan’s foster-son, long ruled over  Norway ; but in the latter part of his life Eric’s sons came  to Norway and strove with him for the kingdom ; and they  had battles together, wherein Hacon ever won the victory.  The last battle was fought in Hordaland, on Stord-island, at  Fitjar: there king Hacon won the victory, but also got his  death-wound. After that Eric’s sons took the kingdom in  Norway. | 7 


<.. POEM ON. ARINBYORN.... |: ove 


Lord Arinbjorn was with Harold Eric’s son, and was  made his counsellor, and had of him great honours: He  was commander of his forces and defender of the land. A  great warrior ‘was Arinbjorn, and a victorious. He was  governor of the Firth folk. Egil Skallagrimsson heard these  tidings.of the change of kings in Norway, and therewith how  Arinbjorn had returned to his estates in Norway, and was  there in great honour. Then Egil coniposed a poem about  ' Arinbjorn, whereof this is the beginning : 


ARINBJORN’S EPIC, OR A PART THEREOF. -  I. 


‘For generous prince ‘That moon-like brightness 


Swift praise I find,  But stint my words  To stingy churl.  Openly sing I  Of king’s true deeds,  But silence keep 

_ On slander’s lies. 


2. 


‘For fabling braggarts  Full am I of scorn,  But willing speak I  Of worthy friends : 

‘Courts I of monarchs  A many have sought,  A gallant minstrel  Of guileless mood. 


‘ Erewhile the anger  Of Yngling’s son 

_ I bore, prince royal 

Of race divine. 

_ With hood of daring 

_ O’er dark locks drawn  A lord right noble  I rode to seek. 


4. 

.§ There sate in might  Thé monarch strong,  With helm of terror 

- High-throned and dread ;  A king unbending  With bloody blade 

- Within York city . 

Wielded he power. 


Might none behold,  _Nor brook undaunted  ‘Great Eric’s brow: 

As fiery serpent 

His flashing eyes  Shot starry radiance  Stern and keen. 


‘ 6.  ‘Yet I to this ruler  Of fishful seas  My bolster-mate’s ransom  Made bold to bear,  Of Odin’s goblet ~  O’erflowing dew  Each listening ear-mouth  Eagerly drank. 


7; 


_*Not beauteous in seeming 


My bardic fee 


To ranks of heroes 


In royal hall : 

~ When I my hood- knoll  Wolf-gray of hue 

For mead of Odin  From monarch gat, 


8. 


. © Thankful I took it, 


And therewithal  The pit-holes black at  Of my beetling brows’;  Yea and that mouth _  That for me bare 

‘The poem of praise  To princely knees. 


STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


9. 

* Tooth-fence took I,  And tongue likewise,  Ears’ sounding chambers  And sheltering eaves.  And better deemed I  Than brightest gold  The gift then given  By glorious king. 


10. 


‘ There a staunch stay  Stood by my side,  One man worth many  Of meaner wights,  Mine own true friend  Whom trusty I found, .  High-couraged ever  In counsels bold. 


Il. 

6 Arinbjorn  Alone us saved—  Foremost of champions—  From fury of king ;  Friend of the monarch  He framed no lies  Within that palace  Of warlike prince. 


12, 

“Of the stay of our house  Still spake he truth,  (While much he honoured  My hero-deeds) 

Of the son of Kveldulf,  Whom fair-haired king  Slew for a slander,  But honoured slain. 


13.  ‘Wrong were it if he  Who wrought me good,  Gold-spender lavish,  Such gifts had cast  To the wasteful tract  Of the wild sea-mew,  To the surge rough-ridden  By sea-kings’ steeds. 


14. 

‘False to my friend  Were I fairly called,  An untrue steward  Of Odin’s cup ; 

Of praise unworthy,  Pledge-breaker vile,  If I for such good 

Gave nought again. 


15.  ‘Now better seeth  The bard to climb  With feet poetic  The frowning steep, -  And set forth open  In sight of all  The laud and honour  Of high-born chief. 


16. 


* Now shall my voice-plane  Shape into song  Virtues full many  Of valiant friend. _  Ready on tongue  Twofold they lie,  Yéa, threefold praises  Of Thorir’s son. 


17.  ‘First tell I forth 

What far is known,  Openly bruited 

In ears of all; 

How generous of mood  Men deem this lord,  Bjorn of the hearth-fire  The birchwood’s bane. 


18. 


‘Folk bear witness  With wond’ring praise,  How to all guests  Good gifts he gives: 


For Bjorn of the hearth-stone - 


Is blest with store  Freely and fully  By Frey and Njord, 


= | POEM ON ARINBFORN {77 


19. None with hard jest,  ‘To him, high scion None with rude jeer,  Of Hroald’s tree, None with his axe-hand  Fulness of riches _ Ungifted hied.  Flowing hath come ; P  And friends ride thither 3 


‘ Hater of money  Is he of the Firths,  A foe to the gold-drops  Of Draupnir born. 


In thronging crowd  By all wide ways  ’Neath windy heaven. 


20.  ‘ Above his ears  Around his brow 24.  A coronal fair, “Rings he scatters,  As a king, he wore. Riches he squanders,  Beloved of gods, Of avarice thievish  Beloved of men, An enemy still. 


The warrior’s friend,  The weakling’s aid. 


25.  | 21. ‘ Long course of life  ‘That mark he hitteth His lot hath been,  That most men miss ; By battles broken,  Though money they gather, Bereft of peace.  This many lack : ° : :  For few be the bounteous 6  And far between, a0:  Nor easily shafted . * Early waked I,  Are all men’s spears. Words I gathered,  Toiled each morning  22. With speech-moulding tongue.  ‘Out of the mansion A proud pile built I  Of Arinbjorn, ~ Of praise long-lasting  When guested and rested To stand unbroken  In generous wise, In Bragi’s town. 


¢ 


CHAPTER LXXXIII.  Of Einar Helgi’s son and Egil. 


: | ‘HERE was a man named Einar. He was the son of  Helgi, the son of Ottar, the son of Bjorn Easterling,  who took land in Broad-firth. Einar was brother - 

of Osvif the seer. Einar at an early age was tall and strong, 

and most doughty. He began to compose poetry when 

quite young, and was eager for learning. One summer at 

the Thing Einar went to the booth of Egil Skallagrimsson,  12 


178 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


and they began to talk, and soon their talk took this turn  that they spoke of poetry. In this converse both of them  found pleasure. After this Einar often went to talk with  Egil, and a great friendship was struck up between them.  Einar had not long returned to Iceland from foreign 

travel. Egil asked Einar much of tidings from the east,  and about his friends, and withal about those that he deemed  his enemies. He asked also much about men of rank.  Einar in turn asked Egil about the events that had happened  in his travels, and about his exploits. This talk pleased  Egil, and was kept up briskly. Einar asked Egil on what  occasion his prowess had been most hardly tried ; this he  begged him to say. Egil then sang: 

‘One with eight I battled, 

Eleven faced I twice, 

Made for wolf a meal, 

Myself the bane of all. 

Shields shook by sword-strokes 

Smitten fast and furious ; 


Angry fire forth-flashing  Flew my ashen spear.’ , 


Egil and Einar pledged them to friendship on parting.  Einar was long abroad from Iceland with men of rank.  Einar was open-handed, and often short of money, but  noble-hearted and manly. He was in the body-guard of earl  Hacon Sigurd’s son. At that time there was in Norway  much war, and battles between earl Hacon and Eric’s sons ;  and now one, now the other, was driven from the land.  King Harold, Eric’s son, fell south in Denmark, at Hals in  Lima-firth ; this was by treachery. He was then fighting  with Harold Knut’s son, who was called Gold-Harold, and  earl Hacon was there. There fell also with king Harold  lord Arinbjorn, of whom much has already been told. And  when Egil heard of the fall of Arinbjorn, then he sang: 

‘ Mead-givers, glorious men,  Gold-spending warrior wights  Are spent and gone. Where seek  Such lavish donors now?  Erewhile, beyond the sea, 

Earth’s islet-studded belt, 


Such on my high hawk- perch  Hailed down the silver shower.’ 


OF EINAR HELGI’S SON AND EGIL 179 


Einar Helgi’s son the poet was nicknamed Skala-glam.  He composed a poem about earl Hacon, which is called  ‘ Dearth of Gold’; and for a long time the earl would not  hear the poem because he was wroth with Einar. Then  Einar sang: . 

‘Song made I on a chief  Supreme o’er land enthroned ;  While others slept, I wrought,  Whereof I much repent.  Hither the earl to seek  Eager I came, nor thought  From brave free-handed prince  Far-comers worse would fare.’ 


And further he sang : 


* Seek we that earl whose sword  Spreads banquet for the wolf:  To Sigvald’s ship well-oared,  Shield-fenced, my sword I lend.  Wielder of wound-snake,. he  Will not my succour scorn : 

I to his sea-borne barque  My buckler now will bear.’ 


The earl did not wish Einar to go away; so he granted a  hearing to the poem, and thereafter gave Einar a shield,  which was a most costly work. It was inscribed with old  tales ; and between the writing were overlaid spangles of  gold with precious stones set therein. Einar went to Iceland  and lodged with his brother Osvif: but in autumn he rode  east and came to Borg, and was guest there. Egil was just  then not at home, having gone to the northern part of the  district, but was expected home. Einar waited for him  three nights : longer than three nights it was not the custom  to stay on a friendly visit. Then Einar made him ready to  go; but when ready he went to Egil’s place in the hall, and  there he hung up that precious shield, and told the house-  carles that he left it a gift for Egil, Then he rode away. 

But on that same day Egil came home. And when he  came in to his place, then he saw the shield, and asked  whose was that costly work. It was told him that Einar  Skala-glam had come there, and had left the shield as a gift  forhim. Then said Egil: ‘The wretched man, to give it!  He means that I should bide awake and compose poetry 


180 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


about his shield. Now, bring my horse. I must ride after  him and slay him.’ He was told that Einar had ridden  away early in the morning. ‘He will,’ they said, ‘by this  be come westwards to the dales.’ Soon after Egil composed  a poem, whereof this is the beginning :  ‘Of shield, the ship’s bright guard, 

To show the praise ’tis time, 

Home to my hand is given 

The treasure-sender’s gift. 

Surely hath Skala-glam 

To skilful guidance lent 

(Speak, ye who list my lay) 

The reins of minstrel lore.’ 

Egil and Einar remained friends so long as they both  lived. But about the shield’s fortune at last this is told,  that Egil took it with him to the wedding when he went  north to Broadmoor with Thorkettle Gunnvald’s son and  Red-Bjorn’s sons Trefill and Helgi. There the shield was  spoilt by falling into a tub of sour whey. After this Egil  had the outer ornaments taken off: and there were twelve  ounces of gold in the spangles. 


e 


CHAPTER LXXXIV.  Of Thorstein Egztl’s son. 


HORSTEIN Egil’s son when he grew up was a most  handsome man, white-haired, bright-faced. Tall he  was and strong, yet not so much so as his father.  Thorstein was wise, gentle, quiet of temper, calm above  other men. Egil loved him little; nor was Thorstein affec-  tionate with his father; but Asgerdr and Thorstein loved  each other dearly. Egil was now beginning to age much. .  One summer Thorstein rode to the Thing, but Egil sat at  home. Before Thorstein left home he and Asgerdr managed  to take from Egil’s chest without his knowledge the silken  robe given him by Arinbjorn, and Thorstein took it to the  Thing. But when he wore it at the Thing it trailed behind  him, and became soiled at the hem as they were going to  the hill of Jaws. And when he came home, Asgerdr put  the robe in the chest where it was before. Long after, when 


OF THORSTEIN EGIL’S SON , 181 


Egil opened his chest, he found that the robe was spoilt,  and questioned Asgerdr how that had come about. She  told him the truth. Then Egil sang:  ‘Him who from me inherits 

I hold no worthy heir. 

A son deceives me living, 

Deceit I call his deed. 

Well might he, wave-horse-rider, 

Wait but awhile, till me 

Sea-skimming shipmen cover 

With shroud of piled stones.’ 

Thorstein married Jofridr, daughter of Gunnar son of  Hlif: her mother was Helga daughter of Olaf Feilan, sister  of Thord Gellir. Jofridr had before been wife of Thorod  the son of Tongue-Odd. 

Soon after this Asgerdr died. After her death Egil gave  up his housekeeping to Thorstein, and went south to Moss-  fell to Grim, his son-in-law, for he loved Thordis his step-  daughter most of all who were then living. One summer a  ship came out and put into Loam Bay, steered by a man  named Thormod. He was a Norwegian, a house-carle of  Thorstein Thora’s son. He was to take with him a shield,  which Thorstein had sent to Egil Skallagrimsson : it was a  valuable treasure. Thormod brought Egil the shield, and  he received it with thanks. In the following winter Egil  composed a poem about the gift of the shield: it is called  Buckler-poem, and this is the beginning : 

‘ List to the stream of lay  From long-haired Odin flowing,  Thane of a king, and bid  Thy folk due silence keep.  For thee, sea-raven’s ruler,  Rained from the eagle’s beak  Full oft shall shower of song  In Horda’s shore be heard. 

Thorstein Egil’s son dwelt at Borg. He had two  illegitimate sons, Hrifla and Hrafn. But after his marriage  he and Jofridr had ten children. Helga the fair was their  daughter, she about whom quarrelled Skald-Hrafn and  Gunnlaug Wormstongue. Grim was their eldest son, the  second Skuli, the third Thorgeir, the fourth Kollsvein, the  fifth Hjorleif, the sixth Hall, the seventh Egil, the eighth 


182 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Thord. The other daughter was Thora, who was married  to Thormod Kleppjarn’s son. From Thorstein’s children  sprang a large progeny, and many great men. They‘are  called Myra-men, all those that sprang from Skallagrim. 


¢ 


| CHAPTER LXXXV.  Of Aunund Sjoni and Steinar his son. 


UNUND SJONI dwelt at Anabrekka, while Egil dwelt  A at Borg. Aunund married Thorgerdr daughter of  Thorbjorn the Stout, of Snzefell-strand : the children  of Aunund and his wife were a son Steinar, and a daughter  Dalla. And when Aunund grew old and his sight was dim,  then he gave up the housekeeping to Steinar his son.  Father and son had much wealth. |  Steinar was above other men tall and strong, ill-favoured,  with a stoop, long in the legs, short in the body. He wasa  very quarrelsome man, vehement, overbearing, and obstinate,  a most headstrong fellow. And when Thorstein Egil’s son  came to dwell at Borg, there was at once a coolness between  him and Steinar. South of Hafs-brook lies a moor called  Stack-moor. In winter this is under water, but in spring,  when the ice breaks up, such good grazing for cattle is there,  that it was deemed equal to stacked hay. Hafs-brook by  old custom marked the boundary ; but in spring Steinar’s  cattle encroached much on Stack-moor, when driven out to  Hafs-brook, and Thorstein’s house-carles complained of it.  Steinar took no notice of this; and so matters went on for  the first summer without anything happening. But in the  second spring Steinar continued to take the pasturage ;  wherefore Thorstein spoke with him about it, but quietly,  asking him to control the grazing of his kine, as had been  the old usage. Steinar said the cattle should go where they  would. He spoke on the whole matter with obstinacy, and  he and Thorstein had words about it. Thorstein then had  the cattle turned back to the moor beyond Hafs-brook.  . This when Steinar knew, he charged Grani his thrall to sit  by the cattle on Stack-moor, and he sat there every day.  This was in the latter part of the summer: all the pasture  south of Hafs-brook had been grazed by then. 


OF AUNUND SFONI AND STEINAR HIS SON _ 183 


Now it happened one day that Thorstein had mounted  a knoll to look round. He saw where Steinar’s cattle  were moving. Out he went on to the moor: it was late in  the day. He saw that the cattle had now come far out on  the fenny hollow. Thorstein ran out on the moor. And  when Grani saw that, he drove the cattle away apace till  they came to the milking-shed. Thorstein followed, and  he and Grani met in the gate. Thorstein slew him there:  and it has been called since Grani’s gate: it is in the wall  of the enclosure. Thorstein pulled down the wall over  Grani, and so covered his body. Then he went home to  Borg, but the women who came to the milking-shed found  Grani where he lay. After that they carried him home to  the house, and told Steinar these tidings. Steinar buried  him up on the hillside, and soon got another thrall to go  with the cattle, whose name is not told. ‘Thorstein made as  though he knew nothing about the pasture for the remainder  of the summer. | 

It now happened that Steinar in the early part of the  winter went out to Sneefell-strand and stayed there awhile.  There he saw a thrall named Thrand, who was tall and strong  above other men. Steinar, wishing to buy him, bid a large  sum: but his owner valued him at three marks of silver,  which was twice the price of a common thrall, and at this  sum the bargain was made. Steinar took Thrand home with  him, and when they came home, then spoke Steinar with  Thrand: ‘Now stand matters so that I will have work of  you. But as all the work is already arranged, I will put on  you a task of but little trouble: you shall sit by my cattle.  I make a great point of their being well kept at pasture. I  would have you go by no man’s rule but your own, take  them wherever the pasture on the moor is best. I am no  judge of a man’s look if you have not courage and strength  enough to hold your own against any house-carle of Thor-  stein’s.’ e 3 

Steinar delivered into Thrand’s hand a large axe, whose  blade was an ell long, it was keen as a razor. ‘ This I think  of you, Thrand,’ said Steinar, ‘that you would not regard  the priesthood of Thorstein if ye two were face to face.’  Thrand answered: ‘No duty do I, as I deem, owe to Thor- 


184 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


stein ; and methinks I understand what work you have laid  before me. You think you risk little where I am; and I  believe I shall come well out of it if I and Thorstein try our  strength together.’ 

After this Thrand took charge of the cattle. He under-  stood, ere he had been long there, whither Steinar had had  his cattle taken, and he sat by them on Stack-moor. When  Thorstein was aware of this, he sent a house-carle to seek  Thrand, bidding him tell Thrand the boundary between his  land and Steinar’s. When the house-carle came to Thrand,  he told him his errand, and bade him take the cattle other-  whither, saying that the land on which they were belonged  to Thorstein Egil’s son. Thrand said, ‘I care not a jot  who owns the land; I shall take the cattle where I think  the pasture is best.’ Then they parted: the house-carle  went home and told him the thrall’s answer. Thorstein let  the matter rest, and Thrand took to sitting by the cattle  night and day. Z 


CHAPTER LXXXVI.  Slaying of Thrand. 


NE morning Thorstein rose with the sun, and went  () up on the hill. He saw where Steinar’s cattle  were. Then went Thorstein out on the moor till 

he came to the cattle. There stands a wood-clad rock by  Hafs-brook : upon this Thrand was lying asleep, having put  off his shoes. ‘Thorstein mounted the rock: he had in his  hand a small axe, and no other weapon. With the shaft of  the axe he poked Thrand, and bade him wake. Up he  jumped swiftly and suddenly, gripped his axe with both  hands and raised it aloft, and asked Thorstein what he  wanted. He replied, ‘I wish to tell you that this land is  mine; yours is the pasture beyond the brook. It is no  wonder if you do not yet know the landmarks here.’ Said  Thrand, ‘It makes no odds to me who owns the land: I  shall let the cattle be where they please.’ ‘’Tis likely,’ said  Thorstein, ‘that I shall wish myself, and not Steinar’s thralls,  to rule my own land.’ Said Thrand, ‘You are a far more 


SLAYING OF THRAND «185 


foolish man, Thorstein, than I judged you to be, if you will  take night-quarters under my axe, and for this risk your  honours. Methinks, from what I see, I have twice your  strength ; nor lack I courage: better weaponed am I also  than you.’ Thorstein replied: ‘That risk I shall run, if  you do not as I say about the pasture. I hope that our  good fortune may differ much, as does the justice of our  cause. Thrand said: ‘Now shall you see, Thorstein,  whether I at all fear your threats.’ And with that Thrand  sat down and tied on his shoe. But Thorstein raised his  axe swiftly, and smote on Thrand’s neck so that his head  fell forward on his breast. Then Thorstein heaped some  stones over him and covered his body, which done, he went  home to Borg. 

On that day Steinar’s cattle were late in coming home ;  and when there seemed no hope of their coming, Steinar  took his horse and saddled it, and fully armed himself. He  then rode to Borg. And when he came there he found men  to speak to, and asked where Thorstein was. It was told  him that he was sitting within. Then Steinar asked that he  should come out; he had (he said) an errand with him.  Which when Thorstein heard, he took his weapons and  went out to the door. Then he asked Steinar what was his  errand. ‘Have you slain Thrand my thrall ?’ said Steinar.  ‘Truly I have,’ said Thorstein; ‘you need not put that  upon any other man.’ ‘Then I see,’ said Steinar, ‘that you  mean to guard your land with the strong hand, since you  have slain my two thralls: yet methinks this is no great  exploit. Now will I offer you in this a far better choice, if  you wish to guard your land by force: I shall not trust other  men with the driving of my cattle, but be you sure of this,  the cattle shall be on your land both night and day.’ ‘So  it is,’ said Thorstein, ‘that I slew last summer your thrall,  whom you set to feed the cattle on my land, but afterwards  let you have the feed as you would up to the winter. Now  have I slain another thrall of yours, for the same fault as  the former. Again you shall have the feed from now  through the summer, as you will. But next summer, if you  feed on my land, and set men to drive your cattle thither,  then will I go on slaying for you every man that tends them, 


186 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


though it be yourself. I will act thus every summer while  you hold to the manner of grazing that you have begun.’ 

Then Steinar rode away and home to Brekka. And a  little while after Steinar rode up to Stafar-holt, where Einar  then dwelt. He was a priest. Steinar asked his help, and  offered him money. Einar said, ‘ You will gain little by my  help, unless more men of honour back you in this cause.’  After that Steinar rode up to Reykjar-dale to see Tongue-  Odd, and asked his help and offered him money. Odd  took the money, and promised his help; he was to  strengthen Steinar to take the law of Thorstein. Then  Steinar rode home. 

But in the spring Odd and Einar went with Steinar on  the journey of summons, taking a large company. Steinar  ~summoned Thorstein for thrall-slaying, and claimed lesser  outlawry as the penalty of each slaying. For this was the  law, when thralls of anyone were slain, and the fine for the  thrall was not brought to the owner before the third sunrise.  But two charges of lesser outlawry were equivalent to one of  full outlawry. Thorstein brought no counter-summons on  any charge. 

And soon after he sent men southwards to Ness. who  came to Grim at Moss-fell and there told these tidings.  Egil did not show much interest about it, but he quietly  learned by questions what had passed between Thorstein  and Steinar, as also about those who had strengthened  Steinar in this cause. Then the messengers went home,  and Thorstein appeared well pleased with their journey. 

Thorstein Egil’s son took a numerous company to the  spring-tide ‘Thing: he came there one night before other  men, and they roofed their booths, he and the Thingmen  who had booths there. And when they had made all  arrangements, then Thorstein bade his Thingmen set to  work, and‘they built there large booth-walls. Then he had  roofed in a far larger booth than the others that were there.  In this booth were no men. 

Steinar rode to the Thing also with a numerous company,  as did Tongue-Odd, and Einar from Stafar-holt ; they roofed  their booths. The Thing was a very full one. Men pleaded  their causes. Thorstein offered no atonement for himself, 


SLAYING OF THRAND 187 


but to those who advised atonement made answer, that. he  meant to abide judgment. He said that he thought the  cause with which Steinar came, about the slaying of his  thralls, was little worth ; Steinar’s thralls, he argued, had  done enough to deserve death. Steinar was high and  mighty about his cause: he had, as he thought, charges  good in law, and helpers strong enough to win his rights.  " So he was most impetuous in his cause. 

That day men went to the Thing-brink and spoke their  pleadings ; but in the evening the judges were to go out to  try suits. Thorstein was there with his train; he had there  chief authority as to the rules of the Thing, for so it had  been while Egil held priesthood and headship. Both  parties were fully armed. : 

And now it was seen from the Thing that a troop of men  was riding down along Cleave-river with gleaming shields.  And when they rode into the Thing, there rode foremost a  man in a-blue mantle. He had on his head a gilded helm,  by his side a gold-decked shield, in his hand a barbed spear  whose socket was overlaid with gold, and a sword at his  girdle. hither had come Egil Skallagrim’s son with eighty  - men, all well-weaponed, as if arrayed for battle. A choice  company it was: Egil had brought with him the best land-  ' owners’ sons from the southern Nesses, those whom he  thought the most warlike. With this troop Egil rode to the  booth which Thorstein had had roofed, a booth hitherto  empty. They dismounted. And when Thorstein perceived  his father’s coming, he with all his troop went to meet  him, and bade him welcome. Egil and his force had their  - travelling gear carried into the booth, and their horses turned  out to pasture. This done, Egil and Thorstein with the  whole troop went up to the Thing-brink, and sat them down  where they were wont to sit. 

Then Egil stood up and spoke with loud voice: ‘Is  Aunund Sjoni here on the Thing-brink ?? Aunund replied  that he was there. And he said, ‘I am glad, Egil, that you  are come. ‘This will set right all the dispute here between  these men.’ ‘Is it by your counsel,’ said Egil, ‘that your  son Steinar brings a charge against my son Thorstein, and  has gathered much people to this end, to make Thorstein 


188 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


an outcast ?? ‘Of this I am not the cause,’ said Aunund,  ‘that they are quarrelling. I have spent many a word and  begged Steinar to be reconciled with Thorstein ; for in any  case I would have spared your son Thorstein disgrace: and  good cause for this is the loving friendship of old that has  been between us two, Egil, since we grew up here as next-  door neighbours.’ ‘It will soon be clear,’ said Egil, ‘ whether  you speak this as truth or vain words; though I think this’  latter can hardly be. I remember the days when either of  us had deemed it incredible that one should be accusing the  other, or that we should not control our sons from going on  with such folly as I hear this is like to prove. To me this  seems right counsel, while we both live and are so nearly  concerned with their quarrel, that we take this cause into  our own hands and quash it, and let not Tongue-Odd and  Einar match our sons together like fighting horses. Let them  henceforth find some other way than this of making money.’ 

Then stood up Aunund and spoke: ‘Rightly say you,  Egil ; and it ill-beseems us to be at a Thing where our sons  quarrel. Never shall that shame be ours, that we lacked the  manhood to reconcile them. Now, Steinar, I will that you  give this cause into my hands, and let me deal with it as  I please.’ 

‘I am not sure,’ said Steinar, ‘that I will so abandon my  cause ; for I have already sought me the help of great men.  I will now only bring my cause to such an issue as shall con-  tent Odd and Einar.’ Then Odd and Steinar talked to-  gether. Odd said, ‘I will give you, Steinar, the help that I  promised towards getting law, or for such issue of the cause  as you may consent to accept. You will be mainly answer-  able for how your cause goes, if Egil is to be judge therein.’ 

Whereupon Aunund said: ‘I need not leave this matter  to the tongue of Odd. Of him I have had neither good nor  bad ; but Egil has done to me much that is very good. I  trust him far more than others ; and I shall have my way in  this. It will be for your advantage not to have all of  us on your hands. I have hitherto ruled for us both, and  will do so still.’ Steinar said, ‘You are right eager about  this cause, father; but I think we shall oft rue this.’ 

After this Steinar made over the cause to Aunund to 


SLAYING OF THRAND 189 


prosecute or compromise according to law. And no sooner  had Aunund the management of this cause, than he went to  seek the father and son, Thorstein and Egil.. Then said  Aunund : ‘ Now I will, Egil, that you alone shape and shear  in this matter as you will, for I trust you best to deal with  this my cause as with all others.’ 

Then Thorstein and Aunund took hands, and named them  witnesses, declaring withal that Egil Skallagrimsson should  alone judge this cause, as he would, without appeal, then  and there at the Thing. And so ended this suit. 

Now men went home to their booths. Thorstein had  three oxen led to Egil’s booth and slaughtered for the  ’ Thing banquet. 

And when Tongue-Odd and Steinar came home to their  booth, Odd said: ‘ Now have you, Steinar, and your father  ruled the issue of your suit. I now declare myself free of  debt to you, Steinar, in regard of that help which I promised  you ; for it was agreed between us that I should help you in  carrying through your suit, or to such issue as should con-  tent you; free am I, I say, whatever may be the terms  adjudged you by Egil.’ Steinar said that Odd had helped  him well and manfully, and their friendship should be closer  than before. ‘I pronounce you,’ he said, ‘free of debt to  me in regard of that whereto you were bound.’ 

In the evening the judges went out; but nothing happened  that needs to be told. 

? 


CHAPTER LXXXVII.  Of Egil and Aunund Sjont. 


HE next day Egil Skallagrimsson went to Thing-brink, 

and with him Thorstein and all their party. Thither 

came also Aunund and Steinar, Tongue-Odd and 

Einar, and company. And when the law pleadings were 

finished, then stood up Egil and spoke thus: ‘Are Steinar 

and Aunund, father and son, present, so that they can hear  my words?’ Aunund answered that they were. 

‘Then will I,’ said Egil, ‘deliver my judgment between 

Steinar and Thorstein. I begin the cause with this: Grim 

my father came to this island, and took to him here all the 


190 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


land of Myrarand the district round about, and chose hima  homestead at Borg, and assigned a parcel of land thereto, but  gave to his friends choice of land outside that same, in which  they have since settled. To Ani he gave a homestead at  Anabrekka, where Aunund and Steinar have hitherto dwelt.  We all know this, Steinar, what are the landmarks between  Borg and Anabrekka, that the chief one is Hafs-brook.  Now therefore not from ignorance, Steinar, did you act in  grazing on Thorstein’s land, for you, Steinar, and you,  Aunund, might know that Ani received the land of my  father Grim: but you encroached on his land, thinking that  he would be so degenerate as tamely to submit to your  robbery. But Thorstein slew two thralls of yours. Now it  is evident to all that these died for their ill-deeds, and are  therefore unatonable, nay, even had they been free men, yet  had they been unatonable, no fine could have been claimed  for them. But as for you, Steinar, seeing that you devised  to rob my son Thorstein of his property which he took with  my authority, and I took by inheritance after my father, you  shall therefore lose your land at Anabrekka, and have no  payment for the same. And further, you shall have neither  homestead nor lodgment here in the district south of Long-  river. And you must quit Anabrekka before flitting days are  past ; else may you, immediately after flitting days, be slain  with impunity by any who wish to help Thorstein, if you  refuse to go away or break any of these terms that I have  pronounced for you.’ 

But when Egil sat down, then Thorstein named witnesses  to his decision. 

Then spoke Aunund Sjoni: ‘’Twill be said, Egil, that  this judgment which you have given and pronounced is very  crooked. And what I have to say is this: hitherto I have  done all I could to prevent strife, but henceforth I shall not  spare to do what I can to harm Thorstein.’ ‘This I forebode,’  said Egil, ‘that the longer our quarrel lasts, the worse will  be the fortune of you and your son. I thought you must  have known, Aunund, that I have held mine own before  men quite as great as are you and your son. But for Odd  and Einar, who have so eagerly thrust themselves into this  cause, they have reaped therefrom due honour,’ 


OF THORGEIR 19! 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII.  Of Thorgeir. 

: ‘HORGEIR BLUND was there at the Thing, Egil’s  sister’s son; he had given Thorstein much help in  this suit. He begged father and son to give him 

some land out there on the Moors. Hitherto he had dwelt  south of White-river below Blunds-water. Egil received the  request well, and persuaded Thorstein to let him come  thither. So they settled Thorgeir at Anabrekka, but Steinar  moved house beyond Long-river and settled down at Leiru-  brook. But Egil rode home southwards to Ness, father and  son parting on friendly terms. 

There was a man with Thorstein named Iri, fleet of |  foot and keen of sight above others; he was a foreigner, a  freedman of Thorstein’s, but he still had the care of his  flocks, and especially to gather the wethers up to the fell in  spring, and in autumn down to the fold. Now, after flitting  days, Thorstein bade gather the wethers that had been left  behind in spring, meaning to have them driven to the fell.  Iri was there in the sheepfold, but Thorstein and his house-  carles rode up to the fell, being eight in all. Thorstein was  having a fence made across Grisar-tongue, between Long-  water and Cleave-river ; at which many of his men were  employed in the spring. After inspecting his house-carles’  work here, Thorstein rode homewards. Now as he came  over against the Thing-field, Ir1 came running to meet  them, and said that he wished to speak to Thorstein alone.  Thorstein bade his companions ride on while they spoke  together. Iri said he had gone up to Einkunnir that day,  and looked to the sheep. ‘But I saw,’ said he, ‘in the  wood above the winter road the gleam of twelve spears and  some shields.’ Then Thorstein said in a loud voice, so that  his companions could hear: ‘ Why can he be in sucha hurry  to see me that I may not ride on my way home? However  Aulvald wifl think it strange that I refuse him the visit if he  is sick.’ Iri then ran up to the fell as fast as he could.  Thorstein said to his companions : ‘I think we must lengthen  our way, for we must first ride south to Aulvaldstead.  Aulvald sends me word I.am to go to him. And he will 


192 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


think it no more than a fair return for the ox that he gave  me last autumn that I should go and see him, if he deems  the matter important.” Whereupon Thorstein with his com-  pany rode south by the moor above Stangar-holt, and so on  south to Gufa-river, and down along the river by the riding-  path. And when they came down below the lake, they saw  south of the river many cattle and a man withthem. He  was a house-carle of Aulvald’s. Thorstein asked whether all  was well there. He said that all was well, and that Aulvald  was in the copse cutting wood. ‘Then tell him,’ said Thor-  stein, ‘if he has an urgent errand with me, to come to Borg,  for I will now ride home.’ And so he did. It was after-  wards learnt that Steinar, with eleven more, had lain in  ambush at Einkunnir that same day. Thorstein made as  though he had heard nought of it, and things remained quiet. 


e 


CHAPTER LXXXIX.  Thorstein goes to a feast. 


HERE was a man named Thorgeir, a kinsman and  friend of Thorstein: he dwelt then at Swan-ness.  Thorgeir was wont to have a harvest feast every  autumn. He went to Thorstein Egil’s son and asked him to  his house. Thorstein promised to come, and Thorgeir went  home. But on the appointed day Thorstein made him  ready to go: it wanted then four weeks of winter. With  Thorstein went an Easterling, his guest, and two house-  carles. There was a son of Thorstein named Grim, who  was then ten years old ; he too went with Thorstein, thus  they were five in all. And they rode out to Foss, there they  crossed Long-river, then out, as the road lay, to Aurrida-  river. On the outer bank of that river Steinar was at work,  and Aunund, and their house-carles. And when they per-  ceived Thorstein they ran to their weapons, then pursued  his party. On seeing Steinar’s pursuit, these rode outside  Long-holt. There is a hillock, high and bare of wood.  Thorstein’s party dismounted there, and climbed the hillock.  Thorstein bade the boy Grim go into the wood, and not be  present at the encounter. As soon as Steinar and his 


THORSTEIN GOES TO A FEAST 193 


company came to the hillock they set upon Thorstein’s  party, and there was a fight. There were in Steinar’s band  six grown men in all, and a seventh was Steinar’s son, ten  years old. This encounter was seen by those who were on  the meadows from other farms, and they ran to part them.  But by the time they were parted both Thorstein’s house-  carles had lost their lives, one house-carle of Steinar’s had  fallen, and several were wounded. 

After they were parted Thorstein sought for Grim. And  they found him sore wounded, while Steinar’s son lay there  by him dead. And when Thorstein leapt on his horse, then  Steinar called after him, ‘You run now, Thorstein the  white.’ Thorstein answered, ‘You shall run further ere a  week be out.’ 

Then Thorstein with his company rode out over the  moor, taking with them the boy Grim. And when they  came to the holt that is there, the boy died ; and they buried  him there in the holt, called since Grimsholt. And the  place where they fought is called Battle-hillock. 

Thorstein rode to Swan-ness that evening, as he had  intended, and sat there at the feast three nights, after which  he made him ready to go home. Men offered to go with  him, but he would not ; so he and his Easterling friend rode  two together. 

That same day Steinar, expecting that Thorstein would be  riding home, rode out along the shore. But when he came  to the dunes below Lamba-stead he lay in wait there. He  had the sword named Skrymir, an excellent weapon. He  stood there on the sandhill with drawn sword and eyes  turned one way, for he saw Thorstein riding out on the sand.  Lambi, who dwelt at Lamba-stead, saw what Steinar was.  doing. He left the house and went down the bank, and,  when he came to Steinar, he gripped him behind between  the shoulders. Steinar tried to shake him off, but Lambi  held fast, and so they went from the sandhill on to the level,  and just then Thorstein and his friend rode by on the path  below. Steinar had ridden thither on his stallion, which  was now galloping inwards along the seashore. Thorstein  and his friend saw this, and wondered, for they had per-  ceived nothing of Steinar’s coming. Then Steinar turned to 


13 


194 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


regain the bank (for he saw not that Thorstein had ridden  by). And as they came on the edge of the bank, Lambi  suddenly threw Steinar from the sandhill down on to the  flat sand, and himself ran home. As soon as he could get  to his feet Steinar ran after Lambi. But when Lambi  ‘reached his house-door, he dashed in and slammed the door  after him, Steinar aiming a blow after him so that the sword  stuck in the wood of the door. There they parted, and  Steinar went home. 

But when Thorstein came home, he sent next day a house-  carle out to Leiru-brook to bid Steinar move house beyond  Borgar-hraun, else would he take advantage of this against  Steinar when he had more power on his side, ‘and you will  then,’ said he, ‘have no choice of migration.’ So Steinar  prepared to go out to Sneefells-strand, and there he set up  his household at a place called Ellida. And thus ended the  dealings between him and Thorstein Egil’s son. 

Thorgeir Blund dwelt at Anabrekka. He proved a bad  neighbour to Thorstein in every way that he could be so.  On one occasion, when Egil and Thorstein met, they talked  much about Thorgeir Blund their kinsman, and they both  agreed about him. Then Egil sang: 

‘Steinar my word erewhile  Stript of his fruitful acres :  So did I hope to help  The heir of Geir and Kettle.  False, though he promised fair,  My sister’s son hath failed me.  Blund now (whereat I wonder)  Withholds him not from ill.’ 

Thorgeir Blund left Anabrekka, and went south to Floka-  dale; for Thorstein saw he could not get on with him, and  yet wished to be forbearing. Thorstein was a man with no  trickery, just, and never aggressive on others, but he held  his own if others attacked him. But it proved disastrous to  most to match their force with him. 

Odd was then head-man in Borgar-firth, south of White-  river. He was temple-priest, and ruled over that temple, to  which all paid tribute within Skards-heath. 


- 


DEATH OF EGIL SKALLAGRIM'’S SON 195 


CHAPTER XC.  Death of Egil Skallagrim’s son. 


GIL Skallagrim’s son now grew old, and in his old  age became heavy in movement, and dull both in  hearing and sight ; he became also stiff in the legs. 

Egil was at Moss-fell with Grim and Thordis. It happened  one day that as Egil went out along the house-wall he  stumbled and fell. Some women saw this, and laughed,  saying: ‘You are now quite gone, Egil, if you fall when  alone.’ Then said the master Grim, ‘ Women jeered at us  less when we were younger.’ Egil then sang:  ‘Old haltered horse I waver, 

Bald-head I weakly fall : 

Hollow my failing leg-bones, 

The fount of hearing dry.’ 

Egil became quite blind. And it was so that one day,  when the weather was cold, Egil went to the fire to warm  himself. Whereupon the cook said that it was a great  wonder, so mighty a man as Egil had been, that he should  lie in their way so that they could not do their work. ‘Be  you civil,’ said Egil, ‘though I bask by the fire, and let us  bear and forbear about place.’ ‘Stand you up,’ said she,  and go to your seat, and let us do our work.’ Egil stood  up, and went to his place and sang : 

‘Blind near the blaze I wander,  Beg of the fire-maid pardon,  Crave for a seat. Such sorrow  From sightless eyes I bear. 

Yet England’s mighty monarch  Me whilom greatly honoured :  And princes once with pleasure  The poet’s accents heard.’ 

Again, once when Egil went to the fire to warm himself,  a man asked him whether his feet were cold, and warned  him not to put them too near the fire. ‘That shall be so,’  said Egil ; ‘but ’tis not easy steering my feet now that I  cannot see ; a very dismal thing is blindness.’ Then Egil sang: 

‘Lonely I lie,  And think it long, 


Carle worn with eld  From kings’ courts exiled. 


196 - STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Feet twain have I,  Frosty and cold,  Bedfellows needing .  Blaze of fire.’ 

In the later days of Hacon the Great Egil Skallagrim’s  son was in his ninth decade of years, and save for his blind-  ness was a hale and hearty man. One summer, when men  made ready to go to the Thing, Egil asked Grim that he  might ride with him to the Thing. Grim was slow to grant  this. And when Grim and Thordis talked together, Grim  told her what Egil had asked. ‘I would like you,’ said he,  ‘to find out what lies under this request.’ Thordis then  went to talk with Egil her uncle: it was Egil’s chief pleasure  to talk to her. And when she met him she asked: ‘Is it  true, uncle, that you wish to ride to the Thing? I want  you to tell me what plan you have in this? ‘I will tell  you, said he, ‘what I have thought of. I mean to take  with me to the Thing two chests that king Athelstan gave  me, each of which is full of English silver. I mean to have  these chests carried to the Hill of Laws just when it is most  crowded. Then I mean to sow broadcast the silver, and I  shall be surprized if all share it fairly between them. Kicks,  I fancy, there will be and blows; nay, it may end in a  general fight of all the assembled Thing.’ Thordis said :  ‘A famous plan, methinks, is this, and it will be remembered  so long as Iceland is inhabited.’ 

After this Thordis went to speak with Grim and told  him EFgil’s plan. ‘That shall never be,’ said he, ‘that he  carry this out, such monstrous folly.’ And when Egil came  to speak with Grim of their going to the Thing, Grim  talked him out of it all; and Egil sat at home during the  Thing. But he did not like it, and he wore a frowning look. 

At Moss-fell were the summer-sheds of the milch kine,  and during the Thing-time Thordis was at the sheds. It  chanced one evening, when the household at Moss-fell were  preparing to go to bed, that Egil called to him two thralls  of Grim’s. He bade them bring him a horse. ‘I will go  to the warm bath; and you shall go with me,’ said he. And  when Egil was ready, he went out, and he had with him his  chests of silver. He mounted the horse. They then went  down through the home paddock and under the slope there, 


DEATH OF EGIL SKALLAGRIM’S SQN 197 


as men saw afterwards. But in the morning, when men rose,  they saw Egil wandering about in the holt east of the farm,  - and leading the horse after him. They went to him, and  brought him home. But neither thralls nor chests ever came  back again, and many are the guesses as to where Egil hid  his money. East of the farm at Moss-fell is a gill coming  down from the fell : and it is noteworthy that in rapid thaws  there was a great rush of water there, but after the water  has fallen there have been found in the gill English pennies.  Some guess that Egil must have hidden his money there.  Below the farm enclosure at Moss-fell are bogs wide and  _ very deep. Many feel sure that ’tis there Egil hid his  money. And south of the river are hot springs, and hard  by these large earthholes, and some men guess that Egil  must have hidden his money there, because out that way  cairn-fires were often seen to hover. Egil said that he had  slain Grim’s thralls, also that he had hidden the chests, but  where he had hidden them he told no man. 

In the autumn following Egil fell sick of the sickness  whereof he died. When he was dead, then Grim had  Egil dressed in goodly raiment, and carried down to Tjalda-  ness ; there a sepulchral mound was made, and in it was  Egil laid with his weapons and his raiment. 


e 


CHAPTER XCTI.  Grim takes the Christian fatth. 


RIM of Moss-fell was baptized when Christianity was  (5 established by law in Iceland. He had a church  built there, and ’tis common report that Thordis had 

Egil moved to the church. And this proof there is thereof,  that later on, when a church was built at Moss-fell, and that  church which Grim had built at Bush-bridge taken down,  the churchyard was dug over, and under the altar-place were  found human bones. They were much larger than the  bones of other men. From the tales of old people it is  thought pretty sure that these were Egil’s bones. Skapti  the priest, Thorarin’s son, a wise man, was there at the  time. He took then the skull of Egil, and set it on the 

~ churchyard fence. The skull was wondrous large, but still 


198 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


more out of the common way was its heaviness. It was all  wave-marked on the surface like a shell. Skapti then  wished to try the thickness of the skull. He took a good-  sized hand-axe, and brandishing it aloft in one hand,  brought down the back of it with force on the skull to break  it. But where the blow fell the bone whitened, but neither  was dinted nor cracked. Whence it might be gathered that  this skull could not easily be harmed by the blows of weak  men while skin and flesh were on it. The bones of Egil  were laid in the outer part of the churchyard a’ Moss-fell. 


e 


CHAPTER XCII.  Of Thorstein’s descendants. 


HORSTEIN  Egil’s son received baptism when 

Christianity came to Iceland, and he had a church 

built at Borg. He was true to the faith, and a 

good man. He lived to be old, and died in his bed; he  was buried at Borg by the church which he had built. 

From ‘Thorstein have come numerous descendants ;  many great men, many poets: they are of the stock of the  Myra-men, as are all who sprang from Skallagrim. It long  held good of that kin that the men were tall, and great  warriors, some too were of prophetic sight. They were of  two distinct types: for in that stock have been born the  handsomest men in Iceland—such were Thorstein Egil’s  son, and Kjartan Olaf’s son, sister’s son of Thorstein, and  Hall Gudmund’s son, also Helga the fair, Thorstein’s  daughter (about whom Gunnlaug Worms-tongue and Skald-  Raven quarrelled). But the more part of the Myra-men  were very ill-favoured. 

Of the brothers, sons of Thorstein, Thorgeir was the  strongest, Skuli was the tallest. He dwelt at Borg after the  days of Thorstein his father. Skuli was long time out free-  booting. He was forecastleman of earl Eric on the Iron  Ram when king Olaf Tryggvason fell. Skuli was in seven  battles, and was deemed a great warrior and a brave. He  afterwards came out to Iceland, settled in the house at  Borg, and dwelt there till old age; many have been his  descendants. And so ends this story. 


NOTES. 


Cu. I.—shapestrong| Men were so called who had fits of superhuman  rage and strength: in which they were even believed to take the shape of  brutes. In this Saga Kveldulf has such an access ot fury in ch. xxvii., Skalla-  grim in ch. xl. See on this subject Dasent's ‘ Burnt Njal,’ Introd., p. xx.  There is no change of shape in the ‘hamrammir’ men of our Saga: but  Gunnhilda in ch. Ixii. assumes a swallow's shape by witchcraft. 

Kveldulf| That is ‘ evening-wolf’: a wolf being the brute whose shape  or temper he assumed. 

Cu. III.—war-arrow] This was sent round as a summons to war, like  the Fiery Cross of the Scottish clans described in the ‘ Lady of the Lake.’ 

CH. 1V.—skal/d] Bard or poet. Kings and chieftains kept such about  them, ‘ poets-laureate.’ Besides long poems, they supplied short staves on  occasion, as we shall see abundantly in Egil’s case. 

Jamtaland, Helsingjaland| In Sweden. The words ‘ Normandy in  France, the Faroe isles,’ have been inadvertently omitted. 

Cu. VII.—Azldirida’s sons| The cause of the after trouble to Kveldulf’s  house, when their claim is rejected: so that this account of Bjorgolf's  second marriage is not superfluous. 

Cu. VIIT.—second highseat| The seat of honour opposite the chief or  master. Cf. ‘Burnt Njal,’ Intr. p. ciii. 

Cu. [X.—Vzk] ‘The Bay’: that is to say, Skage-rack, Christiania-fjord  and the adjacent coasts. 

whom iron bit not\ Curious ideas there were about iron not wounding  certain men. We see them later on in the duel between Egil and Atli. It  has been remarked that probably the Norsemen's weapons had not blades  of steel generally. About Berserks Dasent’s Introd. to ‘ Burnt Njal,’ p. xxii.,  may be consulted. The origin of the name is very doubtful. That ‘ bare  sark' is so seems improbable: no trace of ‘ bare-shirtedness’ is there in the  passages about them. Another derivation is from ‘ bear,’ these men being  supposed able to take a bear’s shape. Later in this Saga Egil has a duel  with a Berserk. 

Cu. XI.—édanquets] ‘veizlur’: repeatedly used of the entertainments  given to the king as he made a circuit through the provinces. 

CH. XIV.—X7riales| Or‘ Careles.’ The relative position of these peoples  and countries is given a little further on. 

Cu. XVII.—penny] A borrowed word, used again of English silver coins  in ch. Ixxxix. During Saga times money was little used. Rings were broken  off and given: worth was estimated by weight of metal : also ‘ wadmal,’ a  stuff or cloth, was a standard of value. 

Cu. XVIII.—homes to be attacked| ‘ Heimferd’ here has a special sense,  visitation of a house for seizure of property. 

some... on land| That is, some landed before they came up to the  ship, and went (unseen probably through brushwood) till they came opposite  to it, then suddenly boarded it. 

was no lie) No lie about the cargo being valuable, but how about its  being rightfully the king’s? Did Harold really believe the slander? And 


200 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


was it altogether slander? To the latter question probably the answer is  yes. For when years afterwards Arinbjorn speaks of ‘Thorolf as ‘slain by  the slander of wicked men, and for no crime,’ Eric does not gainsay him. 

tn partnership| The king had by his act declared open war against  Thorolf: Thorolf therefore would play the same game and get what share  he could. 

CH. XIX.—zice loosed| Norsemen's movements depended on the seasons :  in winter they ‘sat at home.’ In ‘ Head-ransom' st. i. Egil says he launched  his bark ved tsa brot. 

Eyrar| By meaning ‘ banks’: but used especially of the shores about  Copenhagen. Eyrar-sund ‘the Sound.’ The word is still seen in ‘ Elsinore.’ 

£lbe| Not the well-known river, but a Norwegian one. 

CH. XX.—/tke his father| Kveldulf, Skallagrim, Egil were alike in much.  Both the Thorolfs and probably Bodvar were of another type. ‘Thorolf the  elder, we are told, was like his mother’s kin. There continued to be these  two types in Skallagrim’s posterity. See ch. xcii. Kveldulf seems to have  loved most the cheerful Thorolf, his opposite. And Skallagrim did not  much love Egil, who was rather on his own pattern. 

CH. XXI.—sazl and row} t.e., you will make double haste back. Harold  says it with malicious humour. 

two hundred men| One hundred to each ship seems to have been the usual  complement. In next chapter one edition puts Harold's four hundred in  four ships, though afterwards in six when the bonders’ ships are used, which  were perhaps smaller than the king’s, 

CH. XXII.—drew the ale] They brewed ale for each occasion, and drank  it new. The original here has one word, ‘ /arar-mungat, journey-beer.’ 

shield-wall} ‘Alfred . . . made his men hold close together with their  shields’ (Freeman). We constantly hear of this array. Asser calls it a  testudo or tortoise, the Roman term for the same or nearly the same 


array. 

CH. XXIII.—Xettle Haing] Dasent, p. xliii. of Introd., gives the origin  of the by-name ‘ Trout’ of this Kettle. The elder Kettle Hazing was son  of Hallbjorn Half-troll whose sister Hallbera was Kveldulf's mother. There-  fore he was first cousin to Kveldulf. Hrafnilda was thus Thorolf’s second  cousin. But her son may not have been much older than Thorolf, as  Kveldulf married rather late in life. 

Cu. XXIV.—Torolf in| Jénsson thinks this verse not genuine. 

such good fortune] He means that Harold himself will not fall. Nor  did he. 

Cu. XXV.—A vigorous chapter is this : Skallagrim’s character comes out. 

coal-biter| Explained by lexicon as ‘ anidle youth always sitting by the fire-  side.’ How one of Skallagrim's chosen twelve could be this is not clear. 

Thortr Hroaldsson| This foster-brother of Skallagrim, we shall see, is of  some importance in the story. The younger Thorolf comes to him after-  wards, and marries his sister's daughter. And Egil becomes a fast friend of  his son Arinbjorn. ; 

CH. XXVII.—shape-strength| One of the chief passages about the fits of  shape-strength, and the after weakness. 

vengeance| This verse Jénsson rejects as spurious. 

cofin| We aretold that with these emigrants it was a custom to cast over-  board the pillars of the high seat, and, wherever they drifted ashore, there to  take land: Kveldulf’s coffin is to be in the place of these. 

Borgarhraun] ‘Hraun’ in Iceland is ‘lava field’: it enters into many  local names : naturally so, looking to the character of the country. 

Duck-kyle| ‘Kyle’ appears in the North of Scotland in many places of a 


NOTES 201: 


long inlet or estuary : ¢.g., the Kyle of Sutherland, of Durness, Kyle-Akin,  etc. Anda, ‘ of ducks’: 6nd is Germ. née, Lat. anas, anatts. 

CH. XXIX.—many legs] A quaint expression ‘stédd a mérgum fétum.’  Skallagrim had ‘ many irons in the fire,’ ‘ his eggs in more that one basket,’  would be other proverbial equivalents. 

CH. XXX.—¢o the falls| ‘Foss.’ ‘Force’ is still used in the North for  waterfall. This Long-river foss is several times mentioned: the stream  appears to have been navigable up to it. 

Four men| Homer's Hector lifts a stone ‘ which not two men could bear’;  Virgil's hero one big enough for ‘ twelve.’ 

this stave| Not genuine according to Jénsson. 

CH. XXXI.—sprinkled with water] This is not Christian Baptism :  which is expressed in Icelandic differently. To baptize is skzra ‘to purify’:  Baptism is skirm. Cf. ch. xcii., Dhorstein tok skirn. 

£gil| Two sisters were between Thorolf and Egil: Egil’s birth is thought  to have been at least ten years after Thorolfs. The date which is most certain,  and from which the others are reckoned, is the year of Egil’s return to Ice-  land after his service with Athelstan: this was 927. He had been out twelve  years, therefore he and Thorolf went outing1rs. <A year before that Thorolf  returned from his freebootings with Bjorn: and the year before that (913)  Fgil is said to have been twelve vears old : thus his birth would fall in gor,  in which year Jénsson puts it. Thorolf goes out with Bjorn in 903 or 904,  soon after the feast at Yngvar's when Egil is said to have been three years old.  Thorolf cannot well have been less than eighteen years old then, which  would bring his birth to 886 or thereabouts. Skallagrim came to Iceland  in 878, and had several children before Thorolf, none of whom lived. Sup-  pose these to have numbered three or four, this would agree well enough  with the date assigned for Thorolf’s birth. But Egil’s birth may have been  two or three years earlier than gor. One authority puts it in 898. This  would make Egil two or three years older at Yngvar's feast.: and it is not  unlikely that in telling of his childish exploits his precociousness came to be  rather overstated. ‘There seems nothing that can fix absolutely the date of  Thorolf's first going out with Bjorn: but if Asgerdr (Thorolf's wife) was  born (as is probable) about goo, Thorolf’s first voyage falls in 903 or 904.  He is said to have been ‘abroad a long time,’ which we may take to mean  about ten years. Egil is said (ch. xc.) to have been in the eighties (upwards  of eighty) in the last (or first) days of earl Hacon: 7.e., in 975-85 or 985-95.  The reading is uncertain: see note on ch. xc. 

draught horse} Or ‘yoke-horse.’ Zykr akin to of ‘yoke.’ Cf. Gr.  umociytov. 

Gold . . . guardeth| Gold is called the ‘ serpent’s treasure’ in allusion to  the story of Fafnir in Volsunga-Saga. Cf. the golden apples of the  Hesperides and their dragon. This and the next verse are not thought  genuine. 

dogs| Why? Thelexicon says it is an allusion to Icelandic children’s play,  who put pebbles for animals. 

CH. XXXII.—Bjorn took Thora] The abduction of Thora by Bjorn is  something like that of Hildirida by Bjorgolf. And earl Atli disallows it as  a marriage. But it was afterwards accepted and confirmed by Thorir,  Thora’s brother. 

CH. XXXIII.—#hey stood slant-wise| Or ‘ beat up against the wind.’ The  Icel. word is ‘ Jez¢tzu,’ from betta ‘to bite.’ It is plainer to see what this  means in nautical phraseology than why it means the same. The term is  used when with a head or cross wind tacking is needed, when the ship does  not run before, but advances across, or into the teeth of the wind, by slant- 


202 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


ing thesail. Cf. Orkn. 356 undu their segl sin ok beittu ut, ‘ they set their  sails slantwise and beat out.’ The phrase often occurs when capes have to  be weathered on which the wind is blowing. A.g., in this Saga, ch. Ixii.,  Jengu their beitt fyrir Skotland, translated by Petersen ‘de havde ondt nok  med at krydse furbi kysten,’ ‘ they had trouble enough to weather the coast.’  The word ‘ krydse’ is given in Danish dictionary ‘to cross, to lay crosswise,  to cruise, tolaver.’ We do not use ‘ cruise’ now just in this sense ; ‘to laver’  is (I suppose) the French /ouvoyer ‘to tack.’ Is it not possible that the  English nautical ‘beat’ comes from the Iceland dez¢/a ‘ to bite,’ not from  ‘to beat’ in the sense of ‘strike’? If the head or nose (or mouth) of the  ship points against, or partly against, the wind, the ship may be said to be  ‘ biting ' the wind. 

CH. XXXVI.—/ostered| A common practice was this, for a son of king or  chief to be fostered away trom home. Hacon, Eric's brother, was fostered  in England with king Athelstan ; a son ot Eric was fostered with Arinbjorn.  Why ever does Freeman (p. 159 of his small history) suppose that Hacon  was fostered not with king Athelstan, but with Guthorm Athelstan of East  Anglia, who died in 890 (Anglo-Saxon Chronicle)? His death surely falls  before Hacon was born. For Eric Bloodaxe was born in or near 894, and  Hacon was almost certainly younger. He goes trom England to be king in  Norway in 934, and dies, not an old man, in 960. This sending young  princes or nobles abroad for part of their boyhood doubtless was on the  principle that ‘ home-staying youths have ever homely wits.’ 

CH. XXXVII.—Sjarmalana] Eric's journey to Bjarmaland must have  been later in date than it appears in the Saga. Probably it was in 919, as  Jéusson puts it. This would be during Thorolf’s second outing with Egil.  Jonsson thinks it may be an error to make Thorolf accompany Eric at  all on this journey. For Eric’s meeting with Gunnhilda and her up-bringing  among Finnish wizards, the curious may consult vol. ii. of ‘Burnt Njal,’ 


. 378. 

Ber ouneel He marries Bjorn’s second daughter, and he, and after him  Atli, keep back property from Asgerdr, Egil's wife. 

heathen worshipper] So were all in Norway and Iceland then. But  Christianity was, as it were, throwing its shadow before: hence those  prominent in heathen worship are noticed. 

CH. XXXVIII.—axz axe] Skallagrim puts this presentation axe to a hard  test. Doubtless he was not inclined to receive favourably anything from the  son of Harold his old foe. 

‘tis good | Best to leave off in time. The two proverbs both express much  the same. Petersen gives for the second ‘megen fzerd kan blive ukeer,’  which perhaps is meant to be a sort of rhyme; ‘too much travel makes  trouble.’ 

CH. XXXIX.—Kettle Blund]| His grandson, Thorgeir Blund, comes into  the story in ch. Ixxxviii. 

Cu. XL.—Sall-play| There is a description of this in the story of Gisli,  ch. viii. : but in spite of the details given, it is not easy to understand  exactly the rules of the game. It was played on the ice in Gisli’s story: the  ball was large, for a blow with it knocked down Thorgrim ; the players ran  with the ball, and tried to prevent their adversaries from getting it ; a bat  was used for striking it. Sides were chosen; yet (we see from this Saga)  that they were somehow matched in pairs, as in this chapter Egil against  Grim. Some points the game has like Rugby football, some like hockey  perhaps: Dasent pronounces it ‘something between hockey and football.’  Plainly it was a rough game, and led to excitement and sometimes quarrel. 

father and son] Skallagrim and Egil were too much alike to bear and 


NOTES 203 


forbear. Egil seems to have admired and liked his elder brother (just as  Skallagrim did the elder Thorolf). Thorold did not, when Egil was a boy,  return the affection : but they got on better together afterwards. 

Cu. XLIT.—TZhorolf asks Asgerdr| This marriage probably is misplaced ;  it appears here as in 915: probably it was in 923, as also the slaying of  Bard, etc. 

CH. XLIV.—False decetver| Egil’s ire at stinginess and inhospitality is  shown here, and again in his Vermaland journey at Armod’s, ch. Ixxiv. 

CH. XLV.—Sheppey| Sheep were kept on it, and visited now and again,  as is done on small islands off the Scotch coast. The whole description of  this island, with its overgrowth, brake, etc., is a vivid picture, and recalls  several such places in the Scotch highlands. 

CH. XLV1.—¢he eastward way] z,e., to the Baltic: Courland is at the  east end of that sea. 

CH. XLVIII.—cast their lots| Skaut may be either the skirt of a cloak, or  a kerchief, in fact anything of a bag-like character: the earl then draws the  lots out. In Homer lots are thrown into a helmet and shaken out. 

why stttest| Jonsson disallows this stave, as also the other girl’s stave  later in the story. According to the Saga this Holland expedition seems to  fall in 916: but Jonsson thinks it may have been later. 

CH. XLIX.—£yvind Skreyja| He fell by king Hacon’s hand in the  batude at which Hacon received his death-wound in the year 960. 

Cu. L.—A/fred| The account given of England and its kings at that  time is remarkably correct, considering that it was written by a foreigner  some three hundred years after Alfred’s time. The Saga-writer terms  Alfred first of his family ‘supreme king over England.’ Historians count  Egbert, his grandfather, to have been so in some sense: ‘under Egbert,’  says Freeman, ‘the West Saxons became the chief people of Britain, and  their kings became lords over all the princes of the island.’ But the reigns  that followed, of Ethelwulf and his elder sons, were so much troubled with  wars, especially against the Danes, that none till Alfred earned permanently  the claim to be regarded ‘ einvalds-konungr.’ Alfred, after much fighting,  well deserved the title. Alfred’s reign, as the Saga says, was in the days of  Harold Fairhair. Harold came to the throne in 860, and lived till 933: but  he made over part of his kingdom to his sons before his death. 

Edward| King from got-925. His reign, in which there was much fight-  ing, was a prospercus one. ‘The Danes were a large part of the population,  and had an established power in the East and North-East: but they owned  Edward as over-lord. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for 924 says, ‘In this  year king Edward was chosen for father and for lord by the king of the  Scots, and by the Sccts, and by king Ragnald, and by all the Northum-  brians, and also by the king of the Strathclyde Welsh, and by all the  Strathclyde Welsh.’ 

Athelstan| Of this king we have now facts recorded in the Saga that  are found nowhere else. But these seem very probable, and agree with  what we know of Athelstan from other sources. He had, as our writer  says, many brothers, and sisters too, ‘most of whom became kings and  queens’ (Freeman). 

a young king| Athelstan was thirty at his accession. That occasion  would be taken by some to rebel, and that it was so, is plain enough ; but  the Chronicle does not tell us much about this at the beginning of  Athelstan’s reign, only giving details of the great struggle at Brunanburh  twelve years later. 

Britons, Scots, and Irisk| Britons: z.e., Welsh, either of Wales (as we  use the word), or of Strathclyde. The English had to deal with both. 


204 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Perhaps the Strathclyde Welsh were the more likely to combine with the 

Scots. What Irish there were is hard to say. A Danish king, Anlaf, came 

from Ireland with many ships to help at Brunanburh in 937. Whether he 

or others had really Irish soldiers is uncertain. There had been intercourse 

between Ireland and Scotland long before this: Columba came over to 

oe arom 560; but there had been no claim of rule over Ireland by the  nglish. 

thoroughly Christian, Augustine was sentto England by Gregory in 596.  With the battle of the Winwzed in 654 (says J. R. Green) ‘all active resist-  ance on the part of the older heathendom came to anend. Christianity  « - - became the faith of the New England at large.’ 

the first signing; One among several passages in the Sagas about this  practice. Prim-signa, to give the prima signatio ov stgnaculum crucis  preiiminary to christening. The social advantages with the liberty of belief  thereby ensured are naively described here. Also this ‘ prim-signing ' gave  a right to burial at the edge of churchyards where consecrated and uncon-  secrated ground meet. ‘This we see in the case of Egil himself at the end  of the Saga. 

CH. L1.—Olaf’ There were several of this name. Constantine was king  of the Scots when Athelstan came to the throne, and had apparently long  been so, as he is called ‘ hoary warrior’ in the poem on Brunanburh. This  Olaf Jonsson thinks was Constantine's son-in-law. An Olaf (or Anlaf) took  part in the battle of Brunanburh, he was Danish, he came from Ireland,  and he, as well as Constantine, escaped from the field: but a son of Con-  stantine was slain. We cannot reasonably expect absolute accuracy about  names and small details of earlier English and Scotch history in an Ice-  lander writing near the end of the twelfth century. 

Ragnar Lodbrok} A famous man of whom romantic stories are told.  The Danish invasion in the middle of the seventh century is said to have  been undertaken by his sons to avenge the fate of their father, cast by a  Northumbrian king into a cave of vipers. 

Deanish| The Danes became masters of Northumbria and occupied  it long before this. Palgrave names many towns which were called  the ‘Danish Burghs.’ ‘In these burghs there appears to have settled a  large and effective population composed of the higher classes of the  Danish warriors’ (Palgrave's Engiand, vol. i., p. 115). And later of the  events, about 880, ‘ Halfdane completed his conquest by dividing great part  of the Northumbrian territory amongst his followers, who, settling amongst  the Angles, were at last so mixed with them as to form almost one people.’ 

Bretland... Hring ... Adils| It is impossible to identify for certain  these Welsh earls or kinglets. In 922 we read in Anglo-Saxon Chronicle  ‘the kings of the north Welsh Howel, Cledauc, and Jeothwel . . . sought  him (Edward) for lord.’ Palgrave writes ‘ Edwall’ for the last of these  three: ‘ Adils’ is not unlike this. 

now were disloyal| On the early events of Athelstan’s reign the  Chronicle is very brief. Indeed (if we except the poem on Brunanburh),  there is on all Athelstan’s reign but one (not very full) page in Thorpe’s  translation, as compared with ten full pages on Edward's reign. Of the  year 926 we read: ‘ In this year fiery beams of light appeared in the north  part of the sky. And Sihtric died, and king Athelstan assumed the king-  dom of the Northumbrians ; and he subjugated all the kings that were in  this island : first Howel king of the West Welsh, and Constantine king of  the Scots, and Owen king of Gwent, and Ealdred son of Ealdulf of  Bamborough ; and with pledge and with caths they confirmed peace, in  the place which is named Eamot (Emmet ?), on the iv of the Ides of July 


NOTES 205 


(July rath), and renounced every kind of idolatry ; and after that departed  in peace.’ 

Now. though nothing is said of any one great battle here, yet there may  well have been one or more of some importance. Great expectations had  been formed of Athelstan’s prowess, and ‘he engaged as soon as he was  settled on the throne in a succession of warlike enterprises against the other  nations who dwelt in Britain’ (Palgrave). As Jdénsson suggests, the ‘ fiery  beams of light’ may have been looked on as tokens of coming battles.  ‘Else’ (as he says) ‘their mention seems rather meaningless. In some  battle at this time Thorolf and Egil may have taken part. Athelstan would  be glad of additional men at such a time; and so naturally ‘he received  them well.’ He had (Palgrave writes) at an early age ‘ sailed over the North  Sea and visited the opposite shores of the Baltic. Here he became ac-  quainted with the old Norsk tongue and acquired great fondness for the  usages and customs of the Northmen.’ 

And now as to the exact position of Vin-heath, where the battle so  minutely described in the Saga took place, we know it not: but neither  do we know where Brunanburh was, further than that it was in North-  umberland. A passage indeed is quoted by Jénsson and others from  a Latin history by Simeon of Durham, in which it is said that Athelstan  fought a battle against Olaf Constantine and the Cumbrians’ king.  ‘apud Wendune.' Here is a name in place of Brunanburh (if our battle  be meant) which jis something like Vin-hezdi: the first part may be called  the same; the second ‘dune’ or ‘down’ is much the same as heath.  More exactly than this we shall never determine about Vin-heath: Thorold .  and Egil probably did take part in a real battle quite early in Athelstan’s  reign: but very likely the more important battle of Brunanburh some  twelve years later eclipsed the former, and some particulars and names  connected with the one have taken their place in the account of the other.  The account of the battle of Vin-heath, if not in all details vero, is so ben  trovato that we could ill spare it. There is nothing demonstrably untrue or  unlikely about it. And (as Jénsson reminds us) an error or two in details of  English history in no way impair the trustworthiness of the Saga for what  concerns Norway and Iceland. 

Cu. LII.—enhazel] The process is clearly explained further on: the  lexicon refers to two other places that mention this curious kind of  challenge to a pitched battle. 

watt a week| Any way the battle was not to be till the week’s end (from  the date of the proposal) ; but supposing one side not to be on the field by  then, the other side were to wait a week (from the time of their arrival on  the field), and not harry. 

wise men] One is rather led to understand that it was by Thorolf’s and  Egil’s counsel that these delays had been secured. 

CH. LUI.—Aigh enough| When the butt rested on the ground the socket  was just at the convenient height for the hand to grasp, the hand being  probably about level with the waist. The shaft may have been ‘ wrapped  with iron’ to balance the blade when the weapon was in use and held hori-  zontally, or nearly so. 

Earls-ness| Where? In Wales, says Petersen: in England, says Jénsson.  Any way on the west coast. Alfgeir must have gone southwards and round  the Land's end, etc. 

Cu. LIV.—Scots . . . loose in array] A truthful description of Scotch  Highlanders’ battle tactics for any time. 

Cu. LV.—Dauntless, etc.) J6nsson doubts the genuineness of this verse. 

Olaf, young prince) Constantine the king of Scots was an old man (as we 


206 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


have seen) at Brunanburh : and probably was not young even at Athelstan’s  accession. ‘ Young prince’ would suit his son or son-in-law. 

Egil was, etc.| A wonderfully drawn picture. The personal appearance  of Egil is often recurred to. He himself speaks of his own uncomely face  in Hofudlausn and in Arinbjorn’s-drapa. 

a ring| A ring worn on the arm, nota finger-ring, as is plain from the  rest of the description. 

two chests} Of these more anon in chs. Ixi. and Ixxxix.  ' £ila\ Athelstan is looked upon as successor to Ella king of Northumbria  long before. The ‘ reindeer trod hills’ mean the Scotch mountains. 

Cu. LVI.—znfriendly| The translator does not pretend to have solved  the riddle (if there be one) in this stave. Arinbjorn thinks a woman's name  is hidden. Commentators think Asgerdr’s name is hidden; but are not  agreed how. Egil’s next stave seems to make this doubtful. The gist of  this first verse appears to be: ‘ There is a coolness between me and  Asgerdr: I once so bold am reserved and sad.’ 

several winters| Probably from 927-932. 

a swift cutter| The various Norse names for ships do not exactly corre-  spond to the English. This appears to have been a light vessel built for  speed, and not drawing much water: see ch. lviii., where it passes through  a shallow sound. 

Gulz-Thing| This is inentioned in the Njal’s Saga, ch. ii. : and the Gula-  Thing’s code in Dasent’s Preface, p. lii. 

precincts| ‘Ve-bond’: ‘hallowed cords’; also the space thus enclosed.  For the Icelandic courts Dasent’s Preface may be consulted, p. cxl., etc.  The Saga here gives a full description of a suit. 

captive of war| Much the same had been said of Hildirida. But in her  case there had been no reconciliation between the two families as there had  in this. 

Cu. LVIII.—/zke] This might suggest that Egil in the morning dimness  thought he was casting a spear at the king. Else why is the likeness  mentioned? But Egil’s verse shows that he at all events knew very soon  that it was Kettle whom he had slain. 

loops| Either of a strap or withe fastened to the thole-pin. In the same  way the Athenian sailors had oar-thongs (rpoTwripac). 

Frey and Njord Givers of wealth. In Arinbjorn’s-drapa 18 the same  two dcities are said to have enriched Arinbjorn. 

Cu. LIX.—Harold| This making over of the kingdom would fall in 930:  Harold's death in 933. The suit at the Gula-Thing in 934 ; and all up to  Skallagrim’s death. Hacon, one of Eric's brothers, was all this time with  Athelstan ; he thus escaped Eric’s cruelty, and was accepted as king in the  winter of this same year. 

Cu. LX.—must not drink less| A rivalry in potations evidently: they  were hard drinkers these Norsemen. 

let the sword hang| Just the same do earl Atli and Egil in their combat  in ch. Ixvili. 

Forest-foe| This stave is very spirited: the sense is plain: the kennings  poetical, ne sees as in a picture the Viking exulting as his barque  plunges on: it reminds one rather of the German ballad ‘ Du Recke, wohin  im Sturmesgebraus ?’ 

Cu. LXI.—Death of Skallagrim| A curious and interesting chapter.  Skallagrim and Egil are alike in a certain hoarding propensity : the last act  of the life of each was to hide money. There is a case of burial very like  that of Skallagrim in the ‘ Ere-dwellers’: upon which Magnusson has an  instructive note, giving much of the passage about the breaking through 


NOTES 207 


the wall and carrying the corpse that way out, and not by the door. Such  a precaution was (they say) to prevent the ghost of the dead coming back to  haunt the house. 

Cu. LXII.—éo flee the land] This was in 935: no news of this could  reach Iceland (as we are told below), hence in the next year, 936, Egil is  surprized to find Eric at York. The marriage of Eric’s daughter to earl  Arnfinn is probably misplaced : it could not have been in 935, but some  years later. Eric can hardly have had a marriageable daughter yet: be-  sides, it is elsewhere said that Ragnhildr was married to Arnfinn after Eric's  death ; 7.¢., after gso. 

government of Northumberland] About Eric’s government in Northum-  berland there are some obscurities. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is silent  about his rule there for Athelstan. But accepting this as true, it is prohable  that he lost this rule on Athelstan’s death (940). In Edred’s reign (948) we  find ‘king Eadred harried over all Northumberland because they had taken  Eric for their king’ (A.-S. Chr.). Anda line or two further, ‘ when the king  was homeward, the army within York (Eric’s) overtook him, and there made  great slaughter. Then was the king so indignant, that he would again  march in and totally destroy the country. When the Northumbrian  ‘‘witan” understood that, they forsook Eric, and made compensaticn for  the deed to king Eadred.’ Then again ‘the Northumbrians received Eric,  Harold's son’: and later ‘expelled Eric.’ The dates given in the Chronicle  (Thorpe’s translation) reach down to 954 : some modern chronologers think  his, Eric's, death was in gso. Itis plain that after he lost Norway he was  several times in and out of Northumberland. This quite agrees with what  we know of the disturbed state of things there. And there is no reason to  doubt that Eric’s first ‘innings’ in Northumberland came as our Saga  gives it. 

came... evening] Egil’s ride would be about fifty miles or more. 

keen glance| Egil speaks of the king's terrible look in st. 5 of the Epic on  Arinbjorn. 

who... teasing| No ‘ertinga-madr’: a man who stands no nonsense.  In the eastern counties such irritable persons are termed ‘ short-waisted.’ 

a swallow| Of course, though it is not so said, Gunnhilda is ‘the  swallow’ whose shape flits away presently. 

CH. LXIII.—o one will call| Arinbjorn appeals to the king’s nobler  feelings throughout: Gunnhilda to his meaner natnre. Arinbjorn’s plead-  ing is manly, free, truthful, well argued. The whole scene at York is  wonderfully well given. 

Head-ransom\ Hofud-lausn. The earliest complete ‘Drapa’ that we have.  Different editors divide it differently. Petersen divides it into three main  parts. 1. Introduction of five stanzas. 2. Middle part of ten stanzas.  3. Third part of five stanzas. And the middle part he further divides into  three subdivisions with an initial burden omkved (14+3x3=10). The more  natural arrangement seems to be to consider three stanzas (1— 3) intro-  duction : then there are four sets of two stanzas and a burden: then two  stanzas (which have no burden in our text): then a conclusion of two  Stanzas (or three if the short stanza at the end be genuine). ; 

’ In sense the first three are plainly introductory, asking for silence, etc. :  the last two (or three) are conclusory. They are thus arranged in Thordar-  son’s edition: except that he puts no ‘fyrsta stefja-mal’ at head of st. 4. 

The poem has both rhyme and alliteration throughout. It is indeed a  wonderful composition if completed within a night: but itis striking any  way. It may be noticed that while there is great variety of phrase for  Eric’s battles and exploits, we can gather very little that is definite about 


208 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


them, where they were, or when. This might be partly because Egil was  an unwilling eulogist. But probably Eric’s rule, while cruel, was yet in  some respects weak, and his battles perhaps in no very worthy cause. It  has been supposed by some that Egil was all the while laughing in his sleeve,  and meant not to praise Eric heartily: but this seems hardly probable. For  Egil no doubt meant to do his best to save his own head ; and Eric was  personally brave and warlike. Arinbjorn’s loyalty to Eric shows that Eric.  had good points in his character ; but Gunnhilda was his prompter to evil..  ‘The king will not let himself be egged on to all thy dastardly work,’ said  Arinbjorn to the queen. Hence we may suppose Egil to be heartily praising  what he would heartily appreciate, valour in war. 

St. 1. when... icefloes broke| In the spring of the year. The ex-  pression might denote either the ‘ when,’ or the where (from Iceland) ; indeed,  it comprises both. 

2. Odin's mead] One of the numerous expressions for ‘ poetry.’ 

3. Od:n saw} Rumour tells much; but Odin the war-god alone knows,  and the inspired poet can therefore best tell. So Homer invokes the Muses  to tell him of the battle, ‘ye are present everywhere and see, we only hear  the rumour, and do not know ' (pei dé KAéuC Oloy axovomev OvdE Te tOper). 

4. Swelld) Here begins the middle part and substance of the eulogy. 

6. Of men] The first burden, repeated with part changed in st. g. 

8. Odin's oaks] Warriors. The ‘kennings’ in this poem present little  difficulty, being poetical metaphors, ‘ice-of-sword-belt’ is the exact ‘ ken-  ning’ for sword here. 

10. Scotland's scourge\ ‘ Eric was Athelstan’s keeper of the land against  the Scots.’ 

Ogress' steed| In the Edda an ogress is spoken of as thus horsed. 

12. Axe; Another burden, varied in st. 15. 

13. Strings sang} Aiy& [iocg, vevpy O& wey tayev, aXro O diaréc. Hom. 

14. East Eric's prowess in Northumberland, or about the Scotch coast  and isles, would be reckoned as exploits ‘in the west’: their fame would  therefore travel east to Norway: not strictly soto Iceland perhaps. But  Egil was much in Norway. 

15. Bees wound-bearing| ‘Unda-by’: wound-bees. The word ‘by’  seldom occurs: ‘ by-fluga’ is mod. Icel. for ‘bee.’ ‘Stinging arrows’ is  natural enough: and the hum of the twanging string and whizz of the  arrow justify Egil's phrase as most suggestive and poetical. 

16. Weapons] He rouses the goddess of battles when he goes to fight :  Bellona then knows that battle is toward. . 

17. Frodt’s four| Or ‘meal’: this ‘kenning’ rests on a passage in the  Edda. 

18. crowned| This stanza ends the fifth ‘stefja-mal.’ It appears to take  the place of a ‘stef’ or ‘ burden’ with which the others end. 

19. heart's ground| Egil at all events professes sincerity. 

20. hear] igil spoke in a high tone and at once got a silent hearing, we  are told. The half verse that follows in most editions is according to the  best critics not genuine, a much later addition. The literal rendering of it  is ‘May he enjoy gold-rings, as Bragi did his eye, as the whale does the  firth, ship does the haven, the raven the battle!’ It isa wish of wealth to  Eric or someone; the meaning of the sentence about Bragi is obscure. The  translator in ‘Corpus Poeticum Boreale’ takes a different reading and  rendering. 

Cu. LXIV.—in features loathly] Cf. st. 7 of Arinbjornar-drapa, ‘ Not  well-favoured seemed my head,’ etc. 

Dragvandil| The descent of the sword Dragvandil from one giver to 


NOTES ne ‘209 


another is like the descent of the sceptre in Homer, ‘Iliad,’ 8B. 102. ~The  sceptre passes from Hepheestus to Zeus, Hermes, Pelops, Atreus, Thyestes,  Agamemnon ; the sword from Kettle Hzeing to Grim, Thorolf, Skallagrim,  Thoro!f, Arinbjorn, Egil. As to the meaning of Dragvandil, the Arna-  Magnzan editor gives two in Latin, vzbrart consuetus and periculum afferens,  ‘wont to be drawn’ and ‘bringing danger.’ Whether either is satisfactory,  seems doubtful. There are many compounds of vézdr ‘wand’ used for  sword: might not the last half of Dragvandil be this? ‘Draw-wand  would be as natural a kenning for sword as many of the compounds with  ‘ wand.’ 

CH. LXV. — foresight) Something more than mere wisdom is meant by  this expression; something like the ‘second sight ’ of the Scotch. 

to London | Now coming into prominence apparently as a royal Seat,  Alfred repairs it in 886 : Edward occupies it in 911 (Freeman). 

wheat and honey| The same kind of freight is brought from England in  ch, xvii. 

Cu. LXVI.—cast a stone] A proverbial way of expressing rivalry with a  stronger power, against which in the generation before Kveldulf had warned  Thorolf. 

gaps) The same phrase is used by Egil in Sona-torrek, ‘st. 6, sonar-skard 

‘ gap of a son.’ 

CH. LXVII.—my bounden duty| Egil well requites hospitality : this was  also for Arinbjorn’s sake. 

sang a stave| Jonsson doubts the genuineness of this stave and the two  next.  boundary- stones | Ljot appears to break this rule presently. Perhaps,  however, some time limit was set to a ‘round,’ after which a combatant  might go outside the boundary. 

a foreigner) Ljot was a foreigner: so Egil did not get the land. But as  the land was unjustly taken by Ljot from natives, it wou'd seem rather hard  that neither they nor Egil should reap benefit. The case seems to have  been arguable: Arinbjorn, as will appear in ch. Ixxi., thought Egil had  some law on his side, but that he would not succeed. 

little mourned | Everyone was against Berserks. There is a curious case  in the ‘ Ere-dwellers’ of Berserks being utilized to build a causeway, then  unscrupulously put to death. Giants and the like seem looked on as makers  of causeways : of bridges and dykes sometimes even the devil is (in popular  legend) the maker, 

Cu. LXVIII.— the oath of twelve men| This apparently would have made  Atli’s case good, but for the appeal to arms. Before, against Bergonund,  there were twelve to swear on Egil's side, through the help of Arinbjorn ;  but Arinbjorn was now in England. 

He was experienced| This appears to have been the hardest fight against  one opponent that Egil ever had. The resource by which Egil secures the  victory was almost exactly reproduced in a combat between a Cameron of  Lochiel and an officer in General Monk's army, They fell, the English-  -‘man_ uppermost, who, while making a violent effort to extricate himself from  Lochiel’s grip, in order to stab him, gave his foe a chance, ‘who swiftasa  tiger seized his prey by the throat, tearing away the piece with his mouth,  the sweetest mouthful, as he used to relate, that he had ever had in his  lifetime’ (Black’s ‘ Scotland,’ p. F 

CH, LXIX.—years not a fea) ‘Twelve, from 938 950, All the children  are mentioned first in this chapter, But very likely one of the daughters  was born between 927 and 932 when Egil was at home before, Thorgerdr 


14 


210 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


appears to have been married soon after Egil’s final return in 952: indeed,  both she and Bera were married before Bodvar's death in 960. 

CH. LXX.—Eric .. . had fallen| 950 or thereabouts was the year of  his death: Athelstan died in g4o. 

CH, LXXI.—the king’s treasury] A neat proverb ‘rumr ingangs en  throngr brott-farar.’ 

He must tend| | who live in Norway must bend to Norway's king. 

CH. LXXII.—zntersected| This description of the flat country and its  dykes is surely by one who had seen such. It is not quite plain what the  ‘large stakes or poles’ were for. ‘The old editor says ‘ partim palis defixis  (vallis) arva circum sepiebant.’ But this sense would surely have been more  clearly expressed by our Saga-writer by skd-gard, or some such word.  More likely the large stakes were set in the dykes here and there to support  and strengthen the banks ; perhaps where the bridges were. 

his shield behind) So he describes Eric as doing in Headransom, st. 14. 

Arinbjorn went| This is the last we see of him in the Saga. 

Cu. LXXIII.— Vermaland | In the south of Sweden. 

cleared] ‘ eversis silvis ad cultum humanum accommodaverat’ is a note  in the old edition. The nickname ‘tree-cutter’ one may suppose was given  to Olaf from his energy as a pioneering backwoodsman. ‘That there was  still much work for the axe to do is plain from the description of the forest  country through which Egil makes his way. 

Arnvid| Itis mentioned in ‘ Njalssaga,' ch. v., that ‘Arnvid had kept back  the taxes from Hacon Athelstane’s fosterchild, and both father and son had  fled away from Jemtaland to Gothland.’ 

a sending to death| ‘ forsending’: the prefix has much the same force in  some words as the German ver in verrathen, etc. The mission we may say  was something in purpose like Bellerophon's with the ‘ fatal tokens.’ 

Cu. LXXIV.—sledges] We come upon quite a different scene in this  winter journey: a very graphic one of the horses floundering in the snow,  etc. 

no beer| The same treatment and deceit as in the case of Bard, ch. xliii.  The rites of hospitality were much prized in those rude times, and any in-  fringement of them resented. 

Cu. LXXV.—Ae/lga| There is a curious mixture of superstition and  common-sense in Egil's prescription and treatment of the invalid. We shall  see in ch, lxxix. that the runes had been wrongly written by a suitor. 

leck-tending| This is one explanation of the kenning ‘leek-linden’ for a  woman ; that women had to look after the kitchen-garden with leeks, etc.,  in it. 

Cu. LXXVI.—szx men] those spoken of in last chapter : two parties, one  seen by Thorfinn, one by his house-carle. 

CH. LXXVIII.—Z£gztl took] A most remarkable resource by way of  defensive armour. In the note to the Arna-Magnzan edition a similar ex-  pedient is quoted from another Saga. 

Sresh as ever| The expression is spadn-nytr ‘span-new’: the ‘span’ being  as in ‘spick and span.’ S/dnz means ‘chip’: but the compound seems to  be used of quite other things than wood: e¢,¢., of wine. 

Cu. LXXIX.—Gautland] part of western Sweden ; written sometimes  ‘Gothland’ and ‘ Gottland. 

Jor that winter) Nor indeed did he go abroad any more. 

CH. LXXX.—z2 the district] A paragraph about a Kettle Gufa and his  family has been omitted, as it does not bear upon I<gil’s history. And all  the marriages of Egil’s children have been thrown into this chapter, so as to  begin ch, Ixxxi, with Bodvar'’s death. 


NOTES 2u1 


Olaf He and his come into the Laxdzla-Saga. These marriages appear  to have been soon after Egil’s return: certainly before 960. Asgerdr, if  married in 953-5, was probably born before 933 ; see note on ch. Ixix. 

Cu. LXXXI.—Reykjar-hamar| A ‘hamar’ isa rock, beetling crag. 

nones| Three in the afternoon. As an ecclesiastical word, this of course  came in after Egil’s lifetime. The earlier method of marking time was by  sunrise, day-meal, sunset, night-meal. 3 

Thorgerdr| The daughter humours her father, makes at first as thoug  she would die with him, then gets him to chew and drink, then suggests a  poem, and so wins him back to life. Baring-Gould in his interesting book  on Iceland has a translation of this scene, as also of Sona-torrek very  freely rendered into English verse. 

Hardly can Thorstein| Thorstein was younger than Bodvar, and Gunnar  came between them. Thorstein would probably be quite three years  younger than Bodvar, and about thirteen years old at this time. In Vig-  fusson’'s chronological table Thorstein is put as born about gso0. We cannot  tell exactly the years of the children’s birth, but most of them must have  been born 938-950. But Vigfusson puts the drowning of Bodvar and Sona-  torrek in 975. How can this be? For Bodvar is distinctly said to come  first of the sons, Thorstein to be the youngest. And nothing is plainer than  that Bodvar was not come to full manhood when Sona-torrek was com-  posed : but according to Vigfusson he would be some twenty-eight years  old! Jdnsson’s arrangement seems better: Bodvar born 943, Thorstein  945, Sona-torrek 960. A rather larger interval, however, is probable between  Bodvar and Thorstein. And the exact date of Sona-torrek must remain  uncertain : only it is plain that Bodvar was not older than sixteen or seven-  teen. As two daughters came before Bodvar, 943 is perhaps full early for  his birth, unless we suppose a daughter born while Egil was at home  between 927-32. . . 

Sona-torrek] ‘Loss of sons.’ Or, if Sonar-torrek, ‘loss of a son.’ The  poem is mainly on Bodvar, at least, he is the occasion of it ; but Egil had  lost Gunnar as well. 

Some renderings in this translation of Sona-torrek differ from those in  Corpus Poeticum Boreale. But the text there differs from that of ‘Thordar-  son, which has been here mainly followed ; as have also his interpretations. 

Sona-torrek is certainly the most remarkable of Egil’s poems. There isa  deep pathos running through the whole: it has coherence and plan through-  out, though this is obscured by corrupt passages. It is unlike most other  Icelandic poems. The train of thought is as follows : 

‘ How can I utter words? how essay song? (1-2). A blameless son I have  lost: I hear the waves beating on his and my father’s tomb: my kindred  fall away: how can I be gay and sing? (3-4). My father is gone: my  mother : sad theme for poetry! Now is the worst breach made in my  house by the sea: my noble son cut off (5-7). Could I avenge him I would,  but none can wreak vengeance on such resistless power. And] am growing  old and lone (8-9). The shield of my house is gone: had he come to man- 

‘hood he hac! been a mighty warrior. He was ever dutiful, my hope and  stay (10-12). Now recall I the earlier loss of my brother Thorolf. Nought  -else can replace son to father, brother to brother (13-15). Few now see I  in the land faithful and true: brother slays brother: deceit is rife. Some  live in peace, but in selfishness. Happier are the dead (16-17). Odin hath  dealt hardly with me: first by sickness I lost a son: for him, fair branch,  ‘still I grieve (18-20). Once I deemed Odin my friend : he helped my spear.  Now he fails in my need. Worship I will pay him no more (21-22). Yet  some good hath he given for evil: him I thank for poesy, for wit to see and 


212 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


expose falsehood (22-23). Wherefore, though hard beset, I will patiently  wait till Death lay me by my loved ones in the tomb on Digra-ness.’ 

St. 1. Poesy] Odin stole poesy from the giants. See also st. 2. 

3. He who} Commentators give up as desperate the first four lines. Some  suppose they continue the mythological account of the origin of poetry.  Ought they not rather to state the subject, Egil’s loss? There is the word  ‘blameless,’ and the word ‘boat,’ and that is about all that is certainly  intelligible. ‘The translator has ventured to suppose Bodvar the ‘ blameless ’ 

‘one (cf. st. 19 for words about Gunnar's guilelessness) ; and the ‘ boat’ to  be the luckless boat that caused his death. 

It is agreed that the last four lines of st. 3 mean that Egil hears the beat-  ing of the wave on the tomb of his father upon Digra-ness. The blood  flowing from a slain giant Ymir formed the sea according to the Edda. 

6. gap| The same word was used by Hacon in ch. lxvi. of the loss in-  flicted by Egil’s kin on Harold's house. 

; 7. strand | So Eric is called in ch. lxii. ‘strong strand of Harold’s  amily.’ 

ir ee hand] 7.e., had he lived to reach his full warrior strength.  Others (less probably) interpret the four lines ‘had he lived to reach man-  hood before Odin took him away by deathk.’ 

13. drotherless| By the death of Thorolf. But some refer this to Arinbjorn. 

weak-winged| Or ‘faltering in flight.’ He means that he often misses  Thorolf. e said that he should often rue his loss : ch. liv, 

Is, 16] With these as usually arranged there seems no coherence. With  the transposition of stanzas 15 and 16 all seems to hang together. Brother-  lessness, sonlessness take up 13-t5: then complaint of the degeneracy of  the times, 16-17. 

17. bees’ home| Or ‘beehive :’ 4$sktf may be the English ‘ bee-skep’ or  ‘bee-skip,’ which is common for beehive in provincial English. Egil  having been much in England would probably have heard the word ; nor  is there any strong proof that it would not have been understood by his  hearers. Or sézp might be taken as ‘covering, vault, dome’ (oxézac) :  and the rendering be ‘ bee-dome.’ It is at any rate more likely that dyship  (even if ‘bees’ ship’) means ‘bee-hive,’ than that ‘ship of bees’ means the  sky or heaven, because bees live there. Nor doves it seem very far-fetched  to compare the realms of the swarming countless dead to a ‘ beehive.’ Some  northern scholars think that for dyskps should be some other word, a name  of Odin, then ‘the home of Odin’ would of course be heaven, 7.¢., Valhalla.  But it is questionable if it be necessary to suppose the text corrupt. 

‘ [The passage was discussed by the translator in a paper read before the  Camb. Phil. Soc. ] 

18. drooping brow| Cf. the description of Egil at Athelstan’s board after  Thorolf’s death on Vinheath, ch. lv. 

1g. a son| Gunnar. 

20. friend of men] Odin: so also are ‘Vilir’s brother,’ and ‘ Mimir's  friend’ below. 

22. Now victim] A curious renunciation. No more will I worship one  who fails at need, 

boot for bale} Asan after-thought Egil bethinks him that he has some  conipensation in poetry. So he will be patient, and, while not hurrying  death, will welcome it. Of Egil’s delight in poetry we hear in the next  ‘chapter, where he and another poet make friends. . 

24. Of Odin's captive} Hela was sister of the monster wolf of northern  mythology. 

' Co, LXXXII.—ing Hacon] His rule, here said to be long, was for 


NOTES | | 213° 


twenty-six years according to his Saga. He came to Norway in 934, his  death was in 960 or 961. We should suppose it after Bodvar’s death from  our Saga. A very interesting account of the fight at Fitjar, where Hacon  faced great odds, is given in Hacon’s Saga. Eight sons of Harold Fairhair  are said to have fallen in battle before Hacon fell. 

Arinbjorn] He joined Eric's son's nine years before, as we saw ch. Ixxii. 

A part thereof| How much more there was, we cannot exactly determine,  There is no appearance of incompleteness in the first twenty-four stanzas  (except a few lines lost in 12 and 23-24). The poem begins with a sketch 


of Egil’s own principles and early fortunes: then he comes to the great. 


danger of his life at Eric’s court in England, in which Arinbjorn saved him. 


This he treats of fully: then goes on to praises which lie ready and plenti- - 


ful. First he telis of his generosity ; and of this he speaks much. Then  we should expect much about his warlike prowess: he had been on free-  booting expeditions with Egil, had fought much for Eric and his sons, ‘ was  a great warrior and a victorious.’ But there is nothing: ‘a large gap,’ says  Petersen. The whole ‘drapa’ may have been of sixty stanzas: this is  mentioned as a not unusual length in Vigfusson’s Dict. 


~ 


st. 3. Yngling’s son| Yngling isa proper name of a descendant of Odin, to - 


whom the kings of Norway traced back their pedigree. So that the phrase  about matches Homer's ‘ Zeus-born kings.’ 

hood of daring| Egil we are told ‘ took a bold heart’ and rode to York to  Arinbjorn’s. 

6. dolster-mate| t.e., head. There are some other explanations of this  kenning and of the lines: but the whole must be meant of the Hé/ud-  lausn. 

7. Not beauteous | a what Egil said in ch. xiv. He now goes on to  describe his head and all its parts in very curious kennings: ‘ hood-knoll ’  or ‘ hat-knoll,’ etc. 

8. pit-holes| z.e., his eye-sockets or eyes. 

9. Tooth-fence] tpxog d0dévrwy. The inner and outer part of the ear are  next described. 

-11. framed no lies| Arinbjorn’s bold truthfulness before Eric was re-  markable. 

12. Of the Ha) This stanza is corrupt: but the general opinion is that it  alludes to what Harold Fairhair said about Thorolf the elder, whose death  he pronounced to be a great loss. 

13. Wrong] ‘'Twere wrong that such help were wasted in vain,’ is the  whole sense: ‘thrown to the seas’ is curiously amplified. But not very  unlike is Horace’s ¢trastitiam et metus tradam protervis in mare Creticum  portare ventis. 

15. ow] The debt of gratitude paid, I go on to further praises, 

16. votce-plane' Cf. ‘ song-pounder’ in st. 1 of Sona-torrek. ; 

17. hearth-fire| This kenning has been noticed in the Introduction, p. x.,  as one of the riddle kind. 

20. The last part of this stanza is of uncertain text and meaning. 


21. Few] Arinbjorn is generous, which is rare: he is friendly and suits. 


everyone: which is rare. To repair with shaft broken spears, etc., may have  been a not uncommon duty of a host to his guests in a break-spear age.  23. Draupnir| The ring which Odin laid on Baldur's pyre : ‘ it was such  ‘that every ninth night eight gold rings of the same weight dropped there-  from.’ As good as the gold-egg-laying goose. |  23, 24. It is not certain how these lines should be arranged. But it looks  as if the chief gap should come here. The stanza 25, ‘ long course of life,’  would come best after some description of Arinbjorn’s warlike exploits. 


214 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


:26. To stand | A poem to live in men’s memory among other buildings of  poesy. Exegi monumentum are perennius regalique situ pyramidum  altius. Hor. Bragi was the Apollo of the north. 

Cu. LXXXIIL—E£zzar] This friendship of the two poets is interesting. 

One with eight| These exploits were in Friesland and Eida-wood,  chs. ]xxii. and Ixxvili. 

King Harold fell\ Soine put this in 965, some in 969, some in 975.  Kinar's gift of the shield Jonsson puts in 970 The Saga does not profess  to put all these facts about Skala-glam in exact chronological order. His  poem Vell-ekla is said to have been later by chronologers. Ské&/la-glam  seems to mean ‘tinkling bowl,’ or tinkle of bowls’; but is it a name of  praise or blame? Clanging bowls, beakers’ clang are the accompaniment  of feasts: is it that minstrels also are there found ? 

tslet-studded | Fit term for sea in that region of fjords and isles. 

slay him| Hard measure. It is said that the giver of a present reckoned  himself above the receiver, and that Egil was offended at this idea. But  Egil accepted gifts from many, and probably gave gifts too. As Egil did  after all write about the shield, and remained Ejinar’s friend, perhaps the  threat was half in jest. At anv rate he did not ride after him. 

CH. LXXXIV.—/oved him little] He was too quiet for his taste. But  Thorstein bore him bravely in the quarrel] with Steinar, and Egil helped him  by his decision, and after that they were more friendly. 

Asgerdr| About 973. 

CH. LXXXV.—Aunund] Son of Ani, one of Skallagrim's followers,  whence Ana-brekka ‘ Ani's brink’ was named. The quarrel that follows is  rather a petty one, but Egil as arbitrator makes about his last public ap-  pearance, being then nearly, if not quite, eighty years old. 

‘CH. LXXXVI.—roofed their booths] The walls of these Thing booths  were fixtures, but new roofed each season. 

fighting horses| To match horses in fight was a favourite sport then: it  is mentioned in the ‘ Njala.’ 

tongue of Odd| By this he means to jest upon Odd’s nickname of  Tongue. But query whether Odd were so called from his speaking power,  or because he lived on a tongue of land? 

shape and shear| t.e., do with it as you please. 

Thing-banguet| provided by the priest. 

went out| In a sort of procession to the law-hill. On such an occasion  Thorstein spoiled his father's cloak, ch. 1xxxiv. 

CH. LXXXVII.—j/iitting days| The fixed days for ‘ moving house’; four  days at the end of May. 

this judgment| As between Thorstein and Steinar, the judgment seems  right ; Steinar began the wrong, and persisted in it despite of Thorstein’s  forbearance. But one wishes that Egil had treated an old comrade’s son  with leniency for auld lang syne, especially when Aunund had reposed such  trust in him. It is. however, a mark of the truthfulness of the Saga-writer  that Egil’s overbearing use of power is not cloaked. 

CH. LXXXVIII.—we must lengthen| They were to take two sides of a  oes instead of one. Thorstein did not choose to meet the superior 

orce. 

' CH. XC.—haltered horse| It is not quite clear why a haltered or tethered  horse (as the word is explained) should stumble. Does it mean a horse  ‘hobbled’ by a cord round the legs? 

: let us forbear] Egil is more civil than the cook. ‘Bask’ is by origin  reflexive from ‘bake,’ as appears in the Icelandic form. ‘ Fire-maid’  literally ‘ fire-goddess.’ , . or 


NOTES 215 


Feet| There is an untranslateable pun here. Egil uses e&&jur which  means ‘widows’: but A4@// which means ‘widow’ means also ‘ heel.’  Ekkjur is meant to suggest Ae/a, then that to express ‘ heels.’ 

Jirst days of Hacon| Hacon reigned from 975 to g95._‘If his ‘ first days’  be taken to mean the first five years or so of his reign, Egil was eighty odd  years old about 980 or before. Suppose him born in 898 (Munch's date),  this would. be so; or with Jénsson’s date of birth gor he would be eighty  (‘in his ninth decade’) by 981, and this may equally suit. Vigfusson takes  as the text ofan-verdum ‘last, later’ instead of dudverdum ‘first, earlier.’  And he puts Egil’s birth in 904: thus he would be eighty in 984, and Vig-  fusson supposes him to die about—ggo,—-The earlier date for his birth  appears better for the early incidents of the Saga. But one cannot  determine precisely the age meant by ‘in his ninth ten’: whether ‘ just past  eighty ‘orwell onforninety. Critically (according to Jénsson) dzdverdum is  the better reading. And with this it would seem that in the early years of  Hacon’s reign Egil entered on his ninth decade. But how much longer he  lived one cannot determine: Jdnsson thinks not later than 983. As he was  ‘hale and hearty save for blindness,’ his death may have been several years  after the beginning of his eighties ; the Saga does not profess to give all the  events of his old age year by year. One may be pretty sure he did not live  to be over ninety. 

One summer| A curious freak of the old man: one more fight he wished  to see. As they would not let him have his way, he would not let them  have the money. 

slain Grim's thralls| How? For he was old, blind, encumbered with  the chests. 

CH. XCI.—ébaptized when, etc. | z.e., in 1000. 

Egil moved| As ‘ prim-signed’ Egil might be buried in the outskirts of  the churchyard. 

Skapti| Priest from 1143 onwards. 

wave-marked | Like a mussel-shell, Petersen says. 

Cu. XCII.—éwo types] Fair and handsome, dark and ugly. The Thorolfs  were, in the Saga, of the handsome type ; perhaps Bodvar was so. 

Skuli] His great-grandson Einar is suggested as a not improbable com-  piler of the Saga. 

Iron Ram|\ ‘A ship beaked with iron.’ So ‘barded’ is used of horses  in armour. This ship of Eric's is described elsewhere. 


INDEX. 


A 


ACRES, ' Akrar,’ corn-fields, 52 

Adder, name of sword, 97 

Adils, earl, 91, 96, 99, 101 

Afrekstead, 62 

Agdir, county in S, Norway, 13 

Aki, a Dane, 81, 83, 89 

Aldi, a firth in the Firths, 117 

Alf, Gunanhilda's brother, 87, 112 

Alf Wealthy, 4y Eida-wood, 162, 163 

Alfgeir, earl of Northumterland, 91,  97,98 ; 

Alfred the Great, Ais rule, go 

Alof, Byjorn's second wife, 65, 110 

Alost, zsland of Halogaland, 10, etc. 

Alrekstead, 117 

Anabrekka, 7” Myrar, 50, 182 

Arinbjorn Thorir’s son, Egil's friend,  72; tnherits, 102; in England,  126, etc.; harrying, 151; joins  Eric's sons, 153; Egil’s poem on,  175; falls, 178 

Armod Beard, by Ezda-wood, 156, 167 

Arnfid, earl in Halland, 84 

Arnfinn, Orkneys’ earl, 125 

Arngeir, 107 

Arnvid, &ing of South Meri, 3 

Arnvid, earlin Vermaland, 154, 163,  167 

Asbjorn, earl, 5 

Asgaut, eaz/, 5 

Asgerdr, daughter of Bjorn, 61;  married to Thorolf, 67; to Egil,  72; dies, 181 

Askr, farm on Fenhring, 65, 108, 


144 

Athelstan, king of England, 90; re-  cetves Thorelf and Egil, go; fights  in Northumberland, 91-101; Egil's  second visit to, 134; death, 147 

Atla-island, in Fells, 74 

Atli Slim, eal, 2 


Ath Short, 136; lawsuit and duel  with Egil, 145-6 

Audbjorn, king of Firthfolk, 2 

Audun IIl-skald, 11 

Augvaldsness, 62 

Aulvir Hnuf, Kari’s son, 1; joins  Flarold, 5; hisskald, 11; befriends |  Thorolf, 25; Skallagrim, 42 

Aulvir, Thorir's stewurd, 73-77 

Aunund Sjoni, 4272's son, 50; friend  of Egil, 147 ; his old age, 182, 187,  190 


Aurland, 22 Sogn, 57, 110, 168  Auzur Toti, father of queen Guan-  hilda, 65 


B 


Ball-play, 68-70, 202 

Bard, Brynjolf’s son, 9-12, 14 

Bard, of Atla isle, 74-77 

Baug, 40 

Bees, 133, 208 

Bee-skip, 212 

Beigaldi, in Myrar, so 

Beitis sea, 72 Throndheim, 35 

Rergonund, 65, 105, 108-12, 118-20 

Berserk, 13, 14, 140, 199, 209 

Bersi, 107 

Bindheim, z” Hod island, 139 

Bjalf, father of Kveldulf, 1 

Bjarmaland, by the White Sea, 65 

Biorgolf, 9; marries Hildirida, 10 

Bjorn Yeoman, 56; marries Thora,  58; 7x Iceland, 58; in Norway,  61, 62, 63, 71 ; dtes, 107 

Bjorn, Hitadale's champion, 107 

Bjorn, king of Sweden, 129 

Blund-Kettle, 68 

Blunds-water, in Borgar-jirth, 207 

Bodvar, Fgzfs eldest son, 147;  drowned, 169, 170; poem on thts,  171 


2 


INDEX. 


Borg, Skallagrim's home in Iceland,  50, etc. : Le - 

Borgar-firth, 2% South-west Iceland,  50, ete. 

Borgarhraun, 69, 202 

Bragi, @ poet, 129 

Bragi, god of poetry, 177. 

Brak, 70 | 

Brakar-sound, 70 

Brenn islands, a¢ mouth of Gaut-Elée,  86 

Bretland, Wales, 91, 220 

Britons, 90, 219 

Brynjolf, Bjorgolf’s son Bard's father, 


9, 10  Brynjolf, father of Bjorn Yeoman, 56,  57, 62, 71 


Caithness, zz Scotland, 6 

Cleave-river, iz Borgar firth, 51 

Courland, at east end of -he Baltic,  81 

Courlanders, 81 

Cross-river, 72 Borgar-jfirth, 51 

Cross-river-lithe, 107 

Curse, form of, 112, 116 

Curse-pole, 121 


D 


Dales, 72 Norway, 138 .  Dales, zz /celand, meaning Broad-  jirth-dales, 180 


Dalla, 182  Danes, 81 ; 72 Northumberland, 91,  204 


Denmark, 83, 153, 184 

Digraness, 72 Myrar, 50; Skallagrim  buried there, 124; Bodvar, 186 

Dovrefell, 2% Norway, 137, 157 

Dragvandil, zame of sword, 134, 145, 


209  Dublin, 22 /reland, 6, 57 :  Duck-kyle, 22 Porgar-firth, So, 71, 


200  Duck-kyle-river, 50 


Dvina, river in Russia, 65 


» 


t 


E  Edmund, sing of England, 147  Edward, king of England, 90  Earl's-ness, 72 England, 98  Egil Skallagrimsson, d¢rth, 55 ; doy-  hood, 68; goes to Norway, 71;  slays Bard, 76; harries, 79-86;  goes to England, 90; at Vinheath, 


|. 217 


93-99; described, 102 ; tn Norway,  105; marries, 107; tn ‘celand,  507; in Norway, 108; lawsuit  with Bergonund, 111; slays him,  120 ; ‘slays Eric's son, 121; back  - to Iceland, 122; buries Skallas rim,  124; wrecked at Humbermo.th,  126; before Eric at York, 127-31 ;  recites Head-ransom, 132; with  Athelstan,. 134; goes to Norway,  136; before king Hacon, 137;  "fights wiih Ljot, 141; wtth Atl,  145 ; 22 [celand, 147 ; has children,  147 ; joins Arinbjorn in Norway,  148; harries in Friesland, 151;  parts from Arinbjorn, 153; goes  to Vermaland, 155-168 ; to [celand,  184; makes poem on sons’ loss, 171 ;  on Arinbjorn, 176 ; friendship with  Einar, 177-79; retires to Mossfell,  181; atthe Thing, 187-89 ; old age,  195-96; death, 197 ; hts bones found  and reburied, 198. ; 


Egil Thorsteinsson, 181 


Eida-wood, detween Norway and Ver-  maland, 154, 164  Fidséa, zs/hmus-sea above the Firths, 


5 .  Einar Skalaglam, a poet, 177-79  Einar, of Stafaholt, 186  Einarsness, 27 /yrur, 170  Einkunnir, z2 Myrar, 50, 191  Elbe, river 72 Gautland, 32  Elda, zsthmus in Naumdale, 35  Ella, king of Northumberland, 104  England, 29, 90, 91, 125 etc., 136, 


148 

Erling, Alof's father, 65 

Eric Bloodaxe, son of Harold Fair-  hair, 62-64; takes rule, 65; marries  Gunnhilda, 65; has dealings with  Eyil, 77-9, 09-15; flees before  Hacon, 124; in Northumberland,  125-34; falls, 147; hts sons, 147,  153, 178 

Eric Allwise, 135 

Eyrar, ‘ banks,’ near Copenhagen, 31  200 ; 

Eyrar-sound, 83 

Eyvind Lambi, 1 ; joins Harold, 11 ;  marries Thorolf's widow, 38 

Eyvind Skald-spoiler, grandson of the  above, 39 

Eyvind Skreyja, brother 


of queen  Guanhilda, 87-89 , 


218 


F 


Faravid, ken of Kvenland, 23, 24, 27 

Faroe islands, 6 

Fells, district north of Sogn, § 

Fenhring, sland of Hordaland, 119,  44 

Finland, 23 

Finmark, 17, 23 

Finns, Io, 17 

Fir-scund in the Firths, 30 

Firths, district south of South Mari,  6, ete. 

Firthfolk, 2, ete. 

Fitjar, on Stord [sland in Hordaland,  62, 177 

Flanders (Flemings’ land), go 

Fleet-lithe, zz South Iceland, 40 

Flokadale, ¢z Borgar-firth, 52, 68 

France, 6, 98 

Frey, 116, 176, 206 

Freyja, 170 

Fridgeir, Arindjorn's nephew, 139,  etc. 

Friesland, 151 

Frisians, 152 

Frodi, Aznsman of Eric, 117, 118, 


120  Frodi’s meal, gold, 133 


G 

Games, 68-70 

Gaular, 72 Sogn, 2, 87 

Gautland, zz western Sweden, 168,  210 

Geir, Kettle Blund’s son, 68 

Geirlaug, Eyvind Lambi's son, 39 

Geir’s-lithe, 12 Borgar-firth, 68 

Gold- Harold, 178 

Granastead, 72 .Vyrar, 50, 68 

Grani, 42, 68 

Grani, @ thrall, 182-83 

Grim, house-carle, 42 

Grim, Bard's son, 13 

Grim, Hegg's son, 68, 69 

Grim Straggy-skin, 135 

Grim, Svertzng’s son, married Thor-  dis, 168, 181, 197 

Grim, 7. horir's son , Halogalander, 49 

Grim, Zhorstein's son, 193 

Grim, Aveldul/'s son, See Skalla-  grim. 

Grims holt 72 Myrar, 193 

Grim's river in Borgar-firth, 50 

Griss Freedman, 42, 52 

Grisar-tongue z# Myrar, 52, 19% 


STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Grjotgard, 5 

Gudrek, earl, 91, 92 

Gufu-river, 72 Borgar-jirth, 49 

Gula-Thing, 109, 144, 206 

Gunnar, Zgzl's son, 147 

Gunnhilda, Eric's queen, 65; deal-  ngs with Lgil, 76, 88, 112, 125,  128, 130; 1” Denmark, 147 ; early  life, 202 

Gunnhilda, daughter of Bjorn Yeo-  man, 65, 105 

Gunnhilda, daughter of earl Halfdan, 


39  Gunnlaug Hromund’s son, 107  Gunnlaug Worms-tongue, 198  Guttorm, uacle of Harold Fairkatr, 


45,46 — |  Gyda, Arindjorn's sister, 139, etc. 


H 


Hacon, earl, 5 

Hacon, the Good, 90; becomes king,  124; invades Veérmaland, 167;  death, 176. 

Hacon, Sigura’s son, earl, 178-79, 196 

Hadd, brother of Bergonund, 65, 120 

Hafnar-fell, south limtt of Borgar-  firth, 50 

Hafrs-firth, 22 Rogaland, 13 

Hafs-brook, 72 .yrar, 50, 182 

Halberd, weapon, Thorolf's described, 

Halfdan, earl, 39 [97 

Halfdan Swarthy, Harold Fuair-  hazr's father, 3 

Halfdan Whitebone, 154 

Hall, Zhorstein's son, 181 

Hall, Gudmuna's son, 198 

Halland, county in Sweden, 84 

Halibera, KXveldulf's mother, 1 

Hallbjorn, her brother, 1 

Hallstein, earl Atli’s son, 2 

Hallvard Hardfarer, 2ing’s messenger,  29, 34, 47 

Halogaland, northern part of Nor-  way, 3, etc. ; position described, 23 

Hals, 77 Lima-firth in Jutland, 153 

Harek, Hildirida's son, 10, 18, etc., 


47 

Harold Fairhair, 3-6, 13, 14; d7eaks  with Thorolf, 27; slays him, 37;  old age and death, 116 

Harold, £ric’s son, called Grayfell,  116, 153, 178 

Harold, Gorm'sson hingof Denmark, 


83. 89 


INDEX 


Harold, Azut's son, called Gold-  Harold, 178 

Hauga, ¢” Borgar-sirth, 52 

Hauga-sound, 4y Rogaland, 116 

Hazel-poles, for battle or court, 93,  IIo 

Head-ransom, Lgz?'s poem, 132-33 

Hegg, 69 

Helga, Kettle Heing’s daughter, 9 

Helga, Thorfinn's daughter, 160, 167 

Helga, 7horstein's daughter, 181, 198 

Helgi, Kettle Haing’s son, 40 

Helgi, Zhorjfinn's son, 161 

Helsingjaland, zz Sweden, 6, 23 

Herdla, ¢sland of North Hordaland,  118, etc. 

Herdla-water, 118 

Herlaug, £ing of Naumdale, 3 

Herlaug, ear/, 5 

Herstein, 2 

High-seat, 102, 103, 199 

Hildirida, married to Bjorgolf,9, 10 

Hildirida’s sons, Harek and Hrerek,  16; slander Thorolf, 19, etc.;  slain, 140 

Hising, zsland of mouth of Elbe, 29 

Hjarda-holt, zz Laxdale, 169, 170 

Hijorleif, Jand-taker in Iceland, 40 

Hjorleif, Zhorstein’s son, 181 

Hlada, chzef town of Throndheim, 

» 38 

Had. nor Kettle Hod. 

Hod, zsland in South Meri, 139 

Hogni, father of Hildirida, 9, 10 

Holm, zz Myrar, 107 

Holm-gang, island-going, Icelandic  jor duel, wager of battle, 141-42, 


14 

Honialand, between Rogaland and  Sogn, 13, etc. 

Hrafn, Xettle Haing’s son, 40 

Hrafn, Zhorstein's son, 181 

Hrafnilda, 39 

Hrafnista, 72 Naumdale, 1, 9, 39 

Hreerek, Heldirida's son, 10, 18, etc. 

Hrifla, Zhorstein's son, 181 

Hring, earl of Bretland, 91, etc, 

Hringariki, 27 South Norway, 46 

Hrisa, zx Flokadale, 68 

Hrisa-blund, Gezv's son, 68 

Hris-bru, Bush-bridge, near Moss-  Sell, 197 

Hroald, earl of Firthfolk, Thorir’s  Sather, 2,5 

Hrollaug, zug of Naumdale, 3 


219 


Humbermouth, zz England, 126  Hunthiof, king of North Meri, 3 


I 


Iceland, first settlers, 6 

Illugi Swarthy, 107 

Ingibjorg, Harold Fairhair's daugh-  ler, 39 

Ingolf, /and-taker, 40, 49 

Ingunn, Kettle Heing’s wife, 40 

Ireland, 6 

Irish, go, 125 

Iri, Thorstetn's freedman, 191 


J 


amtaland tz Sweden, 6, 23  ofridr, Thorstein's wife, 181  Jutland, 89  Jutland-side, west coast, go 


K 


Kari, called Berdlu-Kari, Kveldulf’s  comrade, 1, 5, 36 

Keels (kilir), 2 mountain ridge in  Norway, 23 

Kenning, tn Icelandic verse, Introd. 


ix  Kettle Hing, Hallbjorn’s son, 1, 9, 


200 

Kettle Hzing, Thorkel's son, grand-  son of the above, 39, 40 

Kettle Blund, 67 

Kettle Hod, 114, 115 

Kiriales, a people east of Finmark, 


23 

Kirialaland, 23 

Kjotvi Wealthy, 13 

Kol, a Norseman, 155 

Kollisvein, soz of Thorstein, 181 

Krum's hills, 22 Myrar, 50 

Krum's bog-hole, zear Borg, 123 

Kveldulf, father of Skallagrim, 1;  well not join Harold, 4; prophesies  evtl, 8; avenges Thorolf, 47; sails  for Iceland, 48; dies, 49 

Kvenland, east of Helstngjaland, 23 

Kvens, people of Kventand, 23 

Kvig, Hegg's brother, 69 

Kylfings, @ people east of Finmark, 


17  L 


Lambi, Zhord's son, 193 .  Lambstead, za Ayrar, 123, 193 


220 


STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Lawsuit, between Egil and Bergonund, | Olaf Peacock, 169 


109, I10; Egil and Alli, 145;  Thorstein and Ste:nar, 187 

Laxfit, salmon-mead or shore, in  Borgar-firth, 69 

Lax-river-dale, 185 

Leiru-brook, 7” Myrar, 107, 191 

-Leiru-vagr (Loam-bay), 181 

Lid-ndisness, south headland of Nor-  WAY, 32 

Lima-firth, zz Jutland, 153, 178 

Ljot, a Berserk, 140-43 

London, 135 

Lundr, 22 Denmark, 83 

Lygra, island off North Hordaland,  62 


M  Mark-fleet, river in South Iceland, 


42  Meri,  counties in Norway, 3, etc.  Melkorka, mother of Olaf Peacock,  Midfirth islands, dy VMyrar, 54 | 161  Mossey, 7% Shetland, 58  Moss-fell,  169  Mostrar-sound, dv Denmark, 31  Myrar, near Lorgar-firth, 51, ete.  Myra-men, men of Myrar,  esp. Skallagrim's descendants, 


198  N 


North and South Meri, 


Grim's home tn Iceland, | 


Olaf Shy, 52 ° 

Olaf Treecutter, 154 

Olaf Tryggvason, 198 

Oleif Halt, 52, 69 

Onund. See Bergonurd.  Orkneys, 53, 125 

Osloar-firth, zz Vzk, 136, 151  Ostr, tsland of Norway, 65 —  Ostrar-firth, 2% North Hordaland, 59  Osvif, @ seer, 177, 179  Outlawry, 108, 110, 117, 186 


P 


Penny, 29, 197, 199 

Poetry, Introd. vii—xi: Zgzl's three  great poems, 132, 171, 175 

Prini-signing, 91, 204 


R  Ragi, 52  Ragnar, Guttorm's son, 46, 48  Ragnar Lodbrok, gr  Ragnhildr, Eric's daughter, 125  Ragnhildr, Guttorm's daughter, 46  Ran, 172  | Rang- -river, 27 South Iceland, 40 


'Rannveig, Thord’s daughter, 7%  >, Raufar-ness, in Myrar, 54 


Raumariki, 72 South Norway, 3, etc.  Raums-dale, bordering on North and  South Mert, 136 


Naumdale, between Throndhetm and, Red-Bjorn, 180 


Halogaland, 3  Naumdalesmen, 3  Naust-dale, 7 Firths, 5  Nausta-ness, near Borg, 124  Njord, god of wealth, 116, 176  Normandy, z2 France, 6  Norsemen, men of Norway, 40  Northumberland, gf, etc.  North-river, 2% Borgarirth, 51  Norway, Harold's rule of, 3, ete. ; 

its bordering lands, 23 


O  Odin, 116  Odd Lonehouse. 52  Odd Tongue. See Tongue Odd.  Olaf, Evic's brother, 116, 132 


Red Gill, z2 Borgar-firth, 68 


| : Rey kir, in Reykjadale, 68 


' Reykjadale, in borgar-firth, 68 

Reykjadale-river, 68 

Reykjarhamar, crag tn Borgar-firth,  170 


: Reykja-ness, south-west point of Ice- 


land, 49, 53  Rogaland, detween Agdir and South 


Hordaland, 13, etc. 


! Rognvald, carl, 5 


Rognvald, Eric's son, 117, 118  Runes, 76, 160 


S 


Sacrifices, 75, 88  Salbjorg, Kveldulf’s wife, 1 


Olaf, ng, married descendant of Sandness, farm on Alost, to, ete. 


Thord Brynjolf’s son, 71 


Sandvik, zear Borg, 70 


Olaf Red, fing of Scotland, 91, etc., | Saxony (Saxland), North Germany, 


Ior 


90, 151 


INDEX 


Szeunn, Skallagrim's daughter, 56, 


107  Scotland, 6, 91, 126  Scots, 91, 100  Seaham, zn Hordaland, 62  Seal-loch, zz Myrar, 50  Shape-changing, 130, 223  Shape-strong, 47, 70, 199  Sheppey, sheep-tsland, in the Fells, 


77  Sheeping-sound, z2 Ferths, 114  Shilling, Exglzsh coin, 94  Ship-ness, 72 Myrar, 53  Sighvat Red, 39  Sigmund, Skallagrim's house-carle,  2 


Sigmundar-ness, 72 Myrar, 52 

Sigridr, Szgurd's daughter, 10;  marries Bard, 12; Thorolf, 15;  Eyvind Lambi, 39 

Sigurd, earl of Orkneys, 58 

Sigurd, Guttorm's son, 46 

Sigurd, Harold Fairhatr's son, 116 

Sigurd, of Sadness, to, etc. 

Sigtrygg Swiftfarer, Ling’s messenger,  29, 47 

Sigvald, earl, 179 

Skald-Hrafn, 181, 198 

Skallagrim, Ze7l’s father, 2; marries,  33; reason of name, 34; goes to  Iceland, 49, etc. ; dies, 123 

Skapti, /zwman, 168 

Skapti, priest, 197 

Skard's Heath, south of Borgar-firth, 


194  Skegg-Thorir (Beard-Thorir), 118  Skrymir, zame of sword and of giant, 


I 

Skul? Thorstein's son, 181, 198 

Sledging, 156, 166 

Smithy, 54 

Sneefell-strand, 2 /celand, 182, 183,  194 

Snow-shoes, 29, 157 

Sogn, county in South-West Norway,  7, etc, 

Sogn-sea, 46 

Solskel, zsland of North Meri, 4 

Solundir-islands, outside Sogn-sea, 45 

. Solveig, carl Atl:’s daughter, 2 

Solvi, 4 

Sons’ loss, é¢/e of poem, 171 

Spell, worked by Gunnhilda, 125 

Stack-moor, #% Myrar, 182-84 


221 


Stafar-holt, 72 A/yrar, 186  Stangar-holt, 22 Myrar, 51  Stave, Introd. vii 

Steinar, 182, etc. 

Stone-sound, 72 the Fells, 114!  Stord, zsland off Hordaland, 176  Strome Firth, zz Alyrar, 53  Swan-ness, 50, 51 

Swan-river, 107 

Sweden, 46, 155 


A & 


Tjaldaness, Egil’s burtal-place, 197 

Thing, public meeting, 112, 113, etc. 

Thing-field, 112 

Thiors-river, 72 South [celand, 40 

Thor, 41 ; frequent prefix in names,  as 7s seen below.. 

Thora Lacehand, 57, 65 

Thora, Thorir's daughter, 135 

Thora, Thorstein’s daughter, 182 

Thorarin, 52 

Thorbjorn Raven, 11 

Thorbjorn Krum, so 

Thord, Brynjolf's son, 56, 71, 168 

Thord Beigaldi, 42, 50 

Thord, Granz's son, 68-70 

Thord, Szgtryge’s brother, 29, 32 

Thord, Thorstein's son, 182 

Thord Yeller, 52 

Thordis, Olaf's daughter, 52 

Thordis Staung, 51 

Thordis, Thorfid's daughter, 107 

Thordis, Thorolf's daughter, 105, 124;  married to Grim, 169; Egel lives  with them, 181 

Thordis, Yxgvar's daughter, 122 

Thorfid Strong, 86-88, 100, 107 

Thorfinn, dwelt by Eida-wood, 159,  166 

Thorgeir Blund, 68, 181, 186 

Thorgeir Earthlong, 42, 51 

Thorgeir Lambi, of Swan-ness, 122,  192 

Thorgeir, Sigtryrg’s brother, 29, 32 

Thorgeir Thornfoot, 65 

Thorgeir, 7horstein's son, 181 

Thorgerdr Brak, 70 

Thorgerdr, Thorbjorn's daughter, 182 

Thorgerdr, Egzl's daughter, 147, 169,  170, I71 

Thorgils Yeller, 21-23, 29, 30, 37 

Thorir Giant, 42, 50 


222 


Thorir, Hroald's son, 2, 57, 61-64,  72, 73, 79. 88, 105 

Thorir, Kettle’s son, 49 

Thorir Longchin, 13 

Thorir Thruma, 32 

Thorkel, earl, 39 

Thorkettle, 180 

Thormod, 181 

Thormod, Aveppjarn's son, 182 

Thorod, 181 

Thorolf, Aveldulf’s son, 2; goes to  Harold, 8; marries, 15; breaks  with king, 27; falls, 37 

Thorolf, Skadlagrin's son, 543 in  Norway, 61; with Eric, 65; with  Egil, 71-go; in England, go-100 

Thorstein, /{gz/'s son, 147, 180-194,  198 

Thorstein, 7hora's son, son of Eric  A llwise, 135, 136, 138, 139, 154,  155, 167 

Thorunon, Skallagrim's daughter, 55,  68 


Thorvald Proud, 86-88 

Thrand, 187 

Throndheim, county in Norway, 3,  etc, 

Thronds, dwellers in Throndheim, 3 

Thuridr Dylla, 107 

Tongue Odd, 186, 188-190 

Torgar, island of Halogaland, 9,  etc. 

Tunsberg, za Vik, 116 


THE 


STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


U 


Ulf. See Kveldulf. 

Ulf Fearless, 1 

UI, earl Arnvid's man, 163-65  Upland, province of Norway, 3, etc. 


Vv  Vagar, islands of the Lofoden, 27  Valdres, z2 Upland, 41  Valland, forezgners’ land, Icelandic  name for France, 6, 98  Vefsnir Firth, 72 Halogaland, 7  Vemund, king of Firthfolk, 5  Vermaland, zz South Sweden, 154  Vermians, people of Vermaland, 181,  Vik, the Bay, 31, etc., 199 [182  Vinheath, 93-98, 205  Vitar, fishing-station outside the  firths, 117  Vors, part of North Hordaland, 42  Vors, zsland by South Meri, 140 


W 


Wager of battle, 140, 142-145  Warm-brook, 22 Borgar-firth, 52  Wener, dake in Sweden, 54  White-river, 2x Borgar-jirth, 51 


Y  Yngvar, father of Bera, 33, 55  York, 91, 126  Yule, 148 oa  END. 


Elliot Stock, 62, Paternoster Row, London, E.C. 


4 


ad 


THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED  AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS NOT  RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON OR  BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED  BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE  NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 


BORRO R FROM OVERDUE FEES.  al ii VOPE Pit ek CPPIOR 


. nese * Fy  L meer’ ep  NOV = 4.1088 


Scan 4756.130  The story of Egil Skallagrimsson : 


WHAM 


044 084 740 158 


