[RIX-egil-saga  —  part 2 of 3, continuation of part 1]
============================================================

scratched runes thereon, and smeared blood in them. He  sang : 

‘Write we runes around the horn, 

Redden all the spell with blood ; 

Wise words choose I for the cup © 

Wrought from branching horn of beast. 

Drink we then, as drink we will, 

J)raught that cheerful bearer brings, 


I.earn what health abides in ale,  Holy ale that Bard hath bless’d.” 


The horn burst asunder in the midst, and the drink was  spilt on the straw below. Then Aulvir began to be faint.  So Egil stood up, took Aulvir by the hand, and led him to  the door. ‘Egil shifted his cloak to his left side, and under  the mantle held his sword. But when they came to the  door, then came Bard after them with a full horn, and bade  them drink a farewell cup. Egil stood in the door. He  took the horn and drank it off; then recited a stave: 


‘ Ale is borne to me, for ale  Aulvir now maketh pale.  From ox-horn I let pour  *Twixt my lips the shower.  But blind thy fate to see  Blows thou bring’st on thee :  Full soon from Odin’s thane  Feel’st thou deadly rain.’ 


With that Egil threw down the horn, but ae his  sword and drew; it was dark in the room. He thrust  Bard right through the middle with the sword, so that the  point went out at the back. Bard fell dead, the blood  welling from the wound. Aulvir fell too, vomiting. Then  Egil dashed out of the room; it was pitch dark outside.  Egil at once ran off from the buildings. But in the entrance-  room it was now seen that Bard and Aulvir were fallen. 

. Then came the king, and bade them bring light; where- 


FLIGHT OF EGIL 7 


upon they saw what had happéned, that Aulvir lay there  senseless ; but Bard was slain, and the floor all streaming  with blood. Then the king asked where was that big. man  who had drunk most that evening. Men said that he had  gone out. 

‘Seek him,’ said the king, ‘and bring him to me.’ : 

Search was made for him round the premises, but nowhere  was he found. But when they came to the detached fire-  hall, there lay Aulvir’s comrades. The king’s men asked  if Egil had come there at all. They said that he had run  in, taken his weapons, and so out again. 

This was told to the king. The king bade his men go  with all speed and seize every ship or boat on the island. 

‘But in the morning,’ said he, ‘when it is light, we must  search all the island and slay the man.’ 


CHAPTER XLV. 


Flight of Egil. 


GIL went in the night and sought the places where  E boats were. But wheresoever he came to the strand,  men were always there before him. He went thus  through the whole night, and found never a boat. But when  day dawned, he was standing on a certain ness. He saw then  another island, and between him and it lay a very wide sound.  This was then his counsel: he took helmet, sword, and  spear, breaking off the spear-shaft and casting it out into  the sea; but the weapons he wrapped round in his cloak,  and made thereof a bundle which he bound on his back.  Then he plunged into the water, nor stayed his swimming -  till he came to the island. It was called Sheppey ; it was  an island of no great size covered with brushwood. ‘There  were cattle on it, both sheep and oxen, belonging to Atla-  isle. But when he came to the island, he wrung his clothes  dry. :  By this time it was broad daylight, and the sun was  risen. King Eric had Atla-island well searched as soon as  _it.was light; this took some time, the island being large, 


78 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


and Egil was not found. Then the king made them row to  other islands and seek him, It was evening when twelve  men rowed to Sheppey. They were to look for Egil, and  had also to bring from thence some cattle for slaughter.  Egil saw the boat coming to the island; he then lay down  and hid himself in the brushwood before the boat came to  land. They left three men behind with the boat ; but nine  went up, and they separated into three search parties, with  three in each. But when a rise in the ground was between  them and the boat, then Egil stood up (having before got  his weapons ready), and made straight across for the sea,  and then along the shore. They who guarded the boat  were not aware of it till Egil was upon them. He at once  smote one with a death-blow ; but another took to his heels,  and he had to leap up something of a bank. Egil followed —  him with a blow cutting off his foot. The third man leapt  out into the boat, and pushed off with the pole. Egil drew  the boat to him with the rope, and leapt out into it. Few  blows were exchanged ere Egil slew him, and pushed him  overboard. Then he took oars and rowed the boat away.  He went all that night and the day after, nor stayed till he  came to lord Thorir’s. 

As for Aulvir and his comrades, the king let them go in  peace, as guiltless in this matter. 

But the men who were in Sheppey were there for many  nights, and killed cattle for food, and made a fire and  cooked them, and piled a large fuel-heap on the side of the  island looking towards Atla-isle, and set fire thereto, and  let folk know their plight. When that was seen, men rowed  out to them, and brought to land those who yet lived. 

The king was by this time gone away ; he went to another 

\ banquet.  But of Aulvir there is this to be told, that he reached  home before Egil, and Thorolf and Thorir had come home  _even before that. Aulvir told the tidings, the slaying of  Bard and the rest that had there befallen, but of Egil’s  goings since he knew nothing. Thorolf was much grieved  hereat, as also was Arinbjorn ; they thought that Egil would  return nevermore. But the next morning Egil came home.  Which when Thorolf knew, he rose up and went out to  meet him, and asked in what way he had escaped, and 


FLIGHT OF EGIL 79 


what tidings had befallen in his journey. Then Egil recited  this stave :  ‘From Norway king’s keeping,  From craft of Gunnhilda,  So I freed me (nor flaunt I  The feat overbold),  That three, whom I wot not,  - The warrior king’s liege-men,  Lie dead, to the high hall  Of Hela downsped.’ 


Arinbjorn spoke well of this work, and said to his father  that he would be bound to atone Egil with the king. 

Thorir said, ‘It will be the common verdict that Bard  got but his desert in being slain; yet hath Egil wrought  too much after the way of his kin, in looking little before  him .and braving a king’s wrath, which most men find a  heavy burden. However, I will atone you, Egil, with the  king for this time.’ 

‘Lhorir went to find the king, but Arinbjorn remained at  home and declared that one lot should befall them all. But  when Thorir came to the king, he offered terms for Egil, his  own bail, while the king should doom the fine. King Eric  was very wroth, and it was hard to come to speech with  him; he said that what his father had said would prove  true—that family would never be trustworthy. He bade ~  Thorir arrange it thus: ‘Though I accept some atonement,  Egil shall not be long harboured in my realm. But for the  sake of thy intercession, Thorir, I will take a money fine  for this man.’ The king fixed such fine as he thought fit ;  Thorir paid it all and went home. 


o 


CHAPTER XLVI.  Of Thorolf’s and Egil’s harrying. 


”T ~“HOROLEF and Egil stayed that winter with Thorir, and  were made much of. But in spring they got ready 

| a large war-ship and gathered men thereto, and in  summer they went the eastern way and harried ; there won  they much wealth and had many battles. They held on even  to Courland, and made a peace for half a month with the men  of the land and traded with them. But when this was ended, 


80 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


then they took to harrying, and put in at divers places. One  day they put in at the mouth of a large river, where was an  extensive forest upon land. ‘They resolved to go up the  country, dividing their force into companies of twelve.  They went through the wood, and it was not long before  they came to peopled parts. There they plundered and  slew men, but the people fled, till at last there was no  resistance. But as the day wore on, Thorolf had the blast  sounded to recall his men down to the shore. Then each  turned back from where they were into the wood. But  when Thorolf mustered his force, Egil and his company  had not come down ; and the darkness of night was closing  in, so that they could not, as they thought, look for him. 

Now Egil and his twelve had gone through a wood and  then saw wide plains and tillage. Hard by them stood a  house. For this.they made, and when they came there  they ran into the house, but could see no one there. They  took all the loose chattels that they came upon. There  were many rooms, so this took them a long time. But  when they came out and away from the house, an armed  force was there between them and the wood,. and this  attacked them. High palings ran from the house to the  wood ; to these Egil bade them keep close, that they might  not be come at from all sides. They did so. Egil went  first, then the rest, one behind the other, so near that none  could come between. 

The Courlanders attacked them vigorously, but mostly  with spears and javelins, not coming to close quarters.  Egil’s party going forward: along the fence did not find out  till too late that another line of palings ran along on the  other side, the space between narrowing till there was a  bend and all progress barred. The Courlanders pursued  after them into this pen, while some set on them from  without, thrusting javelins and swords through the palings,  while others cast clothes on their weapons. FEgil’s party  were wounded, and after that taken, and all bound, and so  brought home to the farmhouse. 

The owner of that farm was a powerful and wealthy man ;  he had a son grown up. Now they debated what they  should do with their prisoners. The goodman said that he  thought this were best counsel, to kill them one on the heels 


OF THOROLF’S AND EGIL’S HARRYING 81 


of another. His son said that the darkness of night was  now closing in, and no sport was thus gotten by their  torture; he bade them be let bide till the morning. So  they were thrust into a room and strongly bound. Egil  was bound hand and foot to a post. Then the room was  strongly locked, and the Courlanders went into the dining-  hall, ate, drank, and were merry. — 

Egil strained and worked at the post till he loosed it up  from the floor. Then the post fell, and Egil slipped him-  self off it. Next he loosed his hands with his teeth. But  when his hands were loose, he loosed therewith the bonds  from his feet. And then he freed his comrades ; but when  they were all loose they searched round for the likeliest  place to get out. The room was made with walls of large  wooden beams, but at one end thereof was a smooth plank-  ing. At this they dashed and broke it through. They had  now come into another room; this too had walls of wooden  beams. ‘Then they heard men’s voices below under their  feet. Searching about they found a trapdoor in the floor,  which they opened. ‘Thereunder was a deep vault; down  in it they heard men’s voices. Then asked Egil what men  were these. He who answered named himself Aki. Would  he like to come up, asked Egil. Aki answered, they would  like it much. 

Then Egil and his comrades lowered into the vault the  rope with which they had been bound, and drew up thence  three men. Aki said that these were his two sons, and.  they were Danes, who had been made prisoners of war last  summer. 

_ €T was,’ he said, ‘ well treated through the winter, and had  the chief care of the goodman’s property; but the lads  were enslaved and had a hard lot. In spring we made up  our minds to run away, but were retaken. Then we were  cast into this vault.’ 

- ©You must know all about the plan of this house,’ said  Egil; ‘where have we the best hope to get out ?’ 

Aki said that there was another plank partition: ‘ Break  you up that, you will then come into a corn-store, whereout  you may go as you will.’ 

Egil’s men did so;. they broke up the planking, came  into the granary, and thence out. It was pitch dark. 


82 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Then said Egil’s comrades that they should hasten to the  wood. But Egil said to Aki, ‘If you know the house here,  you can show us the way to some plunder.’ 

_ Aki said there was no lack of chattels. ‘ Here is a large  loft in which the goodman sleeps; therein is no stint of  weapons.’ 

Fgil bade them go to that loft. But when they came to  the staircase head they saw that the loft was open. A light  was inside, and servants, who were making the beds. Egil  bade some stay outside and watch that none came out.  Fgil ran into the loft, seized weapons, of which there was  no lack. They slew all the men that were in there, and  they armed themselves fully. Aki went to a trap-door in  the floor and opened it, telling them that they should go  down by this to the store-room below. They got a light  and went thither. It was the goodman’s treasury; there  were many costly things, and much silver. There the men  took them each a load and carried it,out. Egil took under  his arm a large mead-cask, and bare it so. 

But when they came to the wood, then Egil stopped, and  he said: | 

‘This our going is all wrong, and not warlike. We have  stolen the goodman’s property without his knowing thereof.  Never ought that shame to be ours. Go we back to the  house, and let him know what hath befallen.’ 

All spoke against that, saying they would make for the ship. 

Egil set down the mead-cask, then ran off, and sped him  to the house. But when he came there, he saw that  serving-lads were coming out of the kitchen with dishes and  bearing them to the dining-hall. In the kitchen (he saw)  was a large fire and kettles thereon. Thither he went.  Great beams had been brought home and lighted, as was  the custom there, by setting fire ‘to the beam-end and so  burning it lengthwise. Egil seized a beam, carried it to the  dining-hall, and thrust the burning end under the eaves, and  so into the birch bark of the roof, which soon caught fire.  Some fagot-wood lay hard by; this Egil brought and piled  before the hall-door. This quickly caught fire. But those  who sate drinking within did not find it out till the flame  burst in round the roof. Then they rushed ‘to the door; 


OF THOROLF’S AND EGIL’S HARRYING 83 


_ .but there was no easy way out, both by reason of the fagot-  .wood, and because Egil kept the door, and slew most who  strove to pass out either in the doorway or outside. 

The goodman asked who had the care of the fire. 

Egil answered, ‘He has now the care of the fire whom  you yester-even had thought least likely ; nor will you wish  to bake you hotter than I shall kindle; you shall have soft  bath before soft bed, such as you meant to give to me and my  comrades. Here now is that same Egil whom you bound  hand and foot to the post in that room you shut so care-  fully. I will repay you your hospitality as you deserve.’ 

At this the goodman thought to steal out in the dark, but  Egil was near, and dealt him his death-blow, as he did to  many others. Brief moment was it ere the hall so burned  that it fellin. Most of those who were within perished. 

But Egil went back to the wood, where he found his  comrades, and they all went together to the ship. Egil said  he would have the mead-cask which he carried as his own  special prize; it proved to be full of silver. Thorolf and  his men were overjoyed when Egil came down. They put  out from land as soon as day dawned ; Aki and his two sons  were with Egil’s following. ‘They sailed in the summer,  now far spent, to Denmark, where they lay in wait for  merchant-ships, and plundered when they got the chance. 


e 


CHAPTER XLVII.  Of the further harrying of Thorolf and Egil. 


AROLD GORMSSON had then taken the kingdom  H in Denmark, his father Gorm being now dead.  The land was then open to harrying ; freebooters  often lay off the Danish coast. Aki knew Denmark well  both by sea and land. So Egil inquired of him diligently  ‘where the places were that promised good booty. But when  they came to Eyrar-sound, then Aki said that up on land  there was a large trading town named Lundr; there, he  Said, was hope of plunder, but ’twas likely that the towns-  amen would make resistance.  The question was put before the men whether they 


a= ne 2 8 


84 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON °° 


should go up or not. Opinions were much divided, some  liking, some letting it; then the matter was referred to  the leaders. Thorolf was rather for going up. Then Eg?  was asked what counsel he thought good. He recited a  stave:  ‘ Wolf-battening warrior, 

Wield we high gleaming swords. 

In snake-fostering summer 

Such deeds well beseem. 

Lead up to Lundr : 

Let laggards be none ! 

Spear-music ungentle 

By sunset shall sound.’ 


After that they made them ready to go up, and they came  to the town. But when the townsmen were aware of the  enemy’s coming, they made against them. A wooden wall  was round the town; they set men to guard this. A very  fierce battle was there fought. Egil, with his following,  charged fiercely on the gate nor spared himself. There was  a great slaughter, the townsmen falling one upon another.  It is said that Egil first entered the town, the others follow-  ing. Then those of the town fled, and great was the  slaughter. But Thorolf and his company plundered the  town and took much wealth, and fired the buildings before  they left. Then they went down to their ships. 


e 


CHAPTER XLVIIL.  Of the banquet at earl Arnfia's. 


. | ‘HOROLEF stood northwards with his force past Hol-  | land, and they put into a harbour there, as the wind 

drove them back. They did not plunder there. A  little way up the country dwelt an earl named Arnfid. But  when he heard that freebooters had come to land there, he  sent his men to meet them with this errand, to know whether  they wished for peace or war. Upon the messengers’ coming  to Thorolf with their errand, he said that they would not harry  there, that there was no need to harry there or come with war-  shield, the land being not wealthy. The messengers went  back to the earl, and told him the issue of their errand: but 


OF THE BANQUET AT EARL ARNFID’S 85 


when the earl knew that he need not gather men for this  cause, then he rode down without any armed force to meet  the freebooters. When they met, all went well at the con-  ference. The earl bade Thorolf to a banquet with him,  and as many of his menas he would. Thorolf promised to go. 

On the appointed day the earl had riding-horses sent  down to meet them. Thorolf and Egil went, and they had  thirty men with them. When they came to the earl, he  received them well; they were led into the dining-hall. At  once beer was brought in and given them to drink. They  sate there till evening. 

But before the tables were removed the earl said that  they should cast lots to drink together in pairs, man and  woman, so far as numbers would allow, but the odd ones  ‘by themselves. They cast then their lots into the skirt of a  cloak, and the earl drew them out. ‘The earl had a very  beautiful daughter then in the flower of youth; the lot  decreed that Egil should sit by her for the evening. She  was going about the floor of the hall amusing herself. Egil  stood up and went to the place in which the earl’s daughter  had sat during the day. But when all took their several  seats, then the earl’s daughter went to her place. She said  in verse : 

‘Why sittest in my seat, youth ?  Thou seldom sure hast given  To wolf his warm flesh-banquet.  Alone I will mine own.  O’er carrion corse thou heard’st not  Croak hoarse the joying raven, 


Nor wentest where sword-edges  In warfare madly met.’ 


Egil took her, and set her down by him. He sang: 


‘ With bloody brand on-striding  Me bird of bane hath followed :  My hurtling spear hath sounded 

In the swift Vikings’ charge.  Raged wrathfully our battle,  Ran fire o’er foemen’s rooftrees ;  Sound sleepeth many a warrior 

Slain in the city gate.’ 


They two then drank together for the evening, and were  right merry. The banquet was of the best, on that day 


86 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON — 


and on the morrow. Then the rovers went to their ships,  they and the earl parting in friendship with exchange of  gifts. 

- Thorolf with his force then stood for the Brenn-islands.  At that time these were a great lair of freebooters, because  through the islands sailed many merchant-ships. Aki went  home to his farms, and his sons with him. He was a very  wealthy man, owning several farms in Jutland. He and  Thorolf parted with affection, and pledged them to close  friendship. But as autumn came on, Thorolf and his men  sailed northward along the Norway coast till they reached  the Firths, then went to lord Thorir. 

He received them well, but Arinbjorn his son much  better, who asked Egil to be there for the winter. Egil  took this offer with thanks. But when Thorir knew of  Arinbjorn’s offer, he called it rather a hasty speech. ‘I  know not,’ said he, ‘how king Eric may like that; for .  after the slaying of Bard he said that he would not have  Fgil be here in the land.’ 

‘You, father, can easily manage this with the king,’ said  Arinbjorn, ‘so that he will not blame Egil’s stay. You will  ask Thorolf, your niece’s husband, to be here; I and Egil  will have one winter home.’ 

Thorir saw from this talk that Arinbjorn would have his  way in this. So father and son offered Thorolf winter-home  there, which he accepted. They were there through the  winter with twelve men. 

Two brothers there were named Thorvald Proud and  Thorfid Strong, near kinsmen of Bjorn Yeoman, and  brought up with him. Tall men they were and strong, of  much energy and forward daring. They followed Bjorn so  long as he went out roving ; but when he settled down in  quiet, then these brothers went to Thorolf, and were with  him in his harrying ; they were forecastle men in his ship.  And when Egil took command of a ship, then Thorfid was  his forecastle man: These brothers followed Thorolf through-  out, and he valued them most of his crew. 

They were of his company this winter, and sate next to  the two brothers. Thorolf sate in the high seat over against  Thorir, and drank with him; Egil sate as cup-mate over 


OF THE BANQUET AT EARL ARNFID’S 87 


against Arinbjorn. At all toasts the cup must cross the  floor. | 

Lord Thorir went in the autumn to king Eric. The  king received him exceedingly well. But when they began  to talk together, Thorir begged the king not to take it  amiss that he had Egil with him that winter. The king  answered this well ; he said that Thorir might get from him  what he would, but it should not have been so had any  other man harboured Fgil. But when Gunnhilda heard  what they were talking of, then said she: ‘This I think,  _ Eric, that ’tis now going again as it has gone often before ;  thou lendest easy ear to talk, nor bearest long in mind the ill  that is done thee. And now thou wilt bring forward the  sons of Skallagrim to this, that they will yet again smite  down some of thy near kin. But though thou mayest  choose to think Bard’s slaying of no account, I think  not so.’ 

The king answered : ‘Thou, Gunnhilda, more than others  provokest me to savageness ; yet time was when thou wert  on better terms with Thorolf than now. However I will  not take back my word about those brothers.’ 

.*Thorolf was well here,’ said she, ‘before Egil made  him bad ; but now I reckon no odds between them.’ 

Thorir went home when he was ready, and told the  brothers the words of the king and of the queen. 


e 


CHAPTER XLIX.  Slaying of Thorvald Proud. 


YVIND SKREYYJA and Alf were the names of two  HK brothers of Gunnhilda, sons of Auzur Toti. They 

were tall and strong, and great traders. They were  then made much of by king Eric and Gunnhilda. Not gener-  ally liked were they ; at this time they were young, but fully  grown to manhood. It so befell in the spring that a great  sacrifice was fixed to be held in the summer at Gaular. Here  was the most renowned chief temple. Thither flocked num-  bers from the firths and from the fells, and from Sogn, and  almost all the great men. King Eric went thither. Then 


88 - STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


spoke Gunnhilda with her brothers: ‘I would fain that you  two should so manage matters in this crowded gathering,  that ye get to slay one of the two sons of Skallagrim, or,  better still, both.’ 

They said it should be done. 

Lord Thorir made ready to go thither. He called Arin-  bjorn to speak with him. ‘ Now will I,’ said he, ‘go to the  sacrifice, but I will not that Egil go thither. I know the  craft of Gunnhilda, the vehemence of Egil, the power of  the king ; no easy task were it to watch these all at once.  But Egil will not let himself be hindered, unless you stay  behind. Now Thorolf and the rest of his company shall  go with me; Thorolf shall sacrifice and pray for happiness  for his brother as well as himself.’ 

Whereupon Arinbjorn told Egil that he meant to stay at  home ; ‘and you shall be with me,’ said he. 

Egil agreed that it should be so. 

But Thorir and the rest went to sacrifice, and a very great 

multitude was there, and there was much drinking. Thorolf  went with Thorir wheresoever he went, and they never were  apart day or night. Eyvind told Gunnhilda that he could  get no chance at Thorolf. She bade him then slay some  one of Thorolf’s men rather than let everything fail.  _ It chanced one evening, when the king had gone to rest,  as had also Thorir and Thorolf, but Thorfid and Thorvald  still sate up, that the two brothers Eyvind and Alf came  and sate down by them, and were very merry. First they  drank as one drinking-party ; but presently it came to this,  that each should drink half a horn, Eyvind and Thorvald  being paired together to drink, and Alf and Thorfid. 

Now as the evening wore on there was unfair drinking ;  next followed bandying of words, then insulting language.  Then Eyvind jumped up, drew a sword, and thrust at Thor-  vald, dealing him a wound that was his death. Whereupon  up jumped on either side the king’s men and Thorir’s house-  carles. But men were all weaponless in there, because it  was sanctuary. Men went between .and parted them who  were most furious; nor did anything more happen that  evening. 

Eyvind had slain a man on holy ground; he was there- 


- SLAYING OF THORVALD PROUD | 89 


fore made accursed, and had to go abroad at once. The  king offered a fine for the man; but Thorolf and Thorfid  said they never had taken man-fine, and would not take  this. With that they parted. Thorir and his company went  home. King Eric and Gunnhilda sent Eyvind south to  Denmark to king Harold Gormsson, for he might not now  abide on Norwegian soil. The king received him and his  comrades well: Eyvind brought to Denmark a large war-  ship. He then appointed Eyvind to be his coastguard there  against freebooters, for Eyvind was a right good warrior. 

In the spring following that winter Thorolf and Egil  made them ready to go again a-freebooting. And when  ready, they again stood for the eastern way. But when they  came to Vik, they sailed then south along Jutland, and  harried there ; then went to Friesland, where they stayed  for a great part of the summer; but then stood back for  Denmark. But when they came to the borderland where  Denmark and Friesland meet, and lay by the land there, so  it was that one evening when they on shipboard were pre-  paring for sleep, two men came to Egil’s ship, and said they  had an errand to him. They were brought before him.  They said that Aki the wealthy had sent them thither with  this message : ‘ Eyvind Skreyja is lying out off Jutland-side,  and thinks to waylay you as you come from the south.  And he has gathered such large force as ye cannot withstand  if ye encounter it all at once; but he himself goes with two  light vessels, and he is even now here close by you.’ 

But when these tidings came before Egil, at once he and  his took down their tenting. He bade them go silently ;  they did so. They came at dawn to where Eyvind and his  men lay at anchor; they set upon them at once, hurling  both stones and spears. Many of Eyvind’s force fell there ;  but he himself leapt overboard and got to land by swim-  ming, as did all those of his men who escaped. But Egil  took his ships, cargo, and weapons. 

They went back that day to their own company, and met  Thorolf. He asked whither Egil had gone, and where he  had gotten those ships with which they came. Egil said  that Eyvind Skreyja had had the ships, but they had taken  them from him. Then sang Fgil : 


90 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


‘In struggle sternly hard  We strove off Jutland-side :  Well did the warrior fight,  Warder of Denmark’s realm.  Till, with his wights o’erborne,  Eastwards from wave-horse high  To swim and seek the sand  Swift Eyvind Skreyja leapt.’  Thorolf said : ‘ Herein ye have so wrought, methinks, that  it will not serve us as our autumn plan to go to Norway.’  Egil said it was quite as well, though they should seek  some other place. 


CHAPTER L.  Of Athelstan king of the English. 


LFRED THE GREAT ruled England, being of his  A family the first supreme king over England. That  was in the days of Harold Fairhair, king of Norway.  After Alfred, Edward his son was king in England. He  was father of Athelstan the Victorious, who was foster-father  of Hacon the Good. It was at this time of our story that  Athelstan took the kingdom after his father. There were  several brothers sons of Edward. 

But when Athelstan had taken the kingdom, then those  chieftains who had before lost their power to his forefathers  rose in rebellion; now they thought was the easiest time to  claim back their own, when a young king ruled the realm.  These were Britons, Scots, and Irish. King Athelstan  therefore gathered him an army, and gave pay to all such as  wished to enrich themselves, both foreigners and natives. 

The brothers Thorolf and Egil were standing southwards  along Saxony and Flanders, when they heard that the  king of England wanted men, and that there was in his  service hope of much gain. So they resolved to take their  force thither. And they went on that autumn till they ©  came to king Athelstan. He received them well; he saw  plainly that such followers would be a great help. Full soon  did the English king decide to ask them to join him, to  take pay there, and become defenders of his land. They 


OF OLAF KING OF SCOTS | gr 


so agreed between them that they became king Athelstan’s  men. 

England was thoroughly Christian in faith, and had long  been so, when these things happened. King Athelstan  was a good Christian ; he was called Athelstan the Faithful.  The king asked Thorolf and his brother to consent to take  the first signing with the cross, for this was then a common  custom both with merchants and those who took soldiers’  pay in Christian armies, since those who were ‘prime-  signed’ (as ’twas termed) could hold all intercourse with  Christians and heathens alike, while retaining the faith  which was most to their mind. Thorolf and Egil did this  at the king’s request, and both let themselves be prime-  signed. They had there three hundred men with them  who took the king’s pay. 


FA 


e  CHAPTER LI.  Of Olaf king of Scots. 

LAF THE RED was the name of the king in Scot-  () land. He was Scotch on his father’s side, but  Danish on his mother’s side, and came of the family  of Ragnar Hairy-breeks. He was a powerful prince. Scot-  land, as compared with England, was reckoned a third of  the realm ; Northumberland was reckoned a fifth part of  England; it was the northernmost county, marching with  Scotland on the eastern side of the island. Formerly the  Danish kings had held it. Its chief town is York. It was  in Athelstan’s dominions; he had set over it two earls, the  one named Alfgeir, the other Gudrek. They were set there  as defenders of the land against the inroads of Scots, Danes,  and Norsemen, who harried the land much, and thought  they had a strong claim on the land there, because in  Northumberland nearly all the inhabitants were Danish by 

the father’s or mother’s side, and many by both. 

Bretland was governed by two brothers, Hring and Adils ;  they were tributaries under king Athelstan, and withal had  this right, that when they were with the king in the field,  they and their force should be in the van of the battle 


92 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


before the royal standard. These brothers were right good  warriors, but not young men. 

Alfred the Great had deprived all tributary kings of name  and power; they were now called earls, who had before  heen kings or princes. This was maintained throughout his  lifetime and his son Edward’s. But Athelstan came young  to the kingdom, and of him they stood less in awe. Where-  fore many now were disloyal who had before been faithful 


subjects.  CAN 


?  CHAPTER LII.  Of the gathering of the host. 


LAF king of Scots, drew together a mighty host, and  marched upon England. When he came to North-  umberland, he advanced with shield of war. On 

learning this, the earls who ruled there mustered their force  and went against the king. And when they met there was a  great battle, whereof the issue was that king Olaf won the  victory, but earl Gudrek fell, and Alfgeir fled away, as did  the greater part of the force that had followed them and  escaped from the field. And now king Olaf found no  further resistance, but subdued all Northumberland. 

Alfgeir went to king Athelstan, and told him of his  defeat. But as soon as king Athelstan heard that so  mighty a host was come into his land, he despatched men  and summoned forces, sending word to his earls and other  nobles. And with such force as he had he at once turned  him and marched against the Scots. But when it was  bruited about that Olaf king of Scots had won a victory  and subdued under him a large part of England, he soon  had a much larger army than Athelstan, for many nobles  joined him. And on learning this, Hring and Adils, who  had gathered much people, turned to swell king Olaf’s  army. ‘Thus their numbers became exceeding great. 

All this when Athelstan learned, he summoned to con-  ference his captains and his counsellors; he inquired of  them what were best to do; he told the whole council point  by point what he had ascertained about the doings of the 


OF THE GATHERING OF THE HOST 93 


Scots’ king and his numbers. All present were agreed  on this, that Alfgeir was most to blame, and thought it  were but his due to lose his earldom. But the plan resolved  on was this, that king Athelstan should go back to the  south of England, and then for himself hold a levy of  troops, coming northwards through the whole land; for  they saw that the only way for the needful numbers to be  levied in time was for the king himself to gather the force. 

As for the army already assembled, the king set over it  as commanders Thorolf and Egil. They were also to lead  that force which the freebooters had brought to the king.  But Alfgeir still held command over his own troops.  Further, the king appointed such captains of companies as  he thought fit. 

When Egil returned from the council to his fellows, they  asked him what tidings he could tell them of the Scots”  king. He sang: 

: ‘ Olaf one earl by furious  Onslaught in flight hath driven,  The other slain: a sovereign  Stubborn in fight is he. 

Upon the field fared Gudrek 

False path to his undoing. 

He holds, this foe of England,  . Northumbria’s humbled soil.’ 


After this they sent messengers to king Olaf, giving out:  this as their errand, that king Athelstan would fain enhazel  him a field and offer battle on Vin-heath by Vin-wood ;  meanwhile he would have them forbear to harry his land ;  but of the twain he should rule England who should  conquer in the battle. He appointed a week hence for the  conflict, and whichever first came on the ground should wait  a week for the other. Now this was then the custom, that  so soon as a king had enhazelled a field, it was a shameful  act to harry before the battle was ended. Accordingly  King Olaf halted and harried not, but waited till the  appointed day, when he moved his army to Vin-heath. 

North of the heath stood a town. There in the town  king Olaf quartered him, and there he had the greatest part  of his force, because there was a wide district around which  seemed to him convenient for the bringing in of such pro- 


94 ‘STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


visions as the army needed. But he sent men of his own up  to the heath where the battlefield was appointed ; these were  to take camping-ground, and make all ready before the army  came. But when the men came to the place where the  field was enhazelled, there were all the hazel-poles set up  to mark the ground where the battle should be. 

The place ought to be chosen level, and whereon a large  host might be set in array. And such was this; for in the  place where the battle was to be the heath was level, with a  river flowing on one side, on the other a large wood. But  where the distance between the wood and the river was  least (though this was a good long stretch), there king  Athelstan’s men had pitched, and their tents quite filled the  space between wood and river. They had so pitched that  in every third tent there were no men at all, and in one of  every three but few. Yet when king Olaf’s men came to  them, they had then numbers swarming before all the tents,  and the others could not get to go inside. Athelstan’s men  said that their tents were all full, so full that their people  had not nearly enough room. But the front line of tents  stood so high that it could not be seen over them whether  they stood many or few in depth. Olaf’s men imagined a  vast host must be there. King Olaf’s men pitched north  of the hazel-poles, toward which side the ground sloped a  little. 

From day to day Athelstan’s men said that the king  would come, or was come, to the town that lay south of the  heath. Meanwhile forces flocked to them both day and night. 

But when the appointed time had expired, then Athel-  stan’s men sent envoys to king Olaf with these words: ‘ King  Athelstan is ready for battle, and has a mighty host. But  he sends to king Olaf these words, that he would fain they  should not cause so much bloodshed as now looks likely ;  he begs Olaf rather to go home to Scotland, and Athelstan  will give him as a friendly gift one shilling of silver from  every plough through all his realm, and he wishes that they  should become friends.’ 

‘When the messengers came to Olaf he was just beginning  to make ready his army, and purposing to attack. But-on  the messengers declaring their errand, he forebore to 


OF THE GATHERING OF THE HOST 95 


advance for that day. Then he and his captains sate in  council. Wherein opinions were much divided. Some  strongly desired that these terms should be taken; they  said that this journey had already won them great honour,  if they should go home after receiving so much money from  Athelstan. But some were against it, saying that Athelstan  would offer much more the second time, were this refused.  And this latter counsel prevailed. Then the messengers  begged king Olaf to give them time to go back to king  Athelstan, and try if he would pay yet more money to  ensure peace. They asked a truce of one day for their  journey home, another for deliberation, a third to return to  Olaf. The king granted them this. 

The messengers went home, and came back on the third  day according to promise ; they now said to king Olaf that  Athelstan would give all that he offered before, and over  and above, for distribution among king Olaf’s soldiers, a  shilling to every freeborn man, a silver mark to every officer  of a company of twelve men or more, a gold mark to every  captain of the king’s guard, and five gold marks to every  earl. Then the king laid this offer before his forces. It  was again as before; some opposed this, some desired it.  In the end the king gave a decision: he said he would  accept these terms, if this too were added, that king  Athelstan let him have all Northumberland with the tributes  and dues thereto belonging. Again the messengers ask  armistice of three days, with this further, that king Olaf  should send his men to hear Athelstan’s answer, whether  he would take these terms or no; they say that to their  thinking Athelstan will hardly refuse anything to ensure  peace. King Olaf agreed to this and sent his men to king  Athelstan. 

Then the messengers ride all together, and find king  Athelstan in the town that was close to the heath on the  south. King Olaf’s messengers declare before Athelstan  their errand and the proposals for peace. King Athelstan’s  men told also with what offers they had gone to king Olaf,  adding that this had been the counsel of wise men, thus to  delay the battle so long as the king had not come. 

But king Athelstan made a quick decision on this matter, 


96 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


and thus bespake the messengers: ‘Bear ye these my  words to king Olaf, that I will give him leave for this, to  gu home to Scotland with his forces ; only let him restore all  the property that he has wrongfully taken here in the land.  Then make we peace between our lands, neither harrying  the other. Further be it provided that king Olaf shall  become my vassal, and hold Scotland for me, and be my  under-king. Go now back,’ said he, ‘and tell him this.’ 

At once that same evening the messengers turned back 

on their way, and came to king Olaf about midnight ; they  then waked up the king, and told him straightway the  words of king Athelstan. The king instantly summoned  his earls and other captains; he then caused the messengers  to come and declare the issue of their errand and the words  of Athelstan. But when this was made known before the  soldiers, all with one mouth said that this was now before  them, to prepare for battle. ‘The messengers said this too,  that Athelstan had a numerous force, but he had come into  the town on that same day when the messengers came  there.  Then spoke earl Adils, ‘Now, methinks, that has come to  pass, O king, which I said, that ye would find tricksters in  the English. We have sat here long time and waited while  they have gathered to them all their forces, whereas their  king can have been nowhere near when we came here.  They will have been assembling a multitude while we were  sitting still. Now this is my counsel, O king, that we two  brothers ride at once forward this very night with our troop.  It may be they will have no fear for themselves, now they  know that their king is near with a large army. So we  shall make a dash upon them. But if they turn and fly,  they will lose some of their men, and be less bold after-  wards for conflict with us.’ 

The king thought this good counsel. ‘We will here  make ready our army,’ said he, ‘as soon as it is light, and  - move to support you.’  This plan they fixed upon, and so ended the council. 


e 


OF THE FIGHT | is ‘9? 


CHAPTER LIITI. 


Of the fight. 


ARL HRING and Adils his brother made ready  K their army, and at once in the night moved south-  wards for the heath. But when day dawned,  Thorolf’s sentries saw the army approaching. Then was a  war-blast blown, and men donned their arms. After that  they began to draw up the force, and they had two  divisions. Earl Alfgeir commanded one division, and the  standard was borne before him. In that division were his  own followers, and also what force had been gathered from  the countryside. It was a much larger force than that  which followed Thorolf and Egil. 

Thorolf was thus armed. He had a shield ample and  stout, a right strong helmet on his head; he was girded  - with the sword that he called Long, a weapon large and  good. In his hand he had a halberd, whereof the feather-  formed blade was two ells long, ending in a four-edged  spike; the blade was broad above, the socket both long  and thick. _The shaft stood just high enough for the hand  to grasp the socket, and was remarkably thick. The socket  fitted with iron prong on the shaft, which was also wound  round with iron. Such weapons were called mail-piercers. 

Egil was armed in the same way as Thorolf. He was  girded with the sword that he called Adder; this he had  gotten in Courland ; it was a right good-weapon. Neither  of the two had shirt of mail. | 

They set up their standard, which was borne by Thorfid  . the Strong. All their men had Norwegian shields and  Norwegian armour in every point; and in their division  were all the Norsemen who were present. Thorolf’s force  was drawn up near the wood, Alfgeirs moved along the  river. 

Earl Adils and his brother saw that they would not come  upon Thorolf unawares, so they began to draw up their  force. They also made two divisions, and had two standards.  Adils was opposed to earl Alfgeir, Hring to the freebooters.  The battle now began; both charged with spirit.. Earl 


98 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Adils pressed on hard and fast till Alfgeir gave ground ;  then Adils’ men pressed on twice as boldly. Nor was it  long before Alfgeir fled. And this is to be told of him,  that he rode away south over the heath, and a company of  men with him. - He rode till he came near the town, where  sate the king. 

Then spake the earl: ‘I deem it not safe for us to enter  the town. We got sharp words of late when we came to  the king after defeat by king Olaf; and he will not think  our case bettered by this coming. No need to expect  honour where he is.’ | 

Then he rode to the south country, and of his travel ’tis  to be told that he rode night and day till he and his came  westwards to Earls-ness. Then the earl got a ship to take  him southwards over the sea ; and he came to France, where  half of his kin were. He never after returned to England. 

Adils at first pursued the flying foe, but not far; then he  turned back to where the battle was, and made an onset  there. This when Thorolf saw, he said that Egil should  turn and encounter him, and bade the standard be borne -  that way ; his men he bade hold well together and stand  close. 

‘Move we to the wood,’ said he, ‘and let it cover our  back, so that they may not come at us from all sides.’ 

They did:so; they followed along the wood. Fierce was  the battle there. Egil charged against Adils, and they had  a hard fight of it. The odds of numbers were great, yet  more of Adils’ men fell than of Egil’s. 

Then Thorolf became so furious that he cast his shield  on his . back, and, grasping his halberd with both hands,  bounded’ forward dealing cut and thrust on either side.  Men sprang away from him both ways, but he slew many.  Thus he cleared the way forward to earl Hring’s standard,  and then nothing could stop him. He slew the man who  bore the earl’s standard, and cut down the standard-pole.  After that he lunged with his halberd at the earl’s breast,  driving it right through mail-coat and body, so that it came  out at the shoulders; and he lifted him up on the halberd  over his head, and planted the butt-end in the ground.  There on the weapon the earl breathed out his life in sight  of all, both friends and foes. Then Thorolf drew his sword 


OF THE FIGHT 99 


and dealt blows on either side, his men also charging,  Many Britons and Scots fell, but some turned and fled. 

But Earl Adils seeing his brother’s fall, and the slaughter  of many of his force, and the flight of some, while himself  was in hard stress, turned to fly, and ran to the wood.  _ Into the wood fled he and his company; and then all the 

force that had followed the earl took to flight. Thorolf  and Egil pursued the flying foe. Great was then the  slaughter ; the fugitives were scattered far and wide over  the heath. Earl Adils had lowered his standard; so none  could know his company from others. 

And soon the darkness of night began to close in.  Thorolf and Egil returned to their camp; and just then  king Athelstan came up with the main army, and they  pitched their tents and made their arrangements. A little  after came king Olaf with his army; they, too, encamped  and made their arrangements where their men had before  placed their tents. Then it was told king Olaf that both  his earls Hring and Adils were Nee and a multitude of  his men likewise. 


CHAPTER LIV.  The fall of Thorelf. 


ING ATHELSTAN had passed the night before’ in  the town whereof mention was made above, and  there he heard rumour that there had been fighting 

on the heath. At once he and all the host made ready  and: marched northwards to the heath. There they learnt  all the tidings clearly, how that battle had gone. Then the  brothers Thorolf and Egil came to meet the king. He  thanked them much for their brave advance, and the  victory they had won; he promised them his hearty friend-  ship. They all remained together for the night. 

No sooner did day dawn than Athelstan waked up his  army. He held conference with his captains, and told  them how his forces should be arranged. His own division  he first arranged, and in the van thereof he set those  companies that were the smartest. 

Then he said that Egil should command these: ‘But 


100 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Thorolf,’ said he, ‘shall be with his own men and such  others as I add thereto. This force shall be opposed to  that part of the enemy which is loose and not in set array,  for the Scots are ever loose in array; they run to and  fro, and dash forward here and there. Often they prove  dangerous if men be not wary, but they are unsteady in the  field if boldly faced.’ 

Egil answered the king: ‘I will not that I and Thorolf  be parted in the battle; rather to me it seems well that we  two be placed there where is like to be most need and  hardest fighting.’ 

Thorolf said, ‘ Leave we the king to rule where he will  place us, serve we him as he likes best. I will, if you wish  it, change places with you.’ 

Egil said, ‘Brother, you will have your way; but this  separation I shall often rue.’ 

After this they formed in the divisions as the king had  arranged, and the standards were raised. The king’s division  stood on the plain towards the river; Thorolf’s division  moved on the higher ground beside the wood. King Olaf  drew up his forces when he saw king Athelstan had done  so. He also made two divisions ; and his own standard,  and the division that himself commanded, he opposed to  king Athelstan and his division. Either had a large army,  there was no difference on the score of numbers. But king  Olaf’s second division moved near the wood against the force  under Thorolf. ~The commanders thereof were Scotch earls,  the men mostly Scots ; and it was a great multitude. 

And now the armies closed, and soon the battle waxed  fierce. Thorolf pressed eagerly forward, causing his standard  to be borne onwards along the woodside; he thought to  go so far forward as to turn upon the Scotch king’s division  behind their shields. His own men held their shields before  them ; they trusted to the wood which was on their right to  cover that side. So far in advance went Thorolf that few  of his men were before him. But just when he was least  on his guard, out leapt from the wood earl Adils and his  followers. They thrust at Thorolf at once with many halberds,  and there by the wood he fell. But Thorfid, who bore the  standard, drew back to where the men stood thicker. Adils  now attacked them, and a fierce contest was there. The 


THE FALL OF THOROLF ee (o) | 


Scots shouted a shout of victory, as having slain the enemy’s  chieftain. Z 

This shout when Egil heard, and saw Thorolf’s standard  going back, he felt sure that Thorolf himself would not be  with it. So he bounded thither over the space between the  two divisions. Full soon learnt he the tidings of what was  done, when he came to his men. Then did he keenly spur  them on to the charge, himself foremost in the van. He  had in his hand his sword Adder. Forward Egil pressed,  and hewed on either hand of him, felling many men.  Thorfid bore the standard close after him, behind the  standard followed the rest. Right sharp was the conflict  there. Egil went forward till he met earl Adils. Few  blows did they exchange ere earl Adils fell, and many men  around him. But after the earl’s death his followers fled.  Egil and his force pursued, and slew all whom they over-  took; no need there to beg quarter. Nor stood those  Scotch earls long, when they saw the others their fellows  fly ; but at once they took to their heels. 

Whereupon Egil and his men made for where king Olaf’s  division was, and coming on them behind their shields soon  wrought great havoc. The division wavered, and broke up.  Many of king Olaf’s men then fled, and the Norsemen  shouted a shout of victory. 

But when king Athelstan perceived king Olaf’s division  beginning to break, he then spurred on his force, and bade  his standard advance. A fierce onset was made, so that  king Olaf’s force recoiled, and there was a great slaughter.  King Olaf fell there, and the greater part of the force which  he had had, for of those who turned to fly all who were  overtaken were slain. Thus king Athelstan gained a signal 


victory.  a 


CHAPTER LV.  Egil buries Thorolf. 


HILE his men still pursued the fugitives, king  7 Athelstan left the battle-field, and rode back to 


the town, nor stayed he for the night before he.  came thither. But Egil pursued the flying foe, and 


‘ 


102 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON — 


followed them far, slaying every man whom he overtook.  At length, sated with pursuit, he with his followers turned  back, and came where the battle had been, and found  there the dead body of his brother Thorolf. He took it up,  washed it, and performed such other offices as were the  wont of the time. They dug a grave there, and laid Thorolf  therein with all his weapons and raiment. ‘Then. Egil  clasped a gold bracelet on either wrist before he parted  from him; this done they heaped on stones and cast in  mould. Then Egil sang a stave:  ‘ Dauntless the doughty champion 

Dashed on, the earl’s bold slayer : 

In stormy stress of battle 

Stout-hearted Thorolf fell. 

Green grows on soil of Vin-heath 

Grass o’er my noble brother : 

But we our woe—a sorrow 

Worse than death-pang—must bear.’ 

And again he further sang:  ‘ With warriors slain round standard 

The western field I burdened ; 

Adils with my blue Adder 

Assailed mid snow of war. 

Olaf, young prince, encountered 

England in battle thunder : 

Hring stood not stour of weapons, 

Starved not the ravens’ maw. 

Then went Egil and those about him to seek king  Athelstan, and at once went before the king, where he sat  at the drinking. There was much noise of merriment. And  when the king saw that Egil was come in, he bade the lower  bench be cleared for them, and that Egil should sit in the  high-seat facing the king. Egil sat down there, and cast  his shield before his feet. He had his helm on his head,  and laid his sword across his knees ; and now and again he  half drew it, then clashed it back into the sheath. He sat  upright, but with head bent forward. 

Egil was large-featured, broad of forehead, with large eye-  brows, a nose not long but very thick, lips wide and long,  chin exceeding broad, as was all about the jaws; thick-  necked was he, and big-shouldered beyond other men,  hard- featured, and grim when angry. He was well- 


EGIL BURIES THOROLF " 103  made, more than commonly tall, had hair wolf-gray and  thick, but became early bald. He was black-eyed and  brown-skinned. : 

But as he sat (as was before written), he drew one eye-  brow down towards the cheek, the other up to the roots of  the hair. He would not drink now, though the horn was  borne to him, but alternately twitched his brows up and  down. King Athelstan sat in the upper high-seat. He  too laid his sword ‘across his knees. When they had sat  there for a time, then the king drew his sword from the  sheath, and took from his arm a gold ring large and good,  and placing it upon the sword-point he stood up, and went  across the floor, and reached it over the fire to Egil. Egil  stood up and drew his sword, and went across the floor.  He stuck the sword-point within the round of the ring, and  drew it to him; then he went back to his place. The king  sate him again in his high-seat. But when Egil was set  down, he drew the.ring on his arm, and then his brows went  back to their place. He now laid down sword and helm,  took the horn that they bare to him, and drank it off. Then  sang he: 

‘ Mailed monarch, god of battle,  Maketh the tinkling circlet  Hang, his own arm forsaking,  On hawk-trod wrist of mine. 

I bear on arm brand-wielding 

Bracelet of red gold gladly. 

War-falcon’s feeder meetly 

Findeth such meed of praise.’ 


Thereafter Egil drank his share, and talked with others.  Presently the king caused to be borne in two chests; two  men bare each. Both were full of silver. 

The king said: ‘ These chests, Egil, thou shalt have, and,  if thou comest to Iceland, shalt carry this money to thy  father; as payment for a son I send it to him: but some  of the money thou shalt, divide among such kinsmen of thy-  self and Thorolf as thou thinkest most honourable. But  thou shalt take here payment for a brother with me, land or  chattels, which thou wilt. And if thou wilt abide with me  long, then will I give thee honour and dignity such as thy-  self mayst name.’ 


104 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Egil took the ‘money, and thanked the king for his gifts  and friendly words. Thenceforward Egil began to be cheer-  ful; and then he sang: 

‘In sorrow sadly drooping  Sank my brows close-knitted 3 :  Then found I one who furrows  Of forehead could smooth.  : Fierce-frowning cliffs that shaded  My face a king hath lifted  With gleam of golden armlet :  Gloom leaveth my eyes.’ 


Then those ,men were healed whose wounds left hope of  lite. Egil abode with king Athelstan for the next winter  after Thorolf’s death, and had very great honour from the’  king. With Egil was then all that force which had followed  the two brothers, and come alive out of the battle. Egil  now made a poem about king Athelstan, and in it is this.  stave ; 


‘ Land-shielder, battle-quickener,  Low now this scion royal  Earls three hath laid. To Ella 

Earth must obedient bow.  Lavish of gold, kin-glorious,  Great Athelstan victorious,  Surely, I swear, all humbled 

To such high monarch yields.’ 


But this is the burden in the poem: 


‘ Reindeer-trod hills obey  Bold Athelstan’s high sway.’ 


Then gave Athelstan further to Egil as poet’s meed two  gold rings, each weighing a mark, and therewith a costly  cloak that the king himself had formerly worn. 

But when spring came Egil signified to the king this,  that he purposed to go away in the summer to Norway, and  to learn ‘how matters stand with Asgerdr, my late brother  Thorolf’s wife. A large property is there in all; but I know  not whether there be children of theirs living. I am bound  to look after them, if they live; but I am heir to all, if  Thorolf died childless.’ 

The king answered, ‘ This will be, Egil, for you to arrange,  to go away hence, if you think you have an errand of duty ; 


EGIL BURIES THOROLF | 405 


but I think ’twere the best way that you should settle down  here with me on such terms as you like to ask.’  _ Egil thanked the king for his words. 

‘I will,’ he said, ‘now first go, as I am in duty bound to  do ; but it is likely that I shall return hither to see after this  promise so soon as I can.’ 

The king bade him do so. 

Whereupon Egil made him ready to depart with his men ;  but of these many remained behind with the king. Egil  had one large war-ship, and on board thereof a hundred  men or thereabouts. And when he was ready: for his  voyage, and a fair wind blew, he put out to sea. He and  king Athelstan parted with great friendship: the king  begged Egil to return as soon as possible. This Egil  promised todo. 

Then Egil stood for Norway, and when he came to land  sailed with all speed into the Firths. He heard these  tidings, that lord Thorir was dead, and Arinbjorn had  taken inheritance after him, and was made a baron. Egil -  went to Arinbjorn and got there a good welcome. Arin-  bjorn asked him to stay there. Egil accepted this, had his  ship set up, and his crew lodged. But Arinbjorn received  Egil and twelve men; they stayed with him through the  winter. 

? 


CHAPTER LVI.  Marriage of Egil. 


ERGONUND son of Thorgeir Thornfoot had then  | married Gunnhilda daughter of Bjorn Yeoman. She 

' had come:to keep house with him at Askr. But  Asgerdr, whom Thorolf Skallagrimsson had had to wife,  was then with Arinbjorn, her kinsman. Thorolf and she  had a daughter named Thordis, and the girl was there with  her mother. Egil told Asgerdr of Thorolf’s death, and  offered her his guardianship. Asgerdr was much grieved  at the tidings; she answered Egil’s words well, saying  however but little one way or the other. 


106 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


But, as autumn wore on, Egil began to be very gloomy  and drank little, and often sat with his head drooping in his  cloak. One time Arinbjorn went to him and asked what  meant his gloom. | 

‘ Though now you have had a great loss in your brother,  yet *tis manly to bear up well; man must overlive man.  Come, what verse are you now repeating? Let me hear.’ 

Fgil said he had just made this verse: 

| ‘ Unfriendly, who was friend, 

Fair goddess seems. Of old  Bold with uplifted brow  Beheld I woman’s face.  Now one (whose name I veil)  No sooner to the skald 

‘ Occurs, than shyly sinks  Screen’d in his cloak his head.’ 

Arinbjorn asked who was the woman about whom he  composed such love-song. ‘Have-you hidden her name in  this stave ?’ 

Then Egil recited : 

* Sorrow shows not, but hides  The saddening thought within.  Names in my poesy  Not oft I use to veil. 

For Odin’s warrior wights  Will surely searching find 

In war-god’s wine of song  What poet deep hath plunged.’ 

‘Here,’ said Egil, ‘will the old saw be found true. All  should be told.to a friend. I will tell you that which you  ask, about what woman I compose verse. ’Tis Asgerdr  your kinswoman; and I would fain have your furtherance  to secure this match.’ 

Arinbjorn said that he deemed it well thought of. ‘I  will,’ said he, ‘surely give my good word that this match  may be made.’ 

Then Egil laid this matter before Asgerdr, but she referred  it to the decision of her father and her kinsman Arinbjorn.  Arinbjorn talked with Asgerdr, and she made the same  answer. Arinbjorn was desirous of this match. After this  Arinbjorn and Egil went together to Bjorn, and then Egil  made his suit and asked to wife Asgerdr Bjorn’s daughter.  Bjorn took this matter well, and said that Arinbjorn should 


MARRIAGE OF EGIL IC7 


chiefly decide this. Arinbjorn greatly desired it; and the  end of the matter was that Egil and Asgerdr were betrothed,  and the wedding was to be at Arinbjorn’s, 

And when the appointed time came, there was a very  grand feast at Egil’s marriage. He was then very cheerful  for the remaining part of the winter. In the spring he  rnade ready a merchant-ship for a voyage to Iceland.  Arinbjorn advised him not to settle in Norway while Gunn-  hilda’s power was so great. ‘For she is very wroth with  you,’ said Arinbjorn; ‘and this has been made much worse  by your encounter with Eyvind near Jutland.’ 

But when Egil was ready, and a fair wind blew, he sailed  out to sea, and his voyage sped well. He came in the  autumn to Iceland, and stood into Borgar-firth, He had  now been out twelve winters. Skallagrim was an old man  by this time. Full glad was he when Egil came home.  Egil went to lodge at Borg, and with him Thorfid Strong  and many of their company; and they were there with  Skallagrim for the winter. Egil had immense store of  wealth ; but it is not told that Egil shared that silver which  king Athelstan had given him cither with Skallagrim or  others. That winter Thorfid married Szeunn, Skallagrim’s  daughter ; and in the following spring Skallagrim gave them  a homestead at Long-river-foss, and the land inwards from  Leiru-brook between Long-river and Swan-river, even up  to the fell. Daughter of Thorfid and Szunn was Thordis  wife to Arngeir in Holm, the son of Bersi Godless. Their  son was Bjorn, Hitadale’s champion. 

Egil abode there with Skallagrim several winters. He  took upon him the management of the property and farm  no less than Skallagrim. Egil became more and more bald.  The country-side began now to be settled far and wide.  Hromund, brother of Grim the Halogalander, settled at  this time in Cross-river-lithe with his shipmates. Hromund  was father of Gunnlaug, the father of Thuridr Dylla, mother  of Illugi the Swarthy. 

Egil had now been several winters at Borg with his father,  when one summer a ship came from Norway to Iceland  with these tidings from the east, that Bjorn Yeoman was  dead. Further, it was told that all the property owned by  Bjorn had been taken up by Bergonund, his son-in-law, who 


108 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


had moved to his own home all loose chattels, letting out  the lands, and securing to himself all the rents. He had  also got possession of all the farms occupied of late by  Bjorn. This when Egil heard, he inquired carefully whether  Bjorn had acted on his own counsel in this matter, or had  the support of others more powerful. It was told him that  Onund was become a close friend of king Eric, but was on  even more intimate terms with Gunnhilda. 

Egil let the matter rest for this autumn ; but when winter  was past and spring came, then Egil bade them draw out his  ship, which had stood in the shed at Long-river-foss. This  ship he made ready for sea, and got a crew thereto.  Asgerdr his wife was to go with him, but Thordis Thorolf’s  daughter remained behind. Egil sailed out to sea when he  was ready, and of his voyage there is nothing to tell before  he came to Norway. He at once, as soon as he could,  went to seek Arinbjorn. Arinbjorn received him well, and  asked Egil to stay with him; this offer he took. So both  he and Asgerdr went thither and several men with them. 

Egil very soon spoke with Arinbjorn about those claims  on money that he thought he had there in the land. 

Arinbjorn said, ‘That matter seems to me unpromising.  Bergonund is hard, ill to deal with, unjust, covetous ; and  he has now much support from the king and the queen.  Gunnhilda is your bitter enemy, as you know already, and  she will not desire Onund to put the case right.’ | 

Egil said, ‘ The king will let us get law and justice in this  matter, and with your help it seems no great thing in my  eyes to take the law of Bergonund.’ 

They resolved on this, that Egil should equip a swift  cutter, whereon they embarked some twenty men, and went  south to Hordaland and on to Askr. There they go to the  house and find Onund. Egil declares his business, and  demands of Onund a sharing of the heritage of Bjorn. He  says that Bjorn’s daughters were by law both alike his  heirs, ‘Though methinks,’ says Egil, ‘Asgerdr will be  deemed more nobly born than your wife Gunnhilda.’ 

Then says Onund in high-pitched voice, ‘A wondrous  bold man are you, Egil, the outlaw of king Eric, who come  hither to his land and think here to attack his men and 


MARRIAGE OF EGIL 109 


friends. You are to know, Egil, that I have overthrown  men as good as you for less cause than methinks this is,  when you claim heritage in right of your wife; for this is  well known to all, that she is born of a bondwoman.’ 

Onund was furious in language for a time; but when  Egil saw that Onund would do no right in this matter, then  he summoned him to court, and referred the matter to the  - law of the Gula-thing. 

Onund said, ‘To the Gula-thing I will come, and my will  is that you should not come away thence with a whole skin.’ 

Egil said he would risk coming to the Thing allthe same :  ‘There let come what come may to end our matter.’ 

Egil then went away with his company, and when he  came home told Arinbjorn of his journey and of Onund’s  answer. Arinbjorn was very angry that Thora his father’s  sister had been called a bondwoman. Arinbjorn went to  king Eric, and declared this matter before him. 

The king took his words rather sullenly, and said that  Arinbjorn had long advocated Egil’s cause: ‘He has had  this grace through thee, that I have let him be here in the  land ; but now shall I think it too much to bear if thou  back him in his assaults on my friends.’ 

Arinbjorn said, ‘ Thou wilt let us get law in this case.’ 

The king was rather peevish in this talk, but Arinbjorn  could see that the queen was much worse-willed. 

Arinbjorn went: back and said that things looked rather  unpromising. The winter wore away, and the time came  when men should go to the Gula-tthing. Arinbjorn took to  the Thing a numerous company, among them went Egil. 


¢ 


CHAPTER LVII.  Suit between Egil and Onund. 


] 4 ING ERIC was there numerously attended. Bergo-  nund was among his train, as were his brothers ;  there was a large following. But when the meeting 

was to be held about men’s lawsuits, both the parties went 

where the court was set, to plead their proofs. ‘Then was 


110 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Onund full of big words. Now where the court sate was a  level plot, with hazel-poles planted in a ring, and outside were  twisted ropes all around. This was called ‘the precincts.’  Within the ring sate twelve judges of the Firth-folk, twelve of  the Sogn-folk, twelve of the Horda-folk. These three twelves  were to judge all the suits. Arinbjorn ruled who should  be judges from the Firth-folk, Thord of Aurland who should  be so from the Sogn-folk. All these were of one party.  Arinbjorn had brought thither a long-ship fully equipt,  also many small craft and store-ships. King Eric had six  or seven long-ships all well equipt ; a great number of :land-  owners were also there. 

Egil began his cause thus: he craved the judges to give  him lawful judgment in the suit between him and Onund.  He then set forth what proofs he held of his claim on the  property that had belonged to Bjorn Brynjolf’s son. He  said that Asgerdr daughter of Bjorn, own wife of him Egil,  was rightful heiress, born noble, of landed gentry, even of  titled family further back. And he craved of the judges  this, to adjudge to Asgerdr half of Bjorn’s inheritance,  whether land or chattels. 

And when he ceased speaking, then Bergonund took the  word and spoke thus: ‘Gunnhilda my wife is the daughter  of Bjorn and Alof, the wife whom Bjorn lawfully married.  Gunnhilda is rightful heiress of Bjorn. I for this reason  took possession of all the property left by Bjorn, because I  knew that that other daughter of Bjorn had no right to  inherit. Her mother was a captive of war, afterwards taken  as concubine, without her kinsmen’s consent, and carried  from land to land. But thou, Egil, thinkest to go on here,  as everywhere else, with thy fierceness and wrongful dealing.  This will not avail thee now; for king Eric and queen  Gunnhilda have promised me that I shall have right in  every cause within the bounds of their dominion. I will  produce true evidence before the king and the judges that  Thora Lace-hand, Asgerdr’s mother, was taken captive from  _ the house of Thorir her brother, and a second time from  Brynjolf’s house at Aurland. Then she went away out of  the land with freebooters, and was outlawed from Norway,  and in this outlawry Bjorn and she had born to them this 


SUIT BETWEEN EGIL AND ONUND WII 


girl Asgerdr. A great wonder now is this in Egil, that he  thinks to make void all the words of king Eric. First,  Egil, thou art here in the land after Eric made thee an out-  law ; secondly—which is worse—though thou hast a bond-  woman to thy wife, thou claimest for her nght of heritage.  I demand this of the judges, that they adjudge the inherit-  ance to Gunnhilda, but adjudge Asgerdr to be the bond-  woman of the king, because she was begotten when her  father and mother were outlawed by the king.’ 

Right wroth was Arinbjorn when he heard Thora Lace-  hand called a bondwoman ; and he stood up, and would no  longer hold his peace, but looked around on either side,  and took the word: 

‘Evidence we will bring, sir king, in this matter, and  oaths we will add, that this was in the reconciliation of my  father and Bjorn Yeoman expressly provided, that Asgerdr  daughter of Bjorn and Thora was to have right of inherit-  ing after Bjorn her father ; as also-this, which thyself, O  king, dost know, that thou restoredst Bjorn to his rights in  Norway, and so everything was settled which had before  stood in the way of thetr reconciliation.’ 

To these words the king found no ready answer. ‘Then  sang Egil a stave: 

‘ Bondwoman born this knave  My brooch-decked lady calls.  Shameless in selfish greed  Such dealing Onund loves:  Braggart ! my bride is one  Born heiress, jewell’d dame.  Our oaths, great king, accept,  Oaths that are meet and true.’ 

Then Arinbjorn produced witnesses, twelve men, and all  well chosen. These all had heard, being present, the recon-  ciliation of Thorir and Bjorn, and they offered to the king |  and judges to swear to it. The judges were willing to  accept their oath if the king forbade it not. 

Then did queen Gunnhilda take the word : ,  -*Great wonder is this, sir king, that thou lettest this big  Fgil make such a coil of the whole cause before thee.  Wouldst thou find nought to say against him, though he  should claim at thy hand thy very kingdom? Now though 


112 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


thou wilt give no decision that may help Onund, yet will not  I brook this, that Egil tread under foot our friends and  wrongfully take the property from Onund. Where is Alf  my brother? Go thou, Alf, with thy following, where the  judges are, and let them not give this wrong judgment.” 

Then he and his men went thither, and cut in sunder the  precinct-ropes and tore down the poles, and scattered the  judges. Great uproar was there in the Thing; but men  there were all weaponless. 

Then spake Egil: ‘Can Bergonund hear my words ?’ 

‘I hear,’ said Onund. 

‘Then do I challenge thee to combat, and be our fight  here at the Thing. . Let him of us. twain have this property,  both lands and chattels, who wins the victory. But be thou  every man’s dastard if thou darest not.’ 

Whereupon king Eric made answer: ‘If thou, Egil, art  strongly set on fighting, then will we grant thee this forth-  with.’ | 

Egil replied: ‘I will not fight with king’s power and over-  whelming force ; but before equal numbers I will not flee, if  this he given me. Nor will I then make any distinction of  persons, titled or untitled.’ 

Then spake Arinbjorn: ‘Go we away, Egil; we shall not  here effect to-day anything that will be to our gain.’ 

And with this Arinbjorn and all his people turned to  depart. | 

But Egil turned him and cried aloud: ‘ This do I protest  before thee, Arinbjorn, and thee, Thord, and all men that  now can hear my word, barons and lawmen and all people,  that I ban all those lands that belonged to Bjorn Brynjolfsson,  from building and tillage, and from all gain therefrom to  be gotten. I ban them to thee, Bergonund, and to all  others, natives and foreigners, high and low; and anyone  who shall herein offend I denounce as a law-breaker, a  peace breaker, and accursed.’ 

After which Egil went away with Arinbjorn. 

They then went to their ships ; and there was a rise in  the ground of some extent to pass over, so that the ships  were not visible from the Thing-field. Egil was very wroth.  And when they:came to the ships, Arinbjorn spoke before  his people and said: 


SUIT BETWEEN EGIL AND ONUND IT3 


_ © Allmen know what has been the issue of the Thing here,  that we have not got law; but the king is much in wrath, so  that I expect our men will get hard measure from him if he  can bring it about. I will now that every man embark on  his ship and go home. Let none wait for other.’ 

Then Arinbjorn went on board his own ship, and to Egil  he said: Now go you with your comrades on board the  cutter that lies here outside the long-ship, and get you away  at once. Travel by night so much as you may, and not by  day, and be on your guard, for the king will seek to meet  with you. Come and find me afterwards, when all this is  oe whatever may have chanced between you and the 

Ing.’ : : 

Egil did as Arinbjorn said ; they went aboard the cutter,  about thirty mer, and rowed with all their might. The  vessel was remarkably fast. Then rowed out of the haven  many other ships of Arinbjorn’s people, cutters and row-  boats ; but the long-ship which Arinbjorn steered went  last, for it was the heaviest under oars. Egil’s cutter, which  he steered,, soon outstripped the rest. Then Egil sang a  stave ;: 

‘ My heritage he steals,  The money-grasping heir  Of Thornfoot. But his threats,  Though fierce, I boldly meet.  For land we sought the law:  Land-grabbing loon is he ! 


But robbery of my right  _Ere long he shall repay.’ 


7 


CHAPTER LVIIJI.  Of king Eric and Egil. 

ING ERIC heard the concluding words of Egil that  he spake last at the Thing, and his wrath waxed ©  hot. But all men had gone weaponless to the 

Thing, therefore the king attempted no attack. He bade |  his men hasten to their ships, and they did as he bade.  Then, when they came to the strand, the king summoned  his household Thing, and told thém his purpose. 


4 


114 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


‘We must now,’ said he, ‘untent our ships and row after |  Arinbjorn and Egil, and this I will have you know, that we  will take Egil’s life if we get the chance, and spare no man  who shall stand up for him.’ 

After that they went aboard, made all ready as speedily  as might be, and pushed out the ships and rowed to the  place where Arinbjorn’s ships had been. These were now  all gone. ‘Then the king bade that they should row after  them northwards by the sound. And when he came to  Sogn-sea, then there was Arinbjorn’s company rowing in  . towards Sheeping-sound, and thither the king turned in  after them, and he came up with Arinbjorn’s ship in the  inner part of Sheeping-sound. At once the king made  for it, and they exchanged words. ‘The king asked whether  Egil was in the ship. Arinbjorn answered. | 

‘Egil is not here,’ he said; ‘that, O king, thou mayest  at once see. Here on boardare none but those whom thou  knowest; and Egil will not be found down under the  benches, though thou shouldst seek him there.’ 

The king asked Arinbjorn what he knew latest of Egil.  He said that Egil was on a cutter with thirty men, and they  took their way out to Stone-sound. Then the king told his  men to row by the inner sound, and shape their course so  as to meet Egil. ~ 

There was a man named Kettle Hod; he was of king  Eric’s guard, an Uplander by family. He was pilot on the  king’s ship, and steered the same. Kettle was a tall man .  and a handsome ; he was near of kintotheking. And’twas  generally said that he and the king were like in appearance. 

Now Egil, before going to the Thing, had had his ship  launched and the cargo put on board. And after parting  with Arinbjorn he and his went their way to Stone-sound,  till they came to his ship, which lay there afloat in the haven  with tent overspread. ‘Then they went up aboard the ship,  but the cutter rode beside the rudder of the ship between  the land and the ship, and the oars lay there in the Joops. 

Next morning, when day had hardly dawned, the watch  were aware that some ships were rowing for them. But  when Egil saw that it was an enemy, he stood up and bade  that they should leap into the cutter. He armed himself 


OF KING ERIC AND EGIL ANTS 


‘at once, as did they all. Egil took up those chests of  silver which King Athelstan gave him, and bore them with  ‘him. They leapt armed into the cutter, and rowed forward  between the land and the long-ship that was advancing  nearest to the land; this was king Eric’s ship. But, as it  happened suddenly and there was little light, the two ships  ran past each other. And when the stern-castles were  opposite, then Egil hurled a spear and smote in the middle  ~the man who sat steering, Kettle Hod to wit, and at once he  got his bane. Then king Eric called out and bade men row  after Egil and his party, but as their vessels ran past Egil’s  merchant-ship, the king’s men leapt aboard of that. And  those ‘of Egil’s men who had been left behind, and not  leapt into the cutter, were all slain who could be caught,  but some escaped to land. Ten men of Egil’s followers  were lost there. 

Some ships rowed after Egil, but some plundered the  merchant-ship. All the booty on board was taken, and the  ship burnt. But those who rowed after Egil pulled hard ;  two at each oar, and they could even so take the rowing by  turns. For they had no lack of men on board, while Egil’s  crew was short, they being now but eighteen on the cutter.  So the distance between them lessened. But inside of the  island was a shallow sound between it and other islands.  It was now low water. Egil and his rowers ran their cutter  into that shallow sound, but the long-ships could not float  there ; thus pursuers and pursued were parted. ‘The king  then turned back. southwards, but aia went north to seek  _Arinbjorn, Then sang Egil a stave: 

‘ Wakener of weapon-din,  The warlike ‘prince, hath wrought  (Where I escaped scot-free)  Scathe on our gallant ten.  Yet sped my hand a spear,  Like springing salmon swift,  Lhat rushed and Kettle’s ribs  Rent sore with deathful wound.’ | 

Egil came to Arinbjorn, and told him these tidings.  Arinbjorn said that he could expect nothing better in  dealing with king Eric. ‘But you shall not want for  money, Egil. I will make good the loss of your ship, and 


“116 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON  give you another, in which you can well sail to Iceland,’  Asgerdr, Egil’s wife, had remained at Arinbjorn’s while they  went to the Thing. Arinbjorn gave Egil a good seaworthy  ‘ship, and had it laden with such things as Egil wished.  ‘This ship Egil got ready for sea, and again he had a crew  of about thirty men. Then he and Arinbjorn pared in  friendship. And Egil sang:  ‘ Requite him, righteous gods, 

For robbery of my wealth ! 

Hunt him away, be wroth, 

High Odin, heavenly powers ! 

Foe of his folk, base king, 

May Frey and Njord make flee ! 

- Hate him, land-guardians, hate,  Who holy ground hath scorn’d 


CHAPTER LIX. 


King Eric slays his brothers. 


AROLD FAIRHAIR set his sons to rule in Norway 

: H when he began to grow old: Eric he made king  above all his other sons. It was when Harold 

‘had been king for seventy years that he gave over the king- 


~ -dom into the hands of hisson Eric. At that time Gunnhilda 


bare ason, whom Harold the king sprinkled with water, giving  him his own name ; and he added this that he should be king  after his father if he lived long enough. King Harold then  settled down in retirement, being mostly in Rogaland or  Hordaland. But three years later king Harold died in Roga-  land, and a mound was raised to his memory by Haugasound. 

After the death of the king there was great strife between  his sons, for the men of Vik took Olaf for their king, but  the Thronds Sigurd. But these two, his brothers, Eric  slew at Tunsberg, one year after King Harold's death. All  these things happened in one and the same summer, to wit,  king Eric’s going with his army eastwards to Vik to fight  with his brothers, and (before that) the strife of Egil and  ‘Bergonund at the Gula-thing, with the other events that have  “just been related. 

Bergonund. remained at home on his estate when the 


KING ERIC SLAYS HIS BROTHERS 117 


king went to the war, for he thought it unsafe for him to  leave home while Egil was still in the land. MHadd, his  brother, was now there with him. ‘There was a man named  Frodi, a kinsman of king Eric, very handsome, young in  years, but a man grown. King Eric left him behind to  protect Bergonund. Frodi was staying at Alrekstead, a  royal farm, and had some men there. <A son of Eric and  Gunnhilda there was named Rognvald, who was then ten or  eleven years old, and had the makings of a very handsome  man. He was with Frodi when these things happened.  But before king Eric rowed forth to this war, he made Egil  an outlaw through all Norway, and free for any man.to slay.  Arinbjorn was with the king in the.war; but before he left  home Egil took his ship to sea, and made for the outlying  fishing station called Vitar, over against Aldi. It is on the  high road of the seas: fishermen were there, and ’twas a  good place for hearing tidings. Then he heard that the  king had made him an outlaw. Whereupon Egil sang a  stave: oe  * Law-breaker, land-demon, 

Leng voyage lays on me ; 

He bane of his brothers, 

Beguiled by his bride. 

Gunnhilda the guilt bears 

(Grim queen) of my exile : 

Fain am I full swiftly 

Her frauds to repay.’ 


. The weather was calm, a fell-wind blew by night, a sea”  breeze by day. One evening Egil sailed out to sea, but the  fishermen were then rowing in to land, those, to wit, who  had been set as spies on Egil’s movements. They had this  to tell, that Egil had put out and sailed to sea, and was  gone. This news they carried to Bergonund. And when  he knew these tidings, then he sent away all those men that  he had had before for protection. Thereafter he rowed in  to Alrekstead, and bade Frodi to his house, for he had a  great ale-drinking there. Frodi went with him, taking some  men. They were feasted well there, and they made merry,  with no fear of danger. Rognvald, the king’s son, had a  pinnace, rowed by six men on either side, painted all above  the sea line. He had with him ten or twelve who con- 


118. STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


stantly followed him ; and when Frodi had left home, then  Rognvald took the pinnace and they rowed out to Herdla  twelve in number. A large farm of the king’s was there,  whereof the manager was named Skegg-Thorir. Rognvald  in his childhood had been fostered there. Thorir received  the king’s son joyfully. ‘There too was no lack of drink. 


CHAPTER Lx. 


The slaying of Bergonund and Rognvald the  -  king’s son. 


GIL sailed out to sea for the night, as was written  above. And when morning came the wind fell and  there was acalm. ‘They then lay drifting, letting 

the ship ride free for some nights. But when a sea-breeze  came on, Egil said to his shipmen, ‘ We will now sail to  land, for I do not quite know, should the sea-wind come to  blow hard, where we could make land, ’tis a dangerous-looking  coast in most places.’ The rowers bade Egil rule their course. 

So then they made sail, and sailed into the waters about  Herdla. There they found a good haven, and spread the  tent over their ship, and lay there for the night. They had  on the ship a little boat, into which went Egil with three  men. They rowed into Herdla, and sent a man up into  the island to learn tidings ; and when he came down to the  ship, he said that there at the farm was Rognvald, the king’s  son, and his men. ‘They sate there a-drinking,’ said he.  ‘I lit on one of the house-carles ; he was ale-mad, and said  that here they must not drink less than was drunk at  Bergonund’s, though Frodi was feasting there with a party  of five. He said that no more were there than the house-  hold, save Frodi and his men.’ 

Whereupon Egil rowed back to the ship, and bade the  men rise and take their weapons. They did so. The ship  they put out from the shore and anchored. Egil left twelve  men to guard the ship, but himself went on the ship’s  boat, they being eighteen in all; they then rowed in along  the sound. They so regulated their pace that they came to 


THE SLAYING OF BERGONUND AND ROGNVALD 119 


Fenhring at eventide, and put into a hidden creek there.  Then said Egil: ‘ Now will I go up into the island and spy  out what I can get to know ; but you shall await me: here.’ 

Egil had his weapons that he was wont to have, a helm  and shield, a sword at his girdle, a halberd in his hand.  He went up into the island and along the border of a wood.  He had now drawn a hood over his helm. He came where  there were some lads, and with them large sheepdogs. And  when they began to exchange words, he asked whence they  were, and why they were there, and had such big dogs.  They said: ‘ You must be a very silly fellow ; have you not  heard that a bear goes about the island here, a great pest ?  He kills both men and sheep, and a price is set upon his head.  We watch here at Askr every night over our flocks that are  penned in the fold. But why go you at night thus armed ?' - 

He answered: ‘I, too, am afraid of the bear; and few,  methinks, now go weaponless. He has long pursued me  to-night. See there now, where he is in the skirt of the  wood! Are all asleep at this farmhouse ?” | 

The boy said that Bergonund and Frodi would be drinking  still; ‘they sit at it every night.’ 

‘Then tell them,’ said Egil, ‘where the bear is; but I  will hasten home.’ 

So he went away ; but the boy ran home to the farm-  house, and into the room where they were drinking. All  had gone to sleep save these three, Onund, Frodi, and.  Hadd. The boy told them where the bear was. They  took their weapons which hung there by them, and at once  ran out and up to the wood. 

From the main forest ran out a spur of wood with scattered  bushes. The boy told them where the bear had been in  the bushes. Then they saw that the branches moved,  whence they guessed that the bear would be there. Then  Bergonund advised that Hadd and Frodi should run for-  ward between the shrubs and the main forest, and stop the  bear from gaining the wood. Bergonund ran forward to  the bushes. He had helm and shield, a sword at his girdle,  a halberd in his hand. Egil was there before him in the  bushes, but no bear. — 

And when he saw where Bergonund was, he unsheathed 


120 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


his sword, and, taking the coil of cord attached to the hilt,  wound it round his arm, and so let the sword hang. In his  hand he grasped his halberd, and then ran forward to meet  Bergonund. Which when Bergonund saw, he quickened his  pace and cast his shield before him, and ere they met  each hurled his halberd at the other. 

Egil opposed the halberd with shield held aslant, so that  the halberd with a cut tore out of the shield and flew into  the ground. But Egil’s weapon came full on the middle  of the shield, and went right through it far up the blade, and  the weapon was fast in the shield. Onund’s shield was thus  cumbersome. ‘Then quickly did Egil grasp his sword-hilt.  Onund also began to draw his sword; but ere it was half  drawn Egil pierced him with a thrust. Onund reeled at  the blow; but Egil suddenly snatched back his sword, and  made a cut at Onund, well-nigh taking off his head. Then  Egil took his halberd out of the shield. 

Now Hadd and Frodi saw Bergonund’s fall, and ran  thither. Egil turned to meet them. At Frodi he threw his  halberd, which, piercing the shield, went into his breast  and out at his back. At once he fell back dead. Then,  taking his sword, Egil turned against Hadd, and they ex-  changed but few blows ere Hadd fell Just then the herd-  boys chanced to come up. Egil said to them: ‘ Watch you  here by Onund your master and his friends, that no beast  or bird tear their bodies.’ 

Egil then went his way, and before long eleven of his  comrades met him, six staying to watch the ship. They  asked him what success he had had. Whereupon he sang: 

‘ Long did we losers sit,  Losers through him who took  With greed the gold that once  To guard I better knew:  Till now Bergonund’s bane  My blade with wounds hath wrought,  And hidden earth in veil  Of Hadd’s and Frodi’s blood.’ 

Then Egil said: ‘We will now turn back to the farm,  and act in warlike-wise, slaying all the men we can, and  taking all the booty we can come by.’ 

_ They went to the farm, rushed into the house, and slew 


THE SLAYING OF BERGONUND AND ROGNVALD 121 


there fifteen or sixteen men. Some escaped by running  away. They plundered the place, destroying what they  could not take with them. The cattle they drove to the  shore and slaughtered, putting on board as much as the  boat would hold ; then they rowed out by the sound between  the islands. Egil was now furious, so that there was no  speaking with him. He sat at the boat’s helm. 

And when they got further out in the firth towards  Herdla, then came rowing out towards them Rognvald the  king’s son with twelve more on the painted pinnace. ‘They  had now learnt that Egil’s ship lay in Herdla-water, and  they meant to take to Onund news of Egil’s whereabouts.  And when Egil saw the boat, he knew it at once. Straight  for it he steered ; and when the boats came together, the  beak of the cutter struck the side of the pinnace’s bow,  which so heeled over that the water poured in on one side  and the boat filled. Egil leapt aboard, grasping his halberd,  and cried to his men to let no one in the pinnace escape  with life. This was easy, for there was no defence, All  were slain as they swam, none escaped. Thirteen there  perished, Rognvald and his comrades. Then Egil and his  men rowed to Herdla-island, and Egil sang a stave: 

; ‘TI fought, nor feared vengeance ;  Falchion there reddened  Blood of son of Bloodaxe,  Bold king, and his queen.  Perish’d on one pinnace  Prince with twelve his liege-men,  Such stress of stern battle  Against them I stirred.’  And when Egil and his men came to Herdla, at once fully  armed they ran up to the farm buildings. But when Thorir  and his household saw that, they at once ran away and  saved themselves, all that could go, men and women. Egil’s  party plundered the place of all they could lay hands on3;.  then they rowed out to their ship. Nor had they long to  wait ere a breeze blew off the land. They made ready to sail. 

And when all was ready for sailing, Egil went up into the  island. He took in his hand a hazel-pole, and went to a  rocky eminence that looked inward to the mainland. Then  he took a horse’s head and fixed it on the pole. After that, 


122 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


in solemn form of curse, he thus spake: ‘ Here set I up a  curse-pole, and this curse I turn on king Eric and queen  Gunnhilda. (Here he turned the horse’s head landwards.)  This curse I turn also on the guardian-spirits who dwell in .  this land, that they may all wander astray, nor reach or find  their home till they have driven out of the land king Eric  and Gunnhilda.’ 

This spoken, he planted the pole down in a rift of the  rock, and let it stand there. The horse’s head he turned  inwards to the mainland; but on the pole he cut runes,  expressing the whole form ‘of curse. 

After this Egil went aboard the ship. They made sail,  and sailed out to sea. Soon the breeze freshened, and blew  strong from a good quarter; so the ship ran On apace.  Then sang Egil: | 

‘ Forest-foe, fiercely blowing,  Flogs hard and unceasing  With sharp storm the sea-way  That ship’s stern doth plow. -  The wind, willow-render,  With icy gust ruthless  Our sea-swan doth buffet  O’er bowsprit and beak.’ | 

Their voyage sped well; .from the main they came tnto  Borgar-firth, brought their ship into the haven, carried  their baggage on shore. Egil then went home to Borg;  but his crew found them lodging. Skallagrim was now old  and weak with age. Egil took the management of the  property and care of the house. 

cA 


?  CHAPTER LXI.  Death of Shallagrim. 


HERE was a man named Thorgeir. He had to wife 

Thordis Yfgvar’s daughter, Egil’s mother’s sister. 

Thorgeir dwelt on Swan-ness at Lambstead. He 

had come out to Iceland with Yngvar. He was wealthy and 

much honoured of men. Thorgeir and his wife had a son 

Thord, who was dwelling at Lambstead after his father,  when Egil now came back to Iceland. 


DEATH OF SKALLAGRIM 123 


It chanced in the autumn, shortly before winter, that  Thord rode in to Borg to find Egil his kinsman ; and he  bade him to a banquet. He had had ale brewed out at his  home. Egil promised to go, and a day was fixed about a  week thence. So when the time came, Egil prepared to  go, and with him Asgerdr his wife ; they were a company of  ten or twelve in all. 

But just when Egil was ready, Skallagrim went out with  him, and embracing him before he mounted said: ‘ You’  are late, methinks, Egil, in paying to me that money which  king Athelstan sent me. What do you mean to do with  that money ?’ 

Egil answered, ‘ Are you very short of money, father? I  did not know it. I shall at once let you have silver, when  I know you need it ; but I know that you still have in your  keeping one or two chests full of silver.’ 

‘I suppose,’ said Skallagrim, ‘you think that we have.  made our division of the movable property. You must now  be content if I do what I like with what money I have in  keeping.’ 

Egil answered: ‘You cannot think you need to ask any  leave from me in this ; for you will choose to have it your  ~ Own way, whatever I may say.’ . 

Then Egil rode away till he came to Lambstead, where  he was made heartily welcome ; he was to be there three  nights. That same evening that Egil left home, Skallagrim  had a horse saddled. He then rode out just when others  were going to bed. When he went away, he bore before  him on his knees a very large chest; but under his arm he  carried a brazen kettle. It has been since held for certain  that he let down one or both into Krum’s bog-hole, and  dropped a large stone slab atop of them. Skallagrim came  home about midnight, and then went to his place and lay  ‘down in his clothes. But in the morning, when it was light  and people were dressed, there sat Skallagrim forward on  the seat’s edge, already dead, and so stiff that they could not  straighten him nor move him, though they tried all they could. 

Then a man was put on horseback, who galloped off as  hard as he might to Lambstead. At once he sought Egil,  and told him these tidings. Then Egil took his weapons 


124 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


and clothes and rode home, reaching Borg by eventide.  And at once on dismounting he went in, and to the passage  that was round the hall, with doors leading from the passage  to the seats inside. Egil went on to the chief seat, and  took Skallagrim by the shoulders, and forced him back-  wards, and laid him down in the seat, and rendered then  the services tothe dead. ‘Then Egil bade them take digging  tools and break open the wall on the south side. When  this was done, then Egil supported the head and others the  feet of Skallagrim ; and so they bore him athwart the house  out through the breach in the wall just made. Then they  bore him immediately down to Nausta-ness. There for  the night a tent was set over the body; but in the morning  with flood-tide Skallagrim was put on a boaf and rowed out  to Digra-ness. There Egil had a mound raised on the point  of the ness. Therein was laid Skallagrim, with his horse,  his weapons, and his smithy tools. It is not told that any  valuables were laid in the mound beside him. | 

Egil took the heritage, lands and chattels. Thence-  forward he ruled the house. With Egil there was Thordis,  daughter of Thorolf and Asgerdr. 


o 


CHAPTER LXITI.  Egil’s voyage to England. 


: ING ERIC ruled over Norway one year after the death  of his father King Harold, before Hacon Athelstan’s  foster-son, another son of Harold, came out of the 

west from England ; and in that same summer Egil Skalla- 

grimsson went to Iceland. Hacon went northwards to Thrond-  heim. He was there accepted as king. He and Eric were  for the winter both kings in Norway. But in the following 

spring each gathered an army. Hacon had by far the larger 

’ numbers; the reason of this was that he made it law in the 

land that every man should own his patrimony, where king 

Harold had enslaved all, rich and poor alike. Eric saw no 

other choice but to flee the land; so he went abroad with 

Gunnhilda his wife and their children. Lord Arinbjorn was 


EGIL’S VOYAGE TO ENGLAND ‘¥25 


king Efic’s foster-brother, and foster-father of his son.  Dear to the king was he above all his barons; the king had  set him as ruler over all the Firth-folk. Arinbjorn was with  the king when he left the land; they first went westwards  over the main to the Orkneys. There Eric gave his daughter  Ragnhildr in marriage to earl Arnfinn. After that he went  south with his force along the coast of Scotland, and harried  there; thence still south to England, and harried there.  And when king Athelstan heard of this, he gathered force  and went against Eric. But when they met, terms were  proposed, and the terms were that king Athelstan gave to  Eric the government of Northumberland ; and he was to be  for king Athelstan defender of the land against the Scots  and Irish. Athelstan had made Scotland tributary under  him after the death of king Olaf, but that people were con-  stantly disloyal to him. The story goes that Gunnhilda had  a spell worked, this spell being that Egil Skallagrimsson  should find no rest in Iceland till she had seen him. But  in that summer when Hacon and Eric had met and con-  tended for Norway, all travel to any land from Norway was  forbidden ; so in that summer there came to Iceland from  Norway neither ship nor tidings. Egil Skallagrimsson abode  at his home. 

But during the second winter that he was living at Borg  after Skallagrim’s death Egil became melancholy, and this  was more marked as the winter wore on. And when  summer came, Egil let it be known that he meant to make  ready his ship for a voyage out in the summer. He then  got a crew. } He purposed to sail to England. They were  thirty men on the ship. Asgerdr remained behind, and  took charge of the house. Egil’s purpose was to seek king  Athelstan and look after the promise that he had made to  Egil at their last parting. 


It was late ere Egil was ready, and when he put to sea,  the winds delayed him. Autumn then came on, and rough  weather set in. {They sailed. past the north coast of the  Orkneys. Egil would not put in there, for he thought king  Eric’s power would be supreme all over the islands. Then  they sailed southwards past Scotland, and had great storms 


126 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


and cross winds. Weathering the’ Scotch coast they held  on southwards along England ; but on. the evening of a day,  cas darkness came on, it blew. a gale. . Before they were  aware, breakers were both seaward and ahead. There was  nothing for.it but to make for land, and this they did.  Under sail they ran ashore, and came to land at Humber-  mouth. All the men were saved, and most of the cargo,  but as for the ship, that was broken to pieces. 

When they found men to speak with, they learnt these  tidings, which Egil thought good, that with king Athelstan  all was well and with his kingdom: but other tidings were  there which Egil thought dangerous, to wit, that king Eric  Bloodaxe was there and Gunnhilda, and they had the govern-  ment of the province, and Eric was but a short way up the  country in the town of York. This also Egil learnt, that  lord Arinbjorn was there with the king, and in great friend-  ship with him. 

And when Egil got to know these tidings, he resolved  what to do. He thought he had little hope of escape,  though he should try to conceal himself and to go disguised  as long as he might till he were clear of Eric’s dominions.  For he was at that time easily known by such as should see  him. He thought also it were a mean man’s fate to be  ‘captured in such flight. So he took a bold heart, and re-  solved that at once, in that very night when they came there,  he would get him a horse and ride to the town. He came  there in the evening, and rode at once into the town. He  had now a hood drawn over his helm, and was fully armed. 

Egil inquired where in the town Arinbjorn was housed.  It was told him. Thither he rode.to the house. When he  came to the hall-door, he dismounted from his horse, and  found a man to speak to. It was told him that Arinbjorn  sat at meat. : 

Egil said: ‘I would fain, good fellow, you should go into  the hall and ask Arinbjorn whether he will rather speak  without or within to Egil Skallagrimsson.’ 

The man said: ‘’Tis but little trouble for me to do this  errand.’ ; 

He went into the ‘hall, and spoke quite loud: ‘There is  a man come here out before the door,’ said he, ‘big as a 


EGIL’S VOYAGE TO ENGLAND . 127 


giant, and he begged me go in and ask whether thou wouldst  rather without or within speak to Egil Skallagrimsson.’ 

Arinbjorn said: ‘Go and beg him to bide without, nor  shall he need to bide long.’ 

He did as Arinbjorn told him, went out and said what  had been saidto him. | 

Arinbjorn bade take up the tables ; then went he out and  all his house-carles with him. 

And when Arinbjorn met Egil, he greeted him well, and  asked why he was come there. 

Egil in few words told him clearly of his journey: ‘And  now you shall see what counsel I ought to take, if you will  give me any help.’ 

‘Have you,’ said Arinbjorn, ‘before you came to this  house met any men in the town who are aby to have  known you Pe 

‘None,’ said Egil. 

‘Let men then take their weapons,’ said Arinbjorn. 

They did so. But when all were armed, then went they 

to the king’s house. And when they came to the hall, then  Arinbjorn knocked at the door, asking them to open, and  saying who was there. The door-keepers at once opened  the door. The king was sitting at table.  . Arinbjorn then bade that they should go in twelve in  number, naming for this Egil and ten others. ‘ Now shall  you, Egil, bring the king your head and clasp his foot, but  I will be your spokesman.’ 

Then they went in. Arinbjorn went before the king and  saluted him. The king received him, and asked what he  would have. 

Arinbjorn said: ‘I lead hither one who has come.a ‘long  way to seek thee in thy place, and to be reconciled to thee.  Great is this honour to thee, my lord, when thine. enemies  travel of their own free will from other lands, and deem  they cannot endure thy wrath though thou be nowhere near.  Now show thyself princely to this man.: Let him get. of  thee good terms, seeing that he hath so magnified..thine  honour, as thou now mayst see, by braving many-seas, and  dangers to come hither from his own home...,No compulsion  drove him to this journey, nought but goodwill to thee.’ 


128 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Then the king looked round, and saw over men’s heads  where Egil stood. ‘The king knew him at once, and, darting  a keen glance at him, said: ‘ How wert thou so bold, Egil,  that thou daredst to come before me? Thy last parting  from me was such that of life thou couldst have from me no  hope.’ 

Then went Egil up to the table, and clasped the foot of  the king. He then sang: 

6 With cross-winds far cruising  I came on my wave-horse,  Eric England’s warder  Eager soon to see.  Now wielder of wound-flash,  Wight dauntless in daring,  That strong strand of Harold’s  Stout lineage I meet.’ 

King Eric said: ‘I need not to count the crimes on thy  hands, for they are so many and great that each one might  well warrant that thou go not hence alive. Thou hast  nothing else to expect but that here thou must die. This  thou mightest know before, that thou wouldst get no terms  from me.’ 

Gunnhilda said: ‘Why shall not Egil be slain at once?  Rememberest thou no more, O king, what Egil hath done  to thee—slain thy friends and kin, ay, even thine own son  to boot, and cursed thyself? Where ever was it known that  a king was thus dealt with?’ ° 

Arinbjorn said: ‘If Egil have spoken evil of the king,  for that he can now atone in words of praise that shall live  for all time.’ 

Gunnhilda said: ‘We will hear none of his praise. O  king, bid Egil be led out and beheaded. I will neither hear  his words nor see him.’ 

Then said Arinbjorn: ‘The king will not let himself be  egged on to all thy dastardly work. He will not have Egil  slain by night, for night-slaying is murder.’ 

The king said: ‘So shall it be, Arinbjorn, as thou  demandest. Egil shall live this night. Take thou him  home with thee, and bring him to me in the morning.’ 

. Arinbjorn thanked the king for his words: ‘We hope,  my lord, that henceforth Egil’s cause will take a better turn. 


EGIL’S VOYAGE TO ENGLAND 12g 


And though Egil has done great wrong against thee, yet  look thou on this, that he has suffered much from thee  and thy kin. King Harold thy father took the life of  Thorolf, a man of renown, Egil’s father’s brother, for the  slander of bad men, for no crime at all. And thou, O king,  didst break the law in Egil’s case for the sake of Bergonund;  nay further thou didst wish to doom his death, and didst  slay his men, and plunder all his goods, and withal didst  make him an outlaw and drive him from the land. And  Egil is one who will stand no teasing. But in every cause  under judgment one must look on the act with its reasons.  I will now have Egil in keeping for the night.’ 

Then Arinbjorn and Egil went back to the house, and  when they came in they two went into a small upper room  and talked over this matter. Arinbjorn said: ‘The king  just now was very wroth, yet methought his mood rather  softened before the end, and fortune will now decide what  may be the upshot. I know that Gunnhilda will set all her  mind on marring your cause. Now I would fain that we  take this counsel: that you be awake through the night, and  compose a song of praise about king Eric. I should think  it had best be a poem of twenty stanzas, and you might  recite it to-morrow when we come before the king. Thus  did Bragi my kinsman, when he was under the wrath of  Bjorn king of Sweden; he composed a poem of praise  about him in one night, and for it received his head. Now  may we also have the same luck with the king, that you  may make your peace with him, if you can offer him the  poem of praise.’ 

Egil said: ‘I shall try this counsel that you wish, but  *twas the last thing I ever meant, to sing king Eric’s praises.’ 

Arinbjorn bade him try. 

Then Arinbjorn went away, and had food and drink  carried to the upper room. Egil was there alone for the  night. Arinbjorn went to his men, and they sate over drink  till midnight. Then Arinbjorn and his men went to the  sleeping chambers, but before undressing he went up to  the room to Egil, and asked how he was getting on with  the poem. 

Egil said that nothing was done. ‘Here,’ said he, ‘has 


9 


ee 


130 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


sate a swallow by the window and twittered all night, so  that I have never got rest for that same.’ 

Whereupon Arinbjorn went away and out by the door  leading up to the house-roof, and he sate by the window of  the upper room where the bird had before sate. He saw  that something of a shape witch-possest moved away from  the roof. Arinbjorn sate there by the window all night till  dawn. But after Arinbjorn had come there, Egil composed  all the poem, and got it so by heart that he could recite it  in the morning when he met Arinbjorn. ‘They watched for  a fit time to go before the king. 


CHAPTER LXIII.  Egil recites the poem. 


ING ERIC went to table according to his wont, and  kK much people were with him. And when Arinbjorn  knew this, then went he with all his followers fully  armed to the king’s palace while the king sate at table.  Arinbjorn craved entrance into the hall; it was granted.  He and Egil went in with half of his followers, but the other  half stood without before the door. Arinbjorn saluted the  king ; the king received him well. Arinbjorn spoke: ‘ Here  now is come Egil. He has not sought to run awayin the night.  Now would we fain know, my lord, what his lot is to be. I  hope thou wilt let him get good from my words, for I think  it a matter of great moment to me that Egil gain terms from  thee. I have so acted (as was right) that neither in word  nor deed have I spared aught whereby thy honour should be  made greater than before. I have also abandoned all my  possessions, kinsmen, and friends that I had in Norway,  and followed thee when all other barons deserted thee ; and  herein do I what is meet, for thou hast often done great  good to me.’ 

Then spoke Gunnhilda: ‘Cease, Arinbjorn, nor prate so  at length of this. Thou hast done much good to king  Eric, and this he hath fully rewarded. Thou owest far  more duty to king Eric than to Egil. It is not for thee 


EGIL RECITES THE POEM. 131 


to ask that Egil go unpunished hence from king Eric’s  presence, seeing what crimes he hath wrought.’ 

Then said Arinbjorn: ‘If thou, O king, and thou Gunn-  hilda, if ye two have resolved that Egil shall here get no  terms, then is this the manly course, to give hirn respite and  leave to go for a week, that he may look out for himself; of  his own free will any way he came hither to seek you, and  therefore hoped for peace. Thereafter, this done, let your  dealings together end as they may.’ 

Gunnhilda said, ‘Well can I see by this, Arinbjorn, that  thou art more faithful to Egil than to king Eric. If Egil is  to ride hence for a week, then will he in this time be come  to king Athelstan. But king Eric cannot now hide this  from himself, that every king is now stronger than is he,  whereas a little while ago it had been deemed incredible  that king Eric would not have the will and energy to avenge  his wrongs on such an one as Egil.’ 

Said Arinbjorn: ‘No one will call Eric a greater man for  slaying a yeoman’s son, a foreigner, who has freely come  into his power. But if the king wishes to achieve greatness  hereby, then will I help him in this, so that these tidings  shall be thought more worthy of record ; for I and Egil will  now back each other, so that we must both be met at once.  Thou wilt then, O king, dearly buy the life of Egil, when  we be all laid dead on the field, I and my followers. Far  other treatment should I have expected of thee, than that  thou wouldst prefer seeing me laid dead on the earth to  granting me the boon I crave of one man’s life.’ 

Then answered the king: ‘A wondrous eager champion  art thou, Arinbjorn, in this thy helping of Egil. Loth  were I to do thee scathe, if it comes to this; if thou wilt  rather give away thine own life than that he be slain. But  sufficient are the charges against Egil, whatever I cause to  be done with him.’ 

And when the king had said this, then Egil advanced  before’: him and began the poem, and recited in a loud  voice, and at once won silence. 


132 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


HEAD-RANSOM. 


I.  ‘“ Westward I sailed the wave,  Within me Odin gave  The sea of song I bear  (So ’tis my wont to fare) :  I launched my floating oak 


When loosening ice-floes broke, 


My mind a galleon fraught 


With load of minstrel thought. 


2. 

‘A prince doth hold me guest,  Praise be his due confess’d :  Of Odin’s mead let draught  In England now be quaff'd.  Laud bear I to the king,  Loudly his honour sing ;  Silence I crave around, 

My song of praise is found. 


3- 

‘Sire, mark the tale I tell,  Such heed beseems thee well ;  Better I chaunt my strain, 

If stillness hush’d I gain.  The monarch’s wars in word  Widely have peoples heard,  But Odin saw alone 

Bodies before him strown. 


_ ©Swell’d of swords the sound  Smiting bucklers round,  Fiercely waxed the fray,  Forward the king made way.  Struck the ear (while blood 


Streamed from glaives in flood) 


Iron hailstorm’s song,  Heavy, loud and long. 


5- 

‘ Lances, a woven fence,  Well-ordered bristle dense ;  On royal ships in line  Exulting spearmen shine.  Soon dark with bloody stain  Seethed there an angry main, 


6. 


‘Of men many a rank  Mid showering darts sank :  Glory and fame  Gat Eric’s name. 


7. 

‘More may yet be told,  An men silence hold :  Further feats and glory,  Fame hath noised in story.  Warriors’ wounds were rife,  Where the chief waged strife ;  Shivered swords with stroke  On blue shield-rims broke. 


‘ Breast-plates ringing crashed,  Burning helm-fire flashed,  Biting point of glaive  Bloody wound did grave.  Odin’s oaks (they say) 

In that iron-play  Baldric’s crystal blade  Bowed and prostrate laid. 


9. 

‘ Spears crossing dashed,  Sword-edges clashed :  Glory and fame  Gat Eric’s name. 


10. 

‘Red blade the king did wield,  Ravens flocked o’er the field.  Dripping spears flew madly,  Darts with aim full deadly.  Scotland’s scourge let feed  Wolf, the Ogress’ steed : 

For erne of downtrod dead  Dainty meal was spread.  If. 

‘ Soared battle-cranes  O’er corse-strown lanes,  Found flesh-fowl’s bill  Of blood its fill. 

While deep the wound  He delves, around 


With war-fleet’s thundering sound, Grim raven’s beak 


With wounds and din around. 


Blood-fountains break. . 


EGIL RECITES THE POEM 


T2.  ‘ Axe furnished feast 


For Ogress’ beast :  Eric on the wave 


To wolves flesh-banquet gave. 


13. 

‘Javelins flying sped,  Peace affrighted fled ;  Bows were bent amain,  Wolves were battle-fain :  Spears in shivers split,  Sword-teeth keenly bit ;  Archers’ strings loud sang,  Arrows forward sprang. 


14. 

‘ He back his buckler flings  From arm beset with rings,  Sword-play-stirrer good,  Spiller of foemen’s blood.  Waxing everywhere  (Witness true I bear), 

East o’er billows came  Eric’s sounding name. 


15. 

‘ Bent the king his yew,  Bees wound-bearing flew :  Eric on the wave 


To wolves flesh-banquet gave. 


16. 

* Yet to make more plain  I to men were fain  High-soul’d mood of king,  But must swiftly sing.  Weapons when he takes,  The battle-goddess wakes,  On ships’ shielded side  Streams the battle-tide. 


v7. 

‘Gems from wrist he gives,  Glittering armlets rives :  Lavish ring-despiser  Loves not hoarding miser.  Frodi’s flour of gold  Gladdens rovers bold ;  Prince bestoweth scorning  Pebbles hand-adorning. 


18.  ‘ Foemen might not stand  For his deathful brand ;  Yew-bow loudly sang, 


Sword-blades meeting rang. 


Lances aye were cast,  Still he the land held fast, 


Proud Eric prince renowned ; 


And praise his feats hath crowned. 


19. 

‘Monarch, at thy will  Judge my minstrel skill :  Silence thus to find  Sweetly cheered my mind. 


Moved my mouth with word 


From my heart’s ground stirred, 


Draught of Odin’s wave  Due to warrior brave. 


20.  © Silence I have broken, 


A sovereign’s glory spoken : 


Words I knew well-fitting  Warrior-council sitting.  Praise from heart I bring,  Praise to honoured king :  ’ Plain I sang and clear  Song that all could hear.’ 


e 


CHAPTER LXIV.  Egil’s life is given him. 


and looked keenly at him. And when the song of 


‘ ING ERIC sate upright while Egil recited the poem, 


praise was ended, then spake the king: ‘ Right well  was the poem recited ; and now, Arinbjorn, I have resolved 


134 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


about the cause between me and Egil, how it shall go. Thou  hast pleaded Egil’s cause with great eagerness, since thou  offerest to risk a conflict with me. Now shall I for thy sake  do what thou hast asked, letting Egil go from my land safe  and unhurt. But thou, Egil, so order thy goings that, after  leaving my presence and this hall, thou never come before  my eyes, nor my sons’ eyes, nor be ever in the way of  myself or my people. But I give thee now thy head this  time for this reason, that thou camest freely into my power.  I will do no dastardly deed on thee; yet know thou this for  sure, that this is no reconciliation with me or my sons or  any of our kin who wish to wreak their vengeance.’ 

Then sang Egil: 

* Loth am I in nowise,  Though in features loathly,  Helm-capt head in pardon  From high king to take.  Who can boast that ever  Better gift he won him,  From a lordly sovereign’s  Noble-minded son ?’ 

Arinbjorn thanked the king with many fair words for the  honour and friendship that he had shown him. Then they  two, Arinbjorn and Egil, went back to Arinbjorn’s house.  After that Arinbjorn bade horses be made ready for his  people. He rode away with Egil, and a hundred fully  armed men with him. Arinbjorn rode with that force till  they came to king Athelstan, where they were well received.  The king asked Egil to remain with him, and inquired how  it had gone between him and king Eric. Whereupon Egil  sang: 

‘ Fgil his eyes black-browed  From Eric, raven’s friend,  Welcomed. Wise help herein 

Wife’s loyal kin lent.  My head, throne of helmet,  An heritage noble,  As erst, from rough rainstorm  To rescue I knew.’ . 


But at the parting of Arinbjorn and Egil, Egil gave  Arinbjorn those two gold rings that king Athelstan had  given him, whereof each weighed a mark. And Arinbjorn 


EGIL’S LIFE IS GIVEN HIM 135 


gave Egil the sword called Dragvandill. This had been  given to Arinbjorn by Thorolf Skallagrimsson ; but before that  Skallagrim had received it from Thorolf his brother; but to  Thorolf the sword was given by Grim Shaggy-skin, son of  Kettle Hzeing. Kettle Hzing had owned the sword and  used it in his single combats, and no sword was there more  biting. Egil and Arinbjorn parted with much affection.  Arinbjorn went home to king Eric at York; but Egil’s  comrades and shipmates had good peace there, and dis-  posed of their cargo under Arinbjorn’s protection. But as  winter wore on they moved south to England and joined Egil. 


y 


CHAPTER LXV.  Egil goes to Norway. 


HERE was a baron in Norway named Fric Allwise. 

He married Thora, daughter of lord Thorir, sister 

of Arinbjorn. He owned property eastwards in Vik. 

He was a very wealthy man, much honoured, of prophetic 

foresight. Son of Eric and Thora was Thorstein; he was 

brought up with Arinbjorn, and was now fully grown, though 

quite young. He had gone westwards to England with  Arinbjorn. | 

But in that same autumn when Egil had come to-  England these tidings were heard from Norway, that Eric  Allwise was dead, but the king’s stewards had taken his  inheritance, and claimed it for the king. These tidings  when Arinbjorn and Thorstein heard, they resolved that  Thorstein should go east and see after the inheritance. 

So when spring came on and men made ready their ships  who meant to travel from land to land, then Thorstein  went south to London, and there found king Athelstan.  He produced tokens and a message from Arinbjorn to the  king and also to Egil, that he might be his advocate with  the king, so that king Athelstan might send a message  from himself to king Hacon, his foster-son, advising that  Thorstein should get his inheritance and possessions in  Norway. King Athelstan was easily persuaded to this,  because Arinbjorn was known to him for good. 


136 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Then came Egil also to speak with king Athelstan, and  told him his intention. 

‘I wish this summer,’ said he, ‘to go eastwards to  Norway and see after that property of which king Eric  and Bergonund robbed me. Atli the Short, Bergonund’s  brother, is now in possession. I know that, if a message of  yours be added, I shall get law in this matter.’ 

The king said that Egil should rule his own goings,  ‘But best, methinks, were it,’ he said, ‘for thee to be with ~  me and be made defender of my land and command my  army. I will promote thee to great honour.’ 

Egil answered: ‘This offer I deem most desirable to  take. I will say yea to it and not nay. Yet have I first to  go to Iceland, and see after my wife and the property that  I have there.’ 

King Athelstan gave then to Egil a good merchant-ship  and a cargo therewith ; there was aboard for lading wheat  and honey, and much money’s worth in other wares. And  when Egil made ready his ship for sea, then Thorstein  Eric’s son settled to go with him, he of whom mention was  made before, who was afterwards called Thora’s son. And  when they were ready they sailed, king Athelstan and Egil  parting with much friendship. 

Egil and his company had a prosperous voyage; they  came to Norway eastwards in Vik, and sailed their ship  right into Osloar-firth, Up on land there Thorstein had  estates, and also inwards as far as Raumarik. And when  Thorstein landed there, he then preferred his claim to his  father’s property before the stewards who were settled on  his. farm. Many lent help to Thorstein in this matter: a  meeting was held about it: Thorstein had there many kins-  men of renown. The end was that it was referred to the  king’s decision, Thorstein meanwhile taking to him the  safe-keeping of his father’s possessions. 

For winter lodgment Egil went to Thorstein’s with eleven  more. ‘Thither to Thorstein’s house was moved the wheat  and honey; a merry time of it they had that winter.  Thorstein kept house in grand style, for provisions were in  plenty. 


EGIL AND THORSTEIN GO BEFORE THE KING 137 


CHAPTER LXVI  Egil and Thorstein go before the king. 


ING HACON Athelstan’s foster-son then ruled Nor-  kK way, as was told before. That winter the king held  court in the north in Throndheim. But as the  winter wore on, Thorstein started on his journey and Egil  with him, and they had about thirty men. When ready  they first went to Upland, thence northwards by the Dovre-  fell to Throndheim, where they came before king Hacon.  They declared their errand with the king. Thorstein ex-  plained his cause, and produced witnesses that he was right-  ful owner of all that inheritance which he claimed. ‘lhe  king received this matter well, and let Thorstein obtain  his possessions, and therewith he was made a baron of  the king even as his father had been. 

Egil also went before king Hacon and declared his  errand, giving therewith king Athelstan’s message and  tokens. Egil claimed, property that had belonged to Bjorn  Yeoman, lands and ‘chattels. Half of this property he  claimed for himself and Asgerdr his wife ¢ and he offered  witness and oaths to his cause. ( He said,,too, that he had  set all this before king Eric, adding that“he had then not  got law, owing to king Eric’s power and the prompting of  Gunnhilda. Egil set forth the whole cause which had been  tried at the Gula-thing. He then begged the king to grant  him law in this matter. ~ 

King Hacon answered: ‘This have I heard, that my  brother Eric and with him Gunnhilda both assert that thou,  Egil, hast cast a stone beyond thy strength in thy dealings  with them. Now, methinks, though I and Eric have not the  luck to agree, yet thou mightest be well content should I  do nothing in this cause.’ 

Egil said: ‘Thou mayest not, O king, be silent about  causes so great, for all men here in the land, natives or  foreigners, must hearken to thy bidding or banning. I have  heard that thou establishest here in the land law and right  for everyone. Now I know that thou wilt let me get these  even as other men. Methinks I am of birth and have 


138 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


strength of kinsfolk enough here in the land to win right  against Atli the Short. But as for the cause between me  and king Eric, there is this to say to thee, that I went  before him, and that we so parted that he bade me go in  peace whither I would. I will offer thee, my lord, my  following and service. I know that there will be here with  thee men who can in no wise be thought of more martial  appearance than I an. . My foreboding is that it will not  be long ere thou and king Eric meet, if ye both live. And  I shall be surprised if thou come not then to think that  Gunnhilda has borne too many sons.’ 

The king said: ‘Thou shalt not, Egil, become my liege-  man. ‘Thy kin have hewn far too many gaps in our house  for it to be well that thou shouldst settle here in this land.  Go thou out to Iceland, and dwell there on thy father’s  inheritance. No harm will there touch thee from our kin;  but in this land ’tis to be looked for that through all thy  days our kin will be the more powerful. _ Yet for the sake  of king Athelstan, my foster-father, thou’shalt have peace  here in the land, and shalt get law and land-right, for I  know that he holds thee right dear.’ 

Egil thanked the king for his words, and prayed that the  king would give him sure tokens to Thord in Aurland, or to  _ other barons in Sogn and Hordaland. The king said that  this should be done. 


Cr a 


? x  CHAPTER LXVII.  Egil slays Ljot the Pale. 


[se soon a and Egil made ready for their journey  so soon as they had ended their errand. They  then went their way back, and when they came 

south over the Dovre-fell, then said Egil that he would go 

down to Raumsdale, and after that south by way of the  sounds. ‘I will,’ said he, ‘finish my business in Sogn and 

Hordaland, for I would fain in the summer take my ship 

out to Iceland.’ Thorstein bade him settle his journey as 

he would. So Thorstein and Egil separated.  Thorstein went south by the dales all the way till he 


EGIL SLAYS L¥OT THE PALE 139 


came to his estates. There he produced the tokens of the  king and his message before the stewards, that they should  give up all that property which they had taken and  Thorstein claimed. No one spoke against it, and he then  took all his property. 

Egil went his way, they being twelve in all. ‘They came  on to Raumsdale, there got them conveyance, and then  went south to Meri. Nothing is told of their journey  before they came to the island called Hod, and went to  pass the night at a farm named Bindheim. This was a  well-to-do homestead, in which dwelt a baron named  Fridgeir. He was young in years, and had but lately  inherited his father’s property. His mother was named  Gyda; she was a sister of lord Arinbjorn, a woman of a  noble presence and wealthy. She managed the house for  her son Fridgeir: they lived in grand style. There Egil  and his company found good welcome. In the evening  Egil sat next to Fridgeir, and his comrades outside him. 

( There was much drink and sumptuous viands. Gyda, the  house-mistress, in the evening had some talk with Egil.  She inquired about Arinbjorn, her brother, and other of  her kinsmen and friends who had gone to England with  Arinbjorn. Egil answered her inquiries. She asked what  tidings had befallen in Egil’s journey. He told her plainly.  ‘Then he sang : 

‘Gloomy on me glowered  In gruesome wrath a king:  But cuckoo faints and fails not  For vulture flapping near.  Aid good from Arinbjorn,  As oft, and peace I gat.  He falls not whom true friends  Help forward on his way.’ 


Egil was very cheerful that evening, but Fridgeir and his  household were rather silent. Egil saw there a maiden fair  and well dressed ;_ he was told that she was Fridgeir’s sister.  The maiden was sad and wept constantly that evening,  which they thought strange. They were there for the night,  but in the morning the wind was blowing hard, and there  was no putting to sea. They needed a boat to take them  from the island. Then went Fridgeir and with him Gyda 


140 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


to Egil, and offered that he and his comrades should stay  there till it was good travelling weather, and should have  thence such help for the journey as they needed. This  Egil accepted. They stayed there weather-bound for three  nights, most hospitably entertained. After that the weather  became calm. 

Then Egil and his men rose up early in the morning  and made ready; then went to meat, and ale was given  them to drink, and they sat awhile. Then they took their  clothes. Egil stood up and thanked the master and mistress  of the house for their entertainment ; then they went out.  The master and his mother went out into the path with  them. Gyda then went to speak with her son Fridgeir, and  talked low with him, Egil standing the while and waiting  for them. 

Egil said to the maiden: ‘Why weep you, maiden? I  never see you cheerful.’ 

She could not answer, but wept the more. Fridgeir now  said to his mother aloud: ‘I will not now ask this. They  are even now ready for their journey.’ 

Then Gyda went to Egil and said: ‘I will tell you, Egil,  how things stand here with us. There is a man named  Ljot the Pale. He isa Berserk and a duellist ; he is hated.  He came here and asked my daughter to wife; but we  answered at once, refusing the match. Whereupon he  challenged my son Fridgeir to wager of battle; and he has  to go to-morrow to this combat on the island called Vors.  Now I wished, Egil, that you should go to the combat with  Fridgeir. It would soon be shown if Arinbjorn were here  in the land, that we should not endure the overbearing of  such a fellow as is Ljot.’ 

‘Egil said: ‘’Tis but my bounden duty, lady, for the sake  of Arinbjorn thy kinsman that I go, if Fridgeir thinks this  any help to him.’ 

‘Herein you do well,’ said Gyda. ‘So we will go back  into the hall, and be all together for the whole day.’ 

Then Egil and the rest went into the hall and drank.  They sate there for the day. But in the evening came those  friends of Fridgeir who had appointed to go with him, and  there was a numerous company for the night, and a great 


EGIL SLAYS L¥OT THE PALE 14! 


banquet. On the morrow Fridgeir made ready to go, and  many with him, Egil being one of the party. It was now  good travelling weather.  They now start, and soon come to the island. There was  a fair plain near the sea, which was to be the place of combat.  The ground was marked out by stones lying round in a ring.  Soon came thither Ljot and his party. Then he made him  ready for the combat. He had shield and sword. Liot  was a man of vast size and strong. And as he came forward  on the field to the ground of combat, a fit of Berserk fury  seized him ; he began to bellow hideously, and bit his shield.  Fridgeir was not a tall man; he was slenderly built, comely  in face, not strong. He had not been used to combats.  But when Egil saw Ljot, then he sang a stave:  ‘It fits not young Fridgeir 

To fight with this warrior, 

Grim gnawer of shield-rim, 

By his gods who doth curse, 

I better may meet him, 

May rescue the maiden ; 


Full fearsome he stareth,  Yet ‘‘ fey” are his eyes.’ 


I.jot saw where Egil stood, and heard his words. He  said: ‘Come thou hither, big man, to the holm, and fight  with me, if thou hast a wish that way. That is a far more  even match than that I should fight with Fridgeir, for I  shall deem me no whit the greater man though I lay him  low on earth.’ 

Then sang Egil : 

* Ljot asketh but little,  Loth were I to baulk him.  Pale wight, my wand pliant  ger Shall play on his mail.  é Come, busk we for combat ;  Nor quarter expect thou :  Strife-stirrer, in Meri  Stern shield-cutting ours.’ 


ies 


After this Egil made him ready for combat with Lot.  Egil had the shield that he was wont to have, was girded  with the sword which he called Adder, but in his hand he  had Dragvandill. He went in over the boundary that 


142 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


marked the battle-ground, but Ljot was then not ready.  Egil shook his sword and sang: 


‘ Hew we with hilt-wands flashing,  Hack we shield with falchion,  Test we moony targets, 

Tinge red sword in blood.  Ljot from life be sundered,  Low stern play shall lay him,  Quelled the quarrel-seeker :  Come, eagles, to your prey.’ 


Then Ljot came forward on the field and declared the  law of combat, that he should ever after bear the name of  dastard who should draw back outside the boundary stones  that were set up in a ring round the field of combat. This  done, they closed, and Egil dealt a blow at Ljot, which  Ljot parried with his shield, but Egil then dealt blow upon  blow so fast that Ljot got no chance for a blow in return.  He drew back to get room for a stroke, but Egil pressed  as quickly after him, dealing blows with all his vigour.  Ljot went out beyond the boundary stones far into the field.  So ended the first bout. Then Ljot begged for a rest.  Egil let it be so. They stopped therefore and rested. And  Egil sang : 

‘ Free-handed gold-giver,  Back goeth yon champion,  In craven fear crouches  This wealth-craving wight.  Not strongly fights spearman  His strokes who delayeth.  Lo beat by a bald-head  This bragging pest flies.’ 


These were the laws of wager of battle in those times,  that when one man challenged another on any claim, and  the challenger gained the victory, then he should have as 

_ prize of victory that which he had claimed in his challenge.  But if he were vanquished, then should he ransom himself  for such price as should be fixed. But if he were slain on  the field, then had he forfeited all his possessions, and he  who slew him in the combat should take his inheritance.  This was also law, that if a foreigner died who had no heir  in the land, then that inheritance fell to the king’s treasury. 


EGIL SLAYS LJOT THE PALE — 143 


And now Egil bade Ljot be ready.  ‘TI will,’ he said, ‘that we now try to the uttermost this  combat.’ | |  Ljot sprang swiftly to his feet. Egil bounded at him and  dealt at once a blowat him. He pressed him so close,  that he was driven back, and the shield shifted from before  him. Then smote Egil at Ljot, and the blow came on him  above the knee, taking off his leg. Ljot then fell and soon  expired. Then Egil went to where Fridgeir and his party  stood. He was heartily thanked for this work. ‘Then  sang Egil:  ‘ Fall’n lies the wolf-feeder,  Foul worker of mischief:  Ljot’s leg by skald sever’d  Leaves Fridgeir in peace.  From the free gold-giver  Guerdon none I seek me,  Sport I deem the spear-din,  Sport with such pale foe.’ 


Ljot’s death was little mourned, for he had been a turbu-  lent bully. He was a Swede by birth, and had no kin there  in the land. He hadcome thither and amassed him wealth  by duels. He had slain many worthy landowners, whom he  had first challenged to wager of battle for their lands and  heritages ; he had now become very wealthy both in lands  and chattels. 

Egil went home with Fridgeir from the field of combat.  He stayed there but a short time before going south to  Meri. Egil and Fridgeir parted with much affection.  Egil charged Fridgeir with the securing of those lands that  had belonged to Ljot. Egil went on his way and came to  the Firths, whence he went into Sogn to seek Thord in  Aurland. Thord received him well; he declared his errand  and the message of king Hacon. These words of Egil  were taken well by Thord, who promised him his help in  this matter. Egil remained there with Thord far into the  spring. 


¥ 


144 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


CHAPTER LXVIII.  Of Egil’s journeyings. 


GIL went on southwards to Hordaland, taking for 

iz this journey a rowing vessel, and thereon thirty 

men. They came on a day to Askr on Fenhring 

island. Egil went up to the house with twenty men, while  ten guarded the ship. 

Atli the Short was there with some men. Egil bade him  be called out and told that Egil Skallagrimsson had an  errand with him. Atli took his weapons, as did all the  fighting men that were there, and then they went out. 

Egil spoke: ‘I am told, Atli, that you hold in keeping  that property which of right belongs to me and my wife  Asgerdr. You will belike have heard it talked of ere now  how I claimed the inheritance of Bjorn Yeoman, which  Bergonund your brother kept from me. I am now come to  look after that property, lands and chattels, and to beg you  to give it up and pay it into my hands.’ 

Said Atl: ‘Long have we heard, Egil, that you are a  most unjust man, but now I shall come to prove it, if you  mean to claim at my hands this property, which king Eric  adjudged to Bergonund my brother. King Eric had then  power to bid and ban in this land. I was thinking now,  Egil, that you would be come here for this end, to offer me  a fine for my brothers whose lives you took, and that you  would pay atonement for the pillage committed by you here  at Askr. I would make answer to this proposal, if you should  plead this errand ; but here to this other I can make none.’ 

‘I shall then,’ said Egil, ‘offer you, as I offered Onund,  that Gula-thing laws decide our cause. Your brothers I  declare to have fallen without claim for fine and through  their own wrong deeds, because they had first plundered me  of law and land-right, and taken my property by force of  arms. I have the king’s leave herein to try the law with  you in this cause. I summon you to the Gula-thing, there  to have lawful decision on this matter.’ 

‘To the Gula-thing,’ said Atli, ‘I will come, and we can  there speak of this matter.’ 


OF EGIL’S FOURNEYINGS. _..,, 145 


- Hereupon Egil with his comrades went away. He went  north to Sogn, then into Aurland to Thord, his wife’s kins-.  man, and there he stayed till the Gula-thing. And when  men came to the Thing, then came Egil thither. Atli the  Short was also there. They began to declare their cause,  and pleaded it before those who were to judge. Egil made  his demand of money due, but Atli offered against it as a  lawful defence the oath of twelve men that he, Atli, had in  keeping no money that belonged to Egil. And when Atli  went before the court with his twelve who should swear,  then went Egil to meet him, and said that he would not  accept Atli’s oaths for his own property. ‘I will offer you  other law, that we do battle here at the Thing, and he shall  have the property who wins the victory.’ _ 

This was also law, that Egil proposed, and ancient custom,  that any man had a right to challenge another to wager of  battle, whether he were defendant in a cause or prosecutor. 

Atli said that he would not refuse thus to do battle with  Egil.. ‘For,’ said he, ‘you propose what I ought to have  proposed, seeing that I have enough loss to avenge on you.  You have: done to death my two brothers, and far shall I  be from upholding the right if I yield to you mine own  possessions unlawfully rather than fight with you when you  offer me this choice.’ 

So then Ath and Egil joined hands and pledged them to  do battle, the victor to own the lands for which they had  been disputing. 

After this they arrayed them for the combat. Egil came  forward with helm on head, and shield before him, and  halberd in hand, but his sword Dragvandill he suspended  from his right arm. It was the custom with those who  fought in single combats so to arrange that the sword should  need no drawing during the fight, but be attached to the  arm, to be ready at once when the combatant willed. Atli  had the same arming as Egil. He was experienced in  single combats, was a strong man, and of a good courage.  To the field was led forth a bull, large and old—‘ sacrificial  beast’ such was termed—to be slain’ by him who won the  victory. . Sometimes there was one such ox, sometimes each  combatant had his own led forth. 

Io 


146 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


And when they were ready for the combat, then ran they  each at the other, and first they threw their halberds, neither  of which stood fast in the foeman’s shield, but both stuck in  the ground. Then took they both to their swords, and  went at it with a will, blow upon blow. Atli gave no  ground. They smote fast and hard, and full soon their  shields were becoming useless. And when Atli’s shield was  of no use, then he cast it from him, and, grasping his sword  with both hands, dealt blows as quickly as possible. Egil  fetched him a blow on the shoulder, but the sword bit not.  He dealt another, and a third. It was now easy to find  parts in Atli that he could strike, since he had no cover;  and Egil brandished and brought down his sword with all  his might, yet it bit not, strike he where he might. Then  Egil saw that nothing would be done this way, for his shield  was now rendered useless. So Egil let drop both sword  and shield, and bounding on Atli, gripped him with his  hands. Then the difference of strength was seen, and Atli  fell right back, but Egil went down prone upon him and  bit through his throat. There Atli died. 

Egil leapt up at once and ran to where the victim stood ;  with one hand he gripped his lips, with the other his horn,  and gave him such a wrench, that his feet slipped up and  his neck was broken; after which Egil went where his  comrades stood, and then he sang : 

*T bared blue Dragvandill,  Who bit not the buckler,  Atli the Short so blunted  All edge by his spells.  Straining my strength I grappled,  Staggered the wordy foeman ;  My tooth I bade bite him,  Best of swords at need.’ 

Then Egil got possession of all those lands for which he  had contended and claimed as rightfully coming to his wife  Asgerdr from her father. Nothing is told of further tidings  at that Thing. Egil then went first into Sogn and arranged  about those lands that he now got into his own power. He  remained there for a great part of the spring. Afterwards  he went with his comrades eastwards to Vik, then to seek  Thorstein, and was there for awhile. | 

att 


Cad 


EGIL COMES OUT TO ICELAND | 347 


CHAPTER LXIX. 


Egil comes out to Iceland. 


N the summer Egil prepared his ship, and, when all was  | ready, at once set sail for Iceland. His voyage sped  well. He came to Borgar-firth and brought in his ship  just below his own house. He had his cargo conveyed home,  and set up his ship. Egil stayed in his home that winter.  He had now brought out very great wealth, and was a very  rich man. He hada large and lofty house. Egil was by no  means meddlesome with other men’s matters, nor generally  presuming when here in Iceland; nor did any try to  encroach on what was his. Egil remained at home now for  years not a few. Egil and Asgerdr had children thus  named: Bodvar a son, and another son Gunnar; Thor-  gerdr a daughter, and Bera. Their youngest was Thorstein.  All Egil’s children were of good promise and intelligence.  Thorgerdr was the eldest of the children, Bera the next. 


CHAPTER LXX. 


Egil goes abroad. 


' GIL heard tidings from east over seas that Eric Blood- 

EK axe had fallen in the west while freebooting ; but  : Gunnhilda and her sons and Eric’s had gone to Den-  mark, and all those that had followed Eric to England had left  that country. This, too, he heard, that Arinbjorn was now  come to Norway. He had taken again the grants and posses-  sions that he had before, and had gotten great favour with  the king. Then Egil thought it desirable again to go to  Norway. Besides this came the tidings that king Athelstan  was dead. His brother Edmund now ruled England. 

So Egil made ready his ship, and got him a crew.  Aunund Sjoni was among them, son of Ani of Anabrekka.  Aunund was tall, and the strongest of those men who were  then in the country-side ; nay, some doubted whether he  were not shape-strong. Aunund had often been on voyages 


148° STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


from land to land. He was somewhat older than Egil ;  there had long been friendship between the two. 

And when Egil was ready he put out to sea, and their  voyage sped well; they came to Mid-Norway. And when  they sighted land, they steered for the Firths. They soon  got tidings from land, and it was told them that Arinbjorn  ‘was at home on his estate. 

Egil put his ship into the haven nearest to Arinbjorn’s  house ; then went he to seek Arinbjorn, and a most joyful  meeting was theirs. Arinbjorn offered quarters to Egil and  such of his men as he liked to bring. This Egil accepted,  and had his ship set up on rollers ; but his crew found them  quarters. Egil and eleven with him went to Arinbjorn’s.  Fgil had caused to be made a long ship’s sail, elaborately  worked ; this he gave to Arinbjorn, and yet other gifts of  value. Egil was there for the winter, treated with much  honour, 

In the winter Egil went southwards to Sogn to collect his  land-rents, staying there some time. After that he came  north again to the Firths. Arinbjorn held a great Yule-feast,  to which he bade his friends and the neighbouring land-  owners. There was there much company and good cheer.  Arinbjorn gave Egil as a Yule-gift a trailing robe made of  silk, and richly broidered with gold, studded with gold  buttons in front all down to the hem. Arinbjorn had had  the robe made to fit Egil’s stature. Arinbjorn gave also to  Egil at Yule a complete suit newly made; it was cut of  English cloth of many. colours. Friendly gifts of many  kinds gave Arinbjorn at Yule to those who were his guests,  for Arinbjorn was beyond all men open-handed and noble. 

Then Egil composed a stave: 

‘ Warrior gave to poet  Silken robe gold-glistering :  Never shall I find me  Friend of better faith.  Arinbjorn untiring  Earneth well his honours : 


For his like the ages  Long may look in vain.’ 


e 


EGIL’S SADNESS 149 


CHAPTER LXXI,  Egil’s sadness. 


GIL after Yule-tide was taken with such sadness that 

iz he spake nota word. And when Arinbjorn perceived 

this he began to talk with Egil, and asked what this 

sadness meant. ‘I wish,’ said he, ‘ you would let me know 

.whether you are sick, or anything ails you, that I may finda  remedy.’ 

Egil said: ‘Sickness of body I have none; but I have  much anxiety about this, how I shall get that property  which I won when I slew Ljot the Pale northwards in  Meera. I am told that the king’s stewards have taken up  all that property, and claimed ownership thereof for the king.  Now I would fain have your help in the recovery of this.’ 

Arinbjorn said: ‘I do not think your claim to the owner-  ship of that property is against the law of the land; yet  methinks the property is now come into strong keeping.  The king’s treasury hath a wide entrance, but a narrow exit.  We have urged many arduous claims of money against  powerful persons, but we were in more confidence with the  king than now; for the friendship between me and king  Hacon is shallow; yet must I act after the old saw: ae  must tend the oak who | is to dwell beneath it.’ 

‘Yet,’ said Egil, ‘my mind is that, if we have law to  show, we should try. Maybe the king will grant us right in  this, for I am told that the king is just and keeps well to  the laws which he has made here in the land. I am rather  minded to go seek the king and try the matter with him.’ 

Arinbjorn said that he did not desire this. ‘I think,  Egil, that these things will be hard to reconcile, your eager-  ness and daring, and the king’s temper and power. For I  deem him to be no friend of yours, and for good reason as  he thinks. I would rather that we let this matter drop, and  did not take it up. But if you wish it, Egil, I will rather  myself go to the king and moot the question.’ 

Egil said that he thanked him heartily, and would choose  it to be so. 

Hacon was then in Rogaland, but at times in Hordaland; 


150 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


there was no difficulty in finding him. And not long after  this talk Arinbjorn made ready for his journey. It was  then publicly known that he purposed to seek the king.  He manned with his house-carles a twenty-oared galley that  he had. Egil was to stay at home; Arinbjorn would not .  have him go. Arinbjorn started when ready, and _ his  journey went well; he found king Hacon, and was well  received. .  ' And when he had been there a little while, he declared  his errand before the king, and said that Egil Skallagrims-  son was come there in the land, and thought he had a  claim to all that property that had belonged to Ljot the  Pale. ‘We are told, O king, that Egil pleads but law in  this ; but your stewards have taken up the property, and  claimed ownership for you. I would pray you, my lord,  that Egil may get law herein.’ 

The king was slow to speak, but at length answered: ‘I  know not, Arinbjorn, why thou comest with such pleading  for Egil, He came once before me, and I told him that I  would not have him sojourn here in the land, for reasons  which ye already know. Now Egil must not set up such  claim before me as he did before my brother Eric. And to  thee, Arinbjorn, I have this to say, that thou mayest be here  in the land only so long as thou preferrest not foreigners  before me and my word ; for I know that thy heart is with  Harold son of Eric, thy foster-son ; and this is thy best  choice, to go to those brothers and be with them ; for I  strongly suspect that men like thee will be ill to trust to, if  I and Eric’s sons ever have to try conclusions.’ 

And when the king had so spoken, Arinbjorn saw that it  would not do to plead this cause any further with him ; so  he prepared to return home. The king was rather sullen  and gloomy towards Arinbjorn after he knew his errand ;  but Arinbjorn was not in the mood to humble himself before  the king about this matter. And so they parted. 

Arinbjorn went home and told Egil the issue of his  errand. ‘I will not,’ said he, ‘again plead such a cause to  the king.’ 

Egil at this report frowned much; he thought he had lost  much wealth, and wrongfully. A few days after, early one 


“a 


OF ARINBFORN’S HARRYING 15! 


morning when Arinbjorn was in his chamber and few men  were present, he had Egil called thither; and when he came,  then Arinbjorn had a chest opened, and weighed out forty  marks of silver, adding ‘these words: ‘This money I pay  you, Egil, for those lands which belonged to Ljot the Pale. 


‘I deem it just that you should have this reward from me 


and my kinsman Fridgeir for saving his life from Ljot; for 


‘I know that you did this for love of me. I therefore am 


bound not to let you be cheated of your lawful right in this 


-matter.’ 


Egil took the money, and thanked Arinbjorn. Then Egil  again became quite cheerful. 


CHAPTER LXXII.  Of Arinbjorn’s harrying. 


RINBJORN stayed at home on his estate that winter,  but in the next spring he let it be known that he  meant to go a-freebooting. Arinbjorn had good 


choice of ships. He made ready in the spring three war- ©  ‘ships, all large, and he had three hundred men. His  hhouse-carles he had on his own ship, which was excellently  equipt; he had also with him many landowners’ sons. 


Egil settled to go with him; he steered a ship, and with  him went many of the comrades whom he brought from  Iceland. But the merchant-ship which he brought from  Iceland he caused to be moved eastwards to Vik, getting  some men there to dispose of the cargo. 

But Arinbjorn and Egil with the war-ships held a south-  ward course along the coast; then took their force still  southwards to Saxland, where ‘they harried in the summer 


and got wealth. As autumn came on they came back 


northward harrying, and lay off Friesland. One night when  the weather was calm they went up a large river-mouth, 


where was bad harbourage, and the ebb of the tide was  ‘great. There up on land were wide flats with woods hard  by. The fields were soaked because there had been much 


rain. They resolved to go up there, and left behind a third 


152 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


of their force to guard the ships. They followed up the  river, keeping between it and the woods. Soon they came  to a hamlet where dwelt several peasants. The people ran  ‘out of the hamlet into the fields, such as could do so, when  they perceived the enemy, but the freebooters pursued  them. Then they came to a second village, and a third ;  ‘all the people fled before them. The land was level, flat  fields everywhere, intersected by dykes full of water. By  these the corn-lands or meadows were enclosed; in some  places large stakes were set, and over the dyke, where men  should go, were bridges and planks laid. The country  folk fled to the forest. But when the freebooters had gone  far into the settled parts, the Frisians gathered them in the  woods, and when they had assembled three hundred men,  they went against the freebooters resolved to give them  battle. There was then some hard fighting; but the end  was that the Frisians fled and the freebooters pursued the  fugitives. The peasants that escaped were scattered far and  wide, and so were their pursuers. Thus it happened that  on either side few kept together. 

Egil was hotly pursuing, and a few with him, after a  numerous company that fled. The Frisians came to a  dyke, over which they went, and then drew away the  bridge. Then came up Egil and his men on the other  bank. Egil at once went at the dyke and leapt it, but it  was no leap for other men, and no one tried it. But when  the Frisians saw that but one man was following, they turned  back and attacked him, but he defended himself well, and  used the dyke to cover him behind so that they could not  attack him on all sides. Eleven men set on him, but the  end of their encounter was that he slew them all. After  that Egil pushed out the bridge over the dyke, and crossed  it back again. He then saw that all his people had turned  back to the ships. He was then near the wood, and he  now went along the wood towards the ships so that he had  the choice of the wood if he needed its shelter. ‘The free-  booters had brought down to the shore much booty and  cattle. And when they came to the ships, some slaughtered  the cattle, some carried out the plunder to the ships, some  stood higher up and formed a shield-burgh ; for the Frisians 


OF ARINBFORN’S HARRYING . 153 


were come down in great force and were shooting at them,  being also in battle array. And when Egil came down and  saw how matters stood, he ran at full speed right at the  throng. His halberd he held before him grasped in both  hands, and slung his shield behind his back. He thrust  forward his halberd, and all before him started aside, and so  gat he a passage right through their ranks. Thus he dashed  down to his men, who looked on him as recovered from the  dead. 

Then they went on ship-board, and loosed from land.  They sailed then to Denmark. And when they came to  Lima-firth and lay at Hals, Arinbjorn held a meeting of his  men, and laid before them his plans. ‘Now will I,’ said he,  ‘go seek Eric’s sons with such force as will follow me. I  have now learnt that the brothers are in Denmark here, and  maintain a large following, and spend the summers in harry-  ing, but for the winters abide here in Denmark. I now give  leave to all to go to Norway who would rather do that than  follow me. For you, Egil, methinks, the best counsel is  that, as soon as we part, you return to Norway, and then on  with all speed to Iceland.’ 

Then the men separated to their several ships. Those  who wished to go back to Norway joined Egil, but by far  the larger part of the force followed Arinbjorn. Arinbjorn  and Egil parted in love and friendship. Arinbjorn went to  seek Eric’s sons, and joined the company of Harold Gray-  fell his foster-son, and was with him henceforth so long as  they both lived. 

Egil went northwards to Vik, and into Osloar-firth. There  was his merchant ship which he had caused to be moved  thither in the spring. There were also his cargo and the  men who had gone with the ship. Thorstein Thora’s son  came to seek Egil, and asked him and such men as he  would bring to stay with him that winter. Egil accepted  the offer, had his ship set up and the cargo safely bestowed.  Of his followers some got quarters there, some went to their  several homes in the north. Egil in a company of ten or  twelve went to Thorstein’s, and remained there for the  winter an honoured guest. 


epee 


is  Side | 


154 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


CHAPTER LXXIII.  Mission to Vermaland. 


( ING HAROLD FAIRHAIR had subdued Verma-  land eastwards as far as Lake Wener. Vermaland  had first been cleared and tilled by Olaf Tree- 

cutter, father of Halfdan Whitebone, who first of his family 

was king in Norway; and from him on the father’s side  was king Harold descended, and all his forefathers had  ruled over Vermaland and taken tribute therefrom, and set  men in charge over the land. But when Harold was grown  old, then was an earl named Arnvid governor of Vermaland.  It happened there, as elsewhere, that the tribute was worse  paid now than when Harold was in the vigour of life. So  also was it when Harold’s sons. strove for the rule in Norway,  the -outlying tributary lands were little looked after. But  when Hacon sat in peace, then enquired he after all the  empire that his father Harold had had. King Hacon had  sent eastwards to Vermaland a company of twelve men.  These had received the tribute from the earl. But as they  were going back by Eida-wood, robbers set upon them and  slew them all. The same hap befell yet other messengers  sent by king Hacon eastwards to Vermaland ; the men were  slain, and no money was brought back. Then was it said  by some that earl Arnvid belike set men of his own to  slay the king’s men, while he kept the tribute for himself. 

Whereupon king Hacon sent yet a third company. 

He was then in Throndheim ; the messengers were to go  to Vik and seek Thorstein Thora’s son with these words,  that he should go eastwards to Vermaland and gather in the  tribute for the king, or else he must leave the land. For  the king had heard that Arinbjorn Thorstein’s mother’s  brother was gone southwards to Denmark and was with  Eric’s sons, and further that they had a large following and  spent the summer in harrying. King Hacon mistrusted the  loyalty of all this company, expecting as he did hostilities  from Eric’s sons if they had but strength to raise rebellion  against him. And to Arinbjorn’s kinsmen and friends he 


MISSION TO VERMALAND : 155 


showed great dislike, putting some to death, driving some  from the land, or laying on them other hard conditions.  And so it was that before Thorstein the king put this choice. 

The man who bore this message was named Kol; he  was a man of all lands ; he had been long in Denmark and  In Sweden, and knew all about ways.and men there. In  Norway too he had travelled widely. And when he brought  this proposal to Thorstein Thora’s son, then Thorstein told  Egil upon what errand these men came, and asked how he  should answer them ; he said that it seemed a hard thing  for him to lose his possessions and be driven out of the  land. 

Egil said: ‘It is to me quite clear what this message  means ; the king will have you out of the land like others  of Arinbjorn’s kin, for I call sending a man of your noble-  ness on such errand a sending to certain death. My advice  is that you call the king’s messengers to conference with  you, and I will be present at your talk, and we will see what  comes of it.’ 

Thorstein did as he bade; he held conference with them.  The messengers told all the truth of their errand and of the  king’s message, that Thorstein must go on this mission or  else be outlawed. 

Egil said: ‘I see clearly about your errand, that if  Thorstein refuses to go, then you will have to go and gather  in the tribute.’ The messengers said that he guessed rightly.  Said Egil: ‘Thorstein shall not go on this journey; for  he is in nowise bound thereto, a man of his renown, to go  on such mean missions. Thorstein will do that whereto  he is bound, to wit, attend the king within the land or with-  out, if the king demands it. Also, if ye want to have  some men from hence for this journey, this will be granted  you, and all such furtherance of your journey as ye may 

name to Thorstein.’ 

Then the messengers talked among themselves, and  agreed that they would accept these terms, if Egil would go  with them on the journey. ‘The king,’ they said, ‘ bears  him great ill-will, and he will think our journey a right good  one if we bring it about that Egil be slain. He can then  drive Thorstein out of the land if he pleases.’ So they told 


156 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


Thorstein ‘that they would be content if Egil went and  Thorstein stayed at home. 

‘So shall it be,’ said Egil. ‘I will release Thorstein from  this journey. But how many men think ye that ye need  to take from hence ?” 

‘We are eight,’ said they ; ‘we would fain have four men  go from hence; then are we twelve.’ 

Egil said it should be so. Aunund Sjoni and some of  Egil’s company had gone out to sea, to look after their ship  and another cargo which they had given into safe keeping  in the autumn, and they had not yet returned. Egil thought  this a great pity, but the king’s men were impatient to be  gone, and would not wait. 


CHAPTER LXXIV.  Journey to Vermaland. 


GIL with three comrades made him ready for the  E journey. They had horses and sledges, and so  had the king’s men. There was then deep snow,  and all the roads were effaced. They betook them to their  journey when they were ready, and sledged up the land ;  and when they came eastwards near Elida, it happened one  night that so much fresh snow fell that they could not see  the way. On the morrow they travelled slowly, because  there were snowdrifts directly one left the track. And as  the day wore on they stopped to bait their horses ; this was  near a wooded ridge. Then spoke the king’s men with  Egil: ‘ Here now the roads divide ; forward below the ridge  dwells a landowner named Arnold, our friend ; we with our  party will go and lodge there. But you shall go yonder up  the ridge, and when you come over it you will soon have  before you a large house where you are sure of lodging. A  wealthy man dwells there, Armod Beard by name. But  to-morrow early we will again join company and. go on the  next evening to Eida-wood. There dwells a worthy land-  owner named Thorfinn.’  Upon this they separated, Egil and his men going up the  ridge. But of the king’s men this is to be told, that no 


wt a 


¥OURNEY TO VERMALAND | 157 


sooner were they and Egil out of sight of each other, than  they took their snow-shoes (which they had brought with  them)-and put them on; then they retraced their way as  fast as they could. Night and day they travelled, and  turned toward Upland, thence north by the Dovre- fell, nor  stayed they till they caine before king Hacon, and told him  of their journey, how it had sped. 

Egil and his comrades crossed the ridge that evening.  To be brief, so soon ‘as they left the main road and got  upon the ridge, they found deep snow, ‘steep rocks, tangled  copsewood. Now and again in the snow the horses so  plunged and lay that they had to be pulled up out of it,  and over rocks and crags was a hard struggle. Much ado  had they with the horses ; but the walking for the men was  of the heaviest, and sorely wearied were they when they  came off the ridge and saw before them a large house, for  which they made. 

And when they came to the enclosure, they saw men  standing outside, Armod and some of his household. They  exchanged words and asked each other’s tidings, and when  Armod knew that they were messengers of the king, he  offered them lodging. ‘This they accepted. Armod’s house-  carles took their horses and harness; but the master bade  Egil go into the hall, and they did so. 

Armod made Egil sit in the high seat on the lower bench,  and his comrades outside him. ‘hey spoke much of what  a toilsome way they had come that evening, but the house-  carles thought it a great marvel that they had won through  it at all; it was, they said, no road for man even were it  free of snow. 

Then said Armod: ‘ Think ye not this were the best hos-  pitality, that a table should be set for you and supper given you  now, and then you should sleep? This will best rest you.’ 

‘We should like this right well,’ said Egil. 

So Armod had a table set for them, whereon were placed  large bowls full of curds. Then said Armod that he was  sorry he had no beer to give them. Egil and his men were  very thirsty from weariness; they took up the bowls and  drank the curds eagerly, Egil drinking far the most. No  other. food was brought. | 


158 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


The household was numerous. The mistress sat on the  cross-bench, and beside her the other women. The master’s  daughter, ten or eleven years old, was running about the  hall-floor. ‘The mistress called her to her side, and spoke  in her ear. Then the girl went out to where Egil sat, and  recited a verse : 

‘To thee with this message  My mother doth send me,  To bear word that Egil  Be wary and wait. 

**So temper thy stomach,”  Thus sayeth our lady, 

** With fare far more worthy  Soon feed we our guests.”’ 


Armod struck the girl, and bade her hold her tongue:  “You are always,’ said he, ‘saying what least suits.’ 

The girl went away ; but Egil threw down the curd-bowl,  which was now nearly empty. The bowls were then  removed from them. 

And now the household took their seats, and tables were  set all round the hall, and food served ; dishes of meat were  brought in and set before Egil and the rest. After this ale  was borne in, beer of the strongest. Soon they began to  drink bumpers, each man was to drink off the horn; and  especial care was taken that Egil and his companions should  drink hard. Egil drank without shirking a drop for a long  while, but when his companions were become helpless, then  he drank for them what they could not. So matters went  on till the tables were removed, and by then all in the room  were well drunk. 

But before each cup that he drank Armod said, ‘I drink  to you, Egil,’ and the house-carles drank to Egil’s com-  panions with the same preface. A man was appointed ‘to  bear every cup to Egil’s party, and he urged them to drink  it off quick. Egil told his companions to drink no more,  . but himself drank for them what they could not avoid. 

Egil soon found that it would not do for him to go on so.  Wherefore he stood up, went across the floor to where  Armod sat, took him with his hands by the shoulders, and  forced him back against the inner posts, and spat in his  face. There was an outcry and uproar, but Egil went back 


PARTING OF EGIL AND ARMOD 159 


to his place, sate him down, and bade them serve him  drink. 

Armod leapt up and ran out ; Egil continued to drink for  a while, as did some others in the hall; but there was little  merriment. Soon Egil and his men stood up, and took  their weapons from the wall where they had hung them up ;  they then went to the granary in which their horses were, and  laid themselves down in the straw, and slept through the night. 


e 


CHAPTER LXXV.  Parting of Egil and Armod. 


GIL rose up in the morning as soon as it was day.  iz He and his made them ready, and when ready went  at once to the house to seek Armod. And when  they came to the apartments where slept Armod and his  wife and daughter, then Egil burst open the door and  approached Armod’s bed. He then drew his sword, but  with the other hand grasped the beard of Armod, and  forced him forward to the edge of the bed. But Armod’s  wife and daughter Jeapt up and prayed Egil not to slay  Armod. Egil said he would spare him for their sakes;  ‘For,’ said he, ‘this is but meet; yet has he deserved  to die.’ | 

After this Egil cut off his beard close to his chin, and  put out one of his eyes. Then he went out to his com-  panions. 

They went on their way and came at day-meal-time to  the house of Thorfinn. He dwelt ‘by Eida-wood. Of him  they craved a day-meal and to bait their horses. Thorfinn  granted this, and Egil with his men went into the hall.  Egil asked if Thorfinn had seen anything of the rest of his °  ‘part  oa We appointed,’ he said, ‘to meet here.’ 

Thorfinn said: ‘ Here passed six men together a little  before day ; and they were well armed.’ 

Then said a house-carle: ‘I was driving a sledge in the  night to fetch wood, and I came upon six men on the road ;  they were house-carles of Armod; but that was long before 


160 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


day. . Now I am not sure whether these will be the same  as the six of whom you spoke.’ 

Thorfinn said that the six men whom he had met had  passed after the house-carle came back with the load  of wood. . 

While they sat at meat Egil saw that a woman lay sick  on the dais at the end of the hall. He asked who was that  woman in such sad case. Thorfinn said she was named  Helga, and was his daughter; she had long been ill; her  complaint was a pining sickness; she got no sleep at night,  and was as one possessed. 

‘Has anything,’ asked Egil, ‘ been tried for her ailment ?” 

‘Runes have been graven,’ said Thorfinn ; ‘a landowner’s  son hard by did this; and she is since much worse than  before. But can you, Egil, do anything for such ailments ?” 

Egil said: ‘Maybe no harm will be done by my taking  it in hand.’ 

And when Egil had finished his meal, he went where the  woman lay and spoke with her. Then he bade them lift  her from her place and lay clean clothes under her, and  they did so. Next he searched the bed in which she had  lain, and there he found a piece of whalebone whereon  were runes. [Egil read them, then cut the runes and  scraped them off into the fire. He burned the whole piece  of whalebone, and had the bed-clothes that she had used  hung out to air. Then Egil sang: 

‘Runes none should grave ever  Who knows not to read them ;  Of dark spell full many  The meaning may miss. 

Ten spell-words writ wrongly  On whale-bone were graven : 


Whence to leek-tending maiden,  _ Long sorrow and pain.’ 


Egil then graved runes, and laid them under the bolster  _ of the bed where the woman lay. She seemed as if she  waked out of sleep, and said she now felt well, but she was  weak. But her father and mother were overjoyed. And  Thorfinn offered to Egil all the furtherance that he might  think needful. 


EGIL COMES TO LANDOWNER ALF 161 


CHAPTER LXXVI.  Egil comes to landowner Alf. 


GIL said to his comrades that he would go on his  way and bide no longer. Thorfinn had a son  named Helgi, a valiant man. Father and son 

offered Egil their company through the wood. They said  ‘they knew for a fact that Armod Beard had put six men  into the wood to lie in wait for them, and it was likely that  there would be more ambushed in the wood in case the  first should fail. There were with Thorfinn four that  offered to go. Then Egil sang a stave:  ‘If four with me follow,  Thou findest not six men  With us bloody sword-blows  To barter in fight.  And if he with eight go,  Undaunted in courage  On twelve black-browed Egil  The battle will dare.’  _ Thorfinn and his men decided to go into the wood with  Egil: thus they were eight in all. And when they came  where the ambush was set, they saw men there. But these  house-carles of Armod who were in ambush, on seeing that  the travellers were eight in number, thought they were over-  matched, and hid them away in the wood. And when  Egil’s party came where the liers-in-wait had been, they saw  that all was not peaceful. And now Egil said that Thorfinn  and his men should go back, but they offered to go further.  However Egil would not have it, and bade them go home;  so they did so and turned back. 

But Egil and his men went on forward, being now four.  And as the day wore on they perceived that there were six  men in the wood, and they were pretty sure that these also  were house-carles of Armod. Up leapt the liers-in-wait and .  made at them, and they met their charge: and the en-  counter ended in Egil’s slaying two and the rest running  back into the wood. 

_ Then Egil’s company went on their way, and nothing  more happened till they got out of the wood and found  II 


"162 “STORY OF EGIL SKALEAGRIMSSON 


lodging near the wood with a landowner named Alf, who  was called Alf the wealthy. He was an old man, wealthy  In money, of a strange temper, so that he could keep but few  in his household. A good reception Egil found there,..and  with him Alf was talkative. Egil asked many questions,  ‘and Alf told him what he asked. They spoke much. about  the earl and the king of Notway’s messengers, who had  before gone eastward to gather the tribute. Alf in | his talk  was no friend to the earl.  o 


CHAPTER LXXVII.  Egul gathers tribute. 


GIL made him ready early next morning to continue  kK his journey, as did his comrades, but at parting  Egil gave Alfa fur cloak. Alf took the gift with  thanks, saying, ‘A good mantle have I here.’ And he bade  Egil visit him on the way back. They parted friends ; and  Egil] going on his way came on the evening of a day to earl  ‘Arnvid’s court, where he found a good reception. He and  -his comrades were placed next to the sitter in the seat  opposite the earl.  When Egil had been there for a night, he declared: ‘his  errand with the earl, and the message of the king from  Norway, and said that he wished to have all that tribute from  Vermaland that had been owing since Arnvid had been set  over the land. The earl said that he had paid out of hand  all the tribute, and delivered it into the hands of the king’s  ‘messengers. ‘But I know not,’ he said, ‘what they have  since done with it, whether they brought it to the king or  ran away with it out of the land. However, as ye bear sure  tokens that the king has sent you, I will pay all the tribute  to which he has a right, and deliver it into your hands: but  I will not be answerable afterwards for how you fare with  it.’ Egil and his men remained there for awhile. But  before Egil went away the earl paid them the tribute. Part  was in silver, part in gray fur.  And when Egil’s party were ready they started to return.  At their parting Egil said to the earl: ‘ Now we will bear to 


' EGIL GATHERS TRIBUTE 163 


‘the king this tribute which we have received. But know,  ‘earl, that this is much less money than the king deems to  -be his due here ; and that too without counting that, as he  thinks, thou oughtest to pay atonement for the messengers  whom common rumour says thou didst cause to be slain.’  The earl said that that was not true. With this they parted. 

Now when Egil was gone, the earl called to him his two  brothers, each of whom was named Ulf, and spoke thus:  ‘That big fellow Egil, who was here for awhile, will, I  expect, do us an ill turn when he comes to the king. We  may by this mark how he will bear our matter before the  king, that he threw in our face such a charge, the taking the  life of the king’s men. Now must ye two go after their party  and slay them all, and let none bear this slander before the  king. Methinks the wisest plan were to lie in wait for them  in Eida-wood. Take with you so many men as to make  sure that not one of them escape, while ye get no loss of  men from them.’ 

Then did the brothers make them ready for their journey,  and they took thirty men. They went to the wood, of  which they knew every path: then they watched for Egil’s  coming. ‘There were two roads through the wood. One  led over a certain ridge, and there was a steep cliff, and only  a path for one; this was the shorter road. The other led  round the end of the ridge, over wide bogs, across which  hewn wood was laid, there too making a causeway for but  one to pass. And they lay in wait fifteen in either place. 


oF 


CHAPTER LXXVIII.  Egil and his band slay twenty-five men. 


GIL went till he came to Alf’s, and was there for the 

kK night in good quarters. Next morning he rose  before day and made ready for his journey. And 

while they sat over their morning meal, Alf the master came  ‘in. He said: ‘ You are making a start betimes, Egil ; but  my counsel would be that you hurry not your journey, but  rather look before you, for I think there be liers-in-wait for  you in the wood. I have no men to give you as escort. who 


164 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


would be any strength to you: but this I offer, that ye tarry  here with me till I can report to you that the wood is safe.’  Egil said: ‘That will be mere nonsense. I will go on my  way as I before meant to do.’ 

So he and his men made ready to go, while Alf tried to  stop them, and bade them come back, if they saw that the  way was trodden : ‘ None,’ he said, ‘have passed the wood  from the east since you, Egil, went eastward, except these,  who, as I suspect, have gone wishing to encounter you.’  Egil said, ‘ How many will they be, think you, if it 1s as you  say? We have not lost the game, though there be some  odds against us.’ Alf said: ‘I with my house-carles ‘had  gone to the wood, and we came on men’s footprints ; the  trail led into the wood, and there must have been many in  all. But if you do not believe this that I say, go and see  for yourself the trail, and then turn back, if it seems as I  tell you.’ Egil went his way, and when they came where  the road entered the wood, they saw there the tracks both  of men and horses. Egil’s comrades then advised that they  should turn back. ‘We will go on,’ said Egil: ‘methinks  *tis no wonder that men have gone through Eida-wood, for  it is a public road.’ So they went on, and the footmarks  continued, being of a numerous company. And when they  came there where the roads forked, then the trail also  -forked, and was equally strong either way. 

Then said Egil: ‘Now I think that maybe Alf has told  the truth. We will now make us ready as expecting an  encounter.’ So then Egil and his men doffed their cloaks  and all their loose clothing, and laid these on the sledge.  Egil had ‘brought in his sledge a very long cord of bast, for  it is the wont of those who take long sledging journeys to  have with them some spare cord in case the harness need  mending. Egil took a large flat stone, and laid it before  his breast and stomach. Then he bent thereon the cord,  and wound it round and round him, and so encased him  right up to the shoulders. . 

Eida-wood is of this kind : there is reaching to the cultivated  land on either side dense forest, but in the middle is a wide  space of shrubs and thin copse, with some parts quite bare  of wood. Egil and his company turned by the shorter way, 


a as ee ee ee 


EGIL AND HIS BAND SLAY TWENTY-FIVE MEN 165 


which lay over the ridge. They all had shields and helms,  and weapons both to cut and thrust. Egil walked first.  And when they came to the ridge, there was wood at the  foot of it, but above on the rock it was bare. But when  they came up to the rock, then seven men leapt out of the  wood and up to the cliff after them, and shot at them.  Egil and his men turned and stood abreast across the path.  Then came other men against them from above on the  crag’s brow, and cast stones at them, and this was by far the .  greater danger. Then said Egil, ‘Now must you step back  close to the cliff, and cover yourselves as best ye may; but  I will try to win the summit.’ They did so. And when  Egil got past the rock out on the top, there were in front  eight men, who all at once set upon him. Of their ex-  change of blows nought is there to tell: the end was that  Egil slew them all. Then he went forward to the verge of  the summit and hurled over stones, that none could with-  stand ; and thereafter three of the Vermians fell, but four  gat them into the wood sore wounded and bruised. 

Then Egil and his men took their horses and went on  their way till they came over the ridge. But the Vermians  who had escaped brought news of this to their fellows, who  were by the bog. They then advanced by the lower road  and so beset the way in front of Egil. Ulf said to his com-  rades: ‘ We must now go cunningly to work with them, and  sO manage that none get away. This,’ said he, ‘is the  nature of the ground: the road skirts the ridge, close to the  foot of which runs the bog, while a rocky brow is above,  and the passage lies between these and is no broader than a  footpath. Now some of us shall go forward round the brow  to withstand them if they advance; but some shall hide  here in the wood, and leap out at their back when they  have got on before us. And take we such heed that none  escape.’ They did as Ulf bade: Ulf went forward round  the brow and ten men with him. 

Egil and his men went on their way knowing nought of  this plan till they came into the narrow path. Then out  leapt men behind them, and drove at them with weapons.  They faced about and defended themselves. Now also  dashed at them those who were in front of the rocky brow ; 


166 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


and when Egil saw that, he turned to meet them. Quick were  the blows exchanged between them ; and Egil smote down  some in the narrow pass, but some turned back to where  there was more level space. Egil dashed after them. There  fell Ulf. And in the end Egil slew there single-handed  eleven men. Then he went where his comrades were keep-  ing the pass before eight men: there were some wounded on  either side. But when Egil came, then at once the Vermians  fled to the wood hard by. Five escaped, all sore wounded,  but three fell there. Egil had many wounds, but none serious. 

They then continued their journey. He bound his  comrades’ wounds, none of which were mortal. They sat  in the sledge, and drove for the rest of the day. 

_ But the Vermians who escaped took their horses, and 

dragged themselves from the wood eastwards to inhabited  parts. There they got their wounds bound. Procuring  companions, they made their way to the earl, and told him  of their misadventure. They told how both the Ulfs had  fallen, twenty-five men were dead, and but five escaped with  life, and they all wounded and bruised. The earl then  asked what were the tidings of Egil and his comrades.  They answered: ‘We know not for sure how much they  were wounded ; but full boldly did they set on us when we  were eight and they four; then we fled. Five reached the  wood, but three perished: yet, for all we could see, Egil  and his men were as fresh as ever.’ 

The earl said that their journey had been as bad as could  be. ‘I could have been content we should have great loss  of life, had ye but slain these Northmen ; but now when  they come west from the wood and tell these tidings to  Norway’s king, then may we expect from him the very  hardest terms.’ 

e 


CHAPTER LXXIX.  Egil comes to Thorfinn’s. The harrying of king Hacon. 


> GIL travelled on till he came westward out of the  K wood. They made for Thorfinn’s that evening,  _ where they were well received : their wounds were  bound up, and they stayed there several nights. Helga, the 


EGIL COMES TO THORFINN’S |. 167; 


master’s daughter, was now on her feet, and whole of her;  ailment. For this she and all the family thanked Egil. He,  and his rested there themselves and their beasts. 

The man who had graved the runes for Helga dwelt HOE.  far off. It now came out that he had asked her to wife, but.  Thorfinn would not give her. Then this landowner’s son  would fain beguile her, but she would not consent. So he  thought to grave for her love-runes, but he did not under-  stand them aright, and graved that wherefrom she took her  sickness. 

And when Egil was 5 ready to depart, Thorfinn and his son  escorted them on the road: they being thus ten or twelve in  company. They went with them all that day as a guard  against Armod and his house-carles. But when the tidings  were heard how Egil’s band had fought against overwhelming —  odds in the wood and conquered, then Armod thought it  hopeless to raise shield against Egil : wherefore he with all  his men sat at home. Egil and Thorfinn exchanged gifts  at parting, and pledged themselves to friendship. Then  Egil and his men went their way, and no tidings are told of  their journey before they came to Thorstein’s. 

There their wounds were healed. Egil stayed there till  spring. But Thorstein sent messengers to king Hacon to  bring him the tribute for which Egil had gone to Verma-  land. Who, when they came before the king, told him the  tidings of what had been done in Egil’s journey, and brought  him the tribute. The king was now sure that what he had  before suspected was true, namely, that earl Arnvid had  caused the slaying of the two companies of messengers sent  eastwards by him. The king said that Thorstein should  have leave to dwell in the land, and should be reconciled to  him. Then the messengers returned home ; and on coming  to Thorstein’s told him that the king was well pleased with  this Vermaland journey, and that Thorstein was now to have.  reconciliation and friendship with the king. 

King Hacon in the summer went eastwards to Vik:  whence he journeyed still eastwards to Vermaland with a  large force. Earl Arnvid fled away ; but the king took large  fines from those landowners whom he thought guilty against.  him according to the report .of those who went after the: 


168 STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON 


tribute. He set over the land another earl, taking hostages  of him and of the landowners. In this expedition Hacon  went far and wide about western Gautland and subdued it, -  as is told in his Saga, and is found in the poems composed  about him. It is also told that he went to Denmark, and.  harried there far and wide. Then was it that with two ships  he disabled twelve ships of the Danes, and gave to Tryggva,  son of his brother Olaf, the name of king and the rule over  Vik eastwards. 

Egil in the summer made ready his merchant-ship and  got thereto a crew. But the long-ship that he had brought  from Denmark in the autumn he gave to Thorstein at part-  ing. Thorstein gave Egil good gifts, and they pledged them  to close friendship. Egil sent messengers to Thord, his  wife’s kinsman, at Aurland, and gave him charge to arrange  for those lands that Egil owned in Sogn and Hordaland,  bidding him sell them if there were a buyer. And when  Egil was ready for his voyage, they sailed out along the bay,  ' and then northwards along the Norway coast, and afterwards  out into the main. They had a fairly good breeze, and came  from the main into Borgar-firth; and Egil steered his ship  up the firth to the haven close to his own house. He had  his cargo conveyed home, and his ship set up on wooden  props. Egil went home to his house: fain were folk to see  him ; and there he stayed for that winter. 


e 


CHAPTER LXxXX.  Of the marriages of Egtl’s daughters. 


Y the time that Egil came out to Iceland from this  B journey, the whole district was settled. All the  original land-takers were dead, but their sons or sons’ 

sons were living, and dwelt there in the district. There was  a man named Grim, son of Sverting ; he dwelt at Moss-fell  below the heath; rich was he and of good family; his  sister was Rannveig whom Thorod, the priest in Olvos, had  to wife; their son was Skapti the lawman. Grim was also  afterwards lawman. He asked to wife Thordis daughter of  Thorolf Egil’s brother, and stepdaughter of Egil. Egil 


OF THE MARRIAGES OF EGIL’S DAUGHTERS 169 


loved Thordis no whit less than his own children. She was  a very beautiful woman. And since Egil knew that Grim  was a wealthy man and the match was a good one, it was  so settled, and Thordis was given toGrim. Then Egil paid  over to her her father’s heritage, and she went home with  Grim, and the pair dwelt long at Moss-fell. 

There was a man named Olaf, son of Hauskuld Dale-  koll’s son and Melkorka daughter of Myrkjartan king of  the Irish. Olaf dwelt at Hjardarho]t in Lax-river-dale,  westward in Broad-firth dales. Olaf was very wealthy, the  handsomest man in Iceland of his time, of a noble character.  He asked to wife Thorgerdr, Egil’s daughter. Thorgerdr  was comely, tall above woman’s wont, wise, rather proud-  spirited, but in daily life gentle. Egil was well acquainted  with Olaf, and knew that the match wasa worthy one, where-  fore Thorgerdr was given to Olaf. She went home with  him to Hjardarholt. 

Auzur, Eyvind’s son, brother of Thorod in Olvos, had to  wife Egil’s daughter Bera. 


CHAPTER LXXXI  Death of Bodvar: Egil’s poem thereon. 


ODVAR Egil’s son was just now growing up; he 

B was a youth of great promise, handsome, tall and 

strong as had been Egil or Thorolf at his age. Egil 

loved him dearly, and Bodvar was very fond of his father.  One summer it happened that there was a ship in White-  river, and a great fair was heldthere. Egil had there bought  much wood, which he was having conveyed home by water :  for this his house-carles went, taking with them an eight-  oared boat belonging to Egil. It chanced one time that  Bodvar begged to go with them, and they allowed him so to  do. So he went into the field with the house-carles. They  were six in all on the eight-oared boat. And when they had  to go out again, high-water was late in the day, and, as they  must needs wait for the turn of tide, they did not start till  late in the evening. Then came on a violent south-west  gale, against which ran the stream of the ebb. This madea 


170, STORY OF EGIL SKALLAGRIMSSON' © 


rough sea in the firth, as can often happen. The end was: - 


that the boat sank under them, and all were lost. The next  -day the bodies were cast up: Bodvar’s body came on shore  at Einars-ness, but some came in on the south shore of the  firth, whither also the boat was driven, being found far in  near Reykjarhamar. _  Egil heard these tidings that same day, and at once rode 


to seek the bodies: he found Bodvar’s, took it up and set it 


on his knees, and rode with it out to Digra-ness, to Skalla-  grim’s mound. Then he had the mound opened, and laid  Bodvar down there by Skallagrim. After which the mound  was Closed again ; this task was not finished till about night-  fall. Egil then rode home to Borg, and, when he came  home, he went at once to the locked bed-closet in which he  was wont to sleep. He lay down, and shut himself in, none  daring to crave speech of him. 

It is said that when they laid Bodvar in earth Egil was  thus dressed : his hose were tight-fitting to his legs, he wore  a red kirtle of fustian, closely-fitting, and laced at the sides :  but they say that his muscles so swelled with his exertion  that the kirtle was rent off him, as were also the hose. 

On the next day Egil still did not open the bed-closet :  he had no meat or drink: there he lay for that day and the  following night, no man daring to speak with him. But on  the third morning, as soon as it was light, Asgerdr hada  man set on horseback, who rode as hard as he could west-  wards to Hjardarholt, and told Thorgerdr all these tidings ;  it was about nones when he got there. He said also that  Asgerdr had sent her word to come without delay south-  wards to Borg. ‘Thorgerdr at once bade them saddle her a  horse, and two men attended her. They rode that evening  and through the night till they came to Borg. Thorgerdr  went at once into the hall. Asgerdr greeted her, and asked  whether they had eaten supper. Thorgerdr said aloud, ‘No 


supper have I had, and none will I have till I sup with.  Freyja. I can do no better than does my father: I will  not overlive my father and brother.’ She then went to the. .  bed-closet and called, ‘ Father, open the door! I will that. 


we both travel the same road.’’ Egil undidthelock. Thor- 


gerdr stepped up into the bed-closet, and locked the door. 


again, and lay down on another bed that was there. 


DEATH OF BODVAR: EGIL’S POEM THEREON 17 


Then said Egil, ‘You do well, daughter, in that you will  follow your father. Great love have you shown to me.  What hope is there that I shall wish to live with this grief ?’  After this they were silent awhile. Then Egil spoke:  ‘What is it now, daughter? You are chewing some-  thing, are you not? ‘I am chewing samphire,’ said  she, ‘ because I think it will do me harm. Otherwise I  think I may live too long.’ ‘Is samphire bad for man ?  said Egil. ‘ Very bad,’ said she ; ‘will youeat some?’ ‘Why  should I not ?’ said he. A little while after she called and  bade them give her drink. Water was brought to her.  Then said Egil, ‘This comes of eating samphire, one ever  thirsts the more.’ ‘Would you like a drink, father?’ said  she. He took and swallowed the liquid in a deep draught :  it was in a horn. Then said Thorgerdr: ‘Now are we  deceived ; this is milk.’ Whereat Egil bit a sherd out of the  horn, all that his teeth gripped, and cast the horn down. 

_ Then spoke Thorgerdr: ‘What counsel shall we take  now? This our purpose is defeated. Now I would fain,  father, that we should lengthen our lives, so that you may-.  compose a funeral poem on Bodvar, and I will grave it ona  wooden roller ; after that we can die, if we like. Hardly, I  think, can Thorstein your son compose a poem on Bodvar ;  but it were unseemly that he should not have funeral rites.  Though I do not think that we two shall sit at the drinking  when the funeral feast is held.’ Egil said that it was not to  be expected that he could now compose, though he were to  attempt it. ‘ However, I will try this,’ said he. 

Egil had had