[RKV-poetic-edda  —  part 1 of 5]
============================================================

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The poetic Edda

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

Title: The poetic Edda         Translated from the Icelandic with an introduction and notes

Translator: Henry Adams Bellows



Release date: May 4, 2024 [eBook #73533]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation, 1923

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/73533

Credits: Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net/ for Project Gutenberg (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POETIC EDDA ***





                                  THE                               POETIC EDDA

                     TRANSLATED FROM THE ICELANDIC                      WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES


                                   BY                           HENRY ADAMS BELLOWS


                           TWO VOLUMES IN ONE


                                NEW YORK                   THE AMERICAN-SCANDINAVIAN FOUNDATION

                        LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD                         OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

                                  1923








    This series of Scandinavian Classics is published by The American-     Scandinavian Foundation in the belief that greater familiarity with     the chief literary monuments of the North will help Americans to a     better understanding of Scandinavians, and thus serve to stimulate     their sympathetic coöperation to good ends.








                       To George Lyman Kittredge








                         SCANDINAVIAN CLASSICS                           VOLUMES XXI AND XXII

                            THE POETIC EDDA








                      ESTABLISHED BY NIELS POULSON

    THIS VOLUME IS ENDOWED IN PART BY CHARLES S. PETERSON OF CHICAGO








CONTENTS [1]


    General Introduction                        xi

    Lays of the Gods

        Voluspo                                  1         Hovamol                                 28         Vafthruthnismol                         68         Grimnismol                              84         Skirnismol                             107         Harbarthsljoth                         121         Hymiskvitha                            138         Lokasenna                              151         Thrymskvitha                           174         Alvissmol                              183         Baldrs Draumar                         195         Rigsthula                              201         Hyndluljoth                            217         Svipdagsmol                            234

    Lays of the Heroes

        Völundarkvitha                         252         Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar            269         Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I             290         Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II            309         Fra Dautha Sinfjotla                   332         Gripisspo                              337         Reginsmol                              356         Fafnismol                              370         Sigrdrifumol                           386         Brot af Sigurtharkvithu                402         Guthrunarkvitha I                      411         Sigurtharkvitha en Skamma              420         Helreith Brynhildar                    442         Drap Niflunga                          447         Guthrunarkvitha II, en Forna           450         Guthrunarkvitha III                    465         Oddrunargratr                          469         Atlakvitha en Grönlenzka               480         Atlamol en Grönlenzku                  499         Guthrunarhvot                          536         Hamthesmol                             545




NOTE

[1] For the phonetic spellings of the proper names see the Pronouncing Index.








ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


The General Introduction mentions many of the scholars to whose work this translation owes a special debt. Particular reference, however, should here be made to the late William Henry Schofield, Professor of Comparative Literature in Harvard University and President of The American-Scandinavian Foundation, under whose guidance this translation was begun; to Henry Goddard Leach, for many years Secretary of The American-Scandinavian Foundation, and to William Witherle Lawrence, Professor of English in Columbia University and Chairman of the Foundation’s Committee on Publications, for their assistance with the manuscript and the proofs; and to Hanna Astrup Larsen, the Foundation’s literary secretary, for her efficient management of the complex details of publication.








GENERAL INTRODUCTION


There is scarcely any literary work of great importance which has been less readily available for the general reader, or even for the serious student of literature, than the Poetic Edda. Translations have been far from numerous, and only in Germany has the complete work of translation been done in the full light of recent scholarship. In English the only versions were long the conspicuously inadequate one made by Thorpe, and published about half a century ago, and the unsatisfactory prose translations in Vigfusson and Powell’s Corpus Poeticum Boreale, reprinted in the Norrœna collection. An excellent translation of the poems dealing with the gods, in verse and with critical and explanatory notes, made by Olive Bray, was, however, published by the Viking Club of London in 1908. In French there exist only partial translations, chief among them being those made by Bergmann many years ago. Among the seven or eight German versions, those by the Brothers Grimm and by Karl Simrock, which had considerable historical importance because of their influence on nineteenth century German literature and art, and particularly on the work of Richard Wagner, have been largely superseded by Hugo Gering’s admirable translation, published in 1892, and by the recent two-volume rendering by Genzmer, with excellent notes by Andreas Heusler, 1914–1920. There are competent translations in both Norwegian and Swedish. The lack of any complete and adequately annotated English rendering in metrical form, based on a critical text, and profiting by the cumulative labors of such scholars as Mogk, Vigfusson, Finnur Jonsson, Grundtvig, Bugge, Gislason, Hildebrand, Lüning, Sweet, Niedner, Ettmüller, Müllenhoff, Edzardi, B. M. Olsen, Sievers, Sijmons, Detter, Heinzel, Falk, Neckel, Heusler, and Gering, has kept this extraordinary work practically out of the reach of those who have had neither time nor inclination to master the intricacies of the original Old Norse.

On the importance of the material contained in the Poetic Edda it is here needless to dwell at any length. We have inherited the Germanic traditions in our very speech, and the Poetic Edda is the original storehouse of Germanic mythology. It is, indeed, in many ways the greatest literary monument preserved to us out of the antiquity of the kindred races which we call Germanic. Moreover, it has a literary value altogether apart from its historical significance. The mythological poems include, in the Voluspo, one of the vastest conceptions of the creation and ultimate destruction of the world ever crystallized in literary form; in parts of the Hovamol, a collection of wise counsels that can bear comparison with most of the Biblical Book of Proverbs; in the Lokasenna, a comedy none the less full of vivid characterization because its humor is often broad; and in the Thrymskvitha, one of the finest ballads in the world. The hero poems give us, in its oldest and most vivid extant form, the story of Sigurth, Brynhild, and Atli, the Norse parallel to the German Nibelungenlied. The Poetic Edda is not only of great interest to the student of antiquity; it is a collection including some of the most remarkable poems which have been preserved to us from the period before the pen and the printing-press replaced the poet-singer and oral tradition. It is above all else the desire to make better known the dramatic force, the vivid and often tremendous imagery, and the superb conceptions embodied in these poems which has called forth the present translation.




WHAT IS THE POETIC EDDA?

Even if the poems of the so-called Edda were not so significant and intrinsically so valuable, the long series of scholarly struggles which have been going on over them for the better part of three centuries would in itself give them a peculiar interest. Their history is strangely mysterious. We do not know who composed them, or when or where they were composed; we are by no means sure who collected them or when he did so; finally, we are not absolutely certain as to what an “Edda” is, and the best guess at the meaning of the word renders its application to this collection of poems more or less misleading.

A brief review of the chief facts in the history of the Poetic Edda will explain why this uncertainty has persisted. Preserved in various manuscripts of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries is a prose work consisting of a very extensive collection of mythological stories, an explanation of the important figures and tropes of Norse poetic diction,—the poetry of the Icelandic and Norwegian skalds was appallingly complex in this respect,—and a treatise on metrics. This work, clearly a handbook for poets, was commonly known as the “Edda” of Snorri Sturluson, for at the head of the copy of it in the Uppsalabok, a manuscript written presumably some fifty or sixty years after Snorri’s death, which was in 1241, we find: “This book is called Edda, which Snorri Sturluson composed.” This work, well known as the Prose Edda, Snorri’s Edda or the Younger Edda, has recently been made available to readers of English in the admirable translation by Arthur G. Brodeur, published by the American-Scandinavian Foundation in 1916.

Icelandic tradition, however, persisted in ascribing either this Edda or one resembling it to Snorri’s much earlier compatriot, Sæmund the Wise (1056–1133). When, early in the seventeenth century, the learned Arngrimur Jonsson proved to everyone’s satisfaction that Snorri and nobody else must have been responsible for the work in question, the next thing to determine was what, if anything, Sæmund had done of the same kind. The nature of Snorri’s book gave a clue. In the mythological stories related a number of poems were quoted, and as these and other poems were to all appearances Snorri’s chief sources of information, it was assumed that Sæmund must have written or compiled a verse Edda—whatever an “Edda” might be—on which Snorri’s work was largely based.

So matters stood when, in 1643, Brynjolfur Sveinsson, Bishop of Skalholt, discovered a manuscript, clearly written as early as 1300, containing twenty-nine poems, complete or fragmentary, and some of them with the very lines and stanzas used by Snorri. Great was the joy of the scholars, for here, of course, must be at least a part of the long-sought Edda of Sæmund the Wise. Thus the good bishop promptly labeled his find, and as Sæmund’s Edda, the Elder Edda or the Poetic Edda it has been known to this day.

This precious manuscript, now in the Royal Library in Copenhagen, and known as the Codex Regius (R2365), has been the basis for all published editions of the Eddic poems. A few poems of similar character found elsewhere have subsequently been added to the collection, until now most editions include, as in this translation, a total of thirty-four. A shorter manuscript now in the Arnamagnæan collection in Copenhagen (AM748), contains fragmentary or complete versions of six of the poems in the Codex Regius, and one other, Baldrs Draumar, not found in that collection. Four other poems (Rigsthula, Hyndluljoth, Grougaldr and Fjolsvinnsmol, the last two here combined under the title of Svipdagsmol), from various manuscripts, so closely resemble in subject-matter and style the poems in the Codex Regius that they have been included by most editors in the collection. Finally, Snorri’s Edda contains one complete poem, the Grottasongr, which many editors have added to the poetic collection; it is, however, not included in this translation, as an admirable English version of it is available in Mr. Brodeur’s rendering of Snorri’s work.

From all this it is evident that the Poetic Edda, as we now know it, is no definite and plainly limited work, but rather a more or less haphazard collection of separate poems, dealing either with Norse mythology or with hero-cycles unrelated to the traditional history of greater Scandinavia or Iceland. How many other similar poems, now lost, may have existed in such collections as were current in Iceland in the later twelfth and thirteenth centuries we cannot know, though it is evident that some poems of this type are missing. We can say only that thirty-four poems have been preserved, twenty-nine of them in a single manuscript collection, which differ considerably in subject-matter and style from all the rest of extant Old Norse poetry, and these we group together as the Poetic Edda.

But what does the word “Edda” mean? Various guesses have been made. An early assumption was that the word somehow meant “Poetics,” which fitted Snorri’s treatise to a nicety, but which, in addition to the lack of philological evidence to support this interpretation, could by no stretch of scholarly subtlety be made appropriate to the collection of poems. Jacob Grimm ingeniously identified the word with the word “edda” used in one of the poems, the Rigsthula, where, rather conjecturally, it means “great-grandmother.” The word exists in this sense nowhere else in Norse literature, and Grimm’s suggestion of “Tales of a Grandmother,” though at one time it found wide acceptance, was grotesquely inappropriate to either the prose or the verse work.

At last Eirikr Magnusson hit on what appears the likeliest solution of the puzzle: that “Edda” is simply the genitive form of the proper name “Oddi.” Oddi was a settlement in the southwest of Iceland, certainly the home of Snorri Sturluson for many years, and, traditionally at least, also the home of Sæmund the Wise. That Snorri’s work should have been called “The Book of Oddi” is altogether reasonable, for such a method of naming books was common—witness the “Book of the Flat Island” and other early manuscripts. That Sæmund may also have written or compiled another “Oddi-Book” is perfectly possible, and that tradition should have said he did so is entirely natural.

It is, however, an open question whether or not Sæmund had anything to do with making the collection, or any part of it, now known as the Poetic Edda, for of course the seventeenth-century assignment of the work to him is negligible. We can say only that he may have made some such compilation, for he was a diligent student of Icelandic tradition and history, and was famed throughout the North for his learning. But otherwise no trace of his works survives, and as he was educated in Paris, it is probable that he wrote rather in Latin than in the vernacular.

All that is reasonably certain is that by the middle or last of the twelfth century there existed in Iceland one or more written collections of Old Norse mythological and heroic poems, that the Codex Regius, a copy made a hundred years or so later, represents at least a considerable part of one of these, and that the collection of thirty-four poems which we now know as the Poetic or Elder Edda is practically all that has come down to us of Old Norse poetry of this type. Anything more is largely guesswork, and both the name of the compiler and the meaning of the title “Edda” are conjectural.




THE ORIGIN OF THE EDDIC POEMS

There is even less agreement about the birthplace, authorship and date of the Eddic poems themselves than about the nature of the existing collection. Clearly the poems were the work of many different men, living in different periods; clearly, too, most of them existed in oral tradition for generations before they were first committed to writing. In general the mythological poems are strongly heathen in character, and as Christianity became generally accepted throughout Norway and Iceland early in the eleventh century, it is altogether likely that most of the poems dealing with the Norse gods antedate the year 1000. On the other hand, Hoffory, Finnur Jonsson and others have shown pretty conclusively from linguistic evidence that these poems cannot have assumed anything like their present form before the ninth century. As for the poems belonging to the hero cycles, one or two of them appear to be as late as 1100, but most of them clearly belong to the hundred years following 950. It is a fairly safe guess that the years between 900 and 1050 saw the majority of the Eddic poems put into shape, but it must be remembered that many changes took place during the long subsequent period of oral transmission, and also that many of the legends, both mythological and heroic, on which the poems were based, certainly existed in Norway, and quite possibly in verse form, long before the year 900. In considering such poems it is essential to forget the present mode of composition, whereby a poet at once fixes his thought and his style by means of writing, and to remember that for at least two centuries, and possibly much longer, the correct transmission of many of the Eddic poems depended solely on accurate hearing and retentive memory.

As to the origin of the legends on which the poems are based, the whole question, at least so far as the stories of the gods are concerned, is much too complex for discussion here. How much of the actual narrative material of the mythological lays is properly to be called Scandinavian is a matter for students of comparative mythology to guess at. The tales underlying the heroic lays are clearly of foreign origin: the Helgi story comes from Denmark, and that of Völund from Germany, as also the great mass of traditions centering around Sigurth (Siegfried), Brynhild, the sons of Gjuki, Atli (Attila), and Jormunrek (Ermanarich). The introductory notes to the various poems deal with the more important of these questions of origin.

Of the men who composed these poems,—“wrote” is obviously the wrong word,—we know absolutely nothing, save that some of them must have been literary artists with a high degree of conscious skill. The Eddic poems are “folk-poetry,”—whatever that may be,—only in the sense that some of them strongly reflect racial feelings and beliefs; they are anything but crude or primitive in workmanship, and they show that not only the poets themselves, but also many of their hearers, must have made a careful study of the art of poetry.

Where the poems were composed is almost equally uncertain. The claims of Norway have been extensively advanced, but the great literary activity of Iceland after the settlement of the island by Norwegian emigrants late in the ninth century makes the theory of an Icelandic source for most of the poems plausible. The two Atli lays, with what authority we do not know, bear in the Codex Regius the superscription “the Greenland poem,” and internal evidence indicates that this statement is correct. Certainly in one poem, the Rigsthula, and probably in several others, there are marks of Celtic influence. During a considerable part of the ninth and tenth centuries, Scandinavians were active in Ireland and in most of the western islands inhabited by branches of the Celtic race. Some scholars claim nearly all the Eddic poems for these “Western Isles,” in sharp distinction from Iceland; their arguments are commented on in the introductory note to the Rigsthula. However, as Iceland early came to be the true center of this Scandinavian island world, it may be said that most of the evidence concerning the birthplace of the Eddic poems in anything like their present form points in that direction, and certainly it was in Iceland that they were chiefly preserved.




THE EDDA AND OLD NORSE LITERATURE

Within the proper limits of an introduction it would be impossible to give any adequate summary of the history and literature with which the Eddic poems are indissolubly connected, but a mere mention of a few of the salient facts may be of some service to those who are unfamiliar with the subject. Old Norse literature covers approximately the period between 850 and 1300. During the first part of that period occurred the great wanderings of the Scandinavian peoples, and particularly the Norwegians. A convenient date to remember is that of the sea-fight of Hafrsfjord, 872, when Harald the Fair-Haired broke the power of the independent Norwegian nobles, and made himself overlord of nearly all the country. Many of the defeated nobles fled overseas, where inviting refuges had been found for them by earlier wanderers and plunder-seeking raiders. This was the time of the inroads of the dreaded Northmen in France, and in 885 Hrolf Gangr (Rollo) laid siege to Paris itself. Many Norwegians went to Ireland, where their compatriots had already built Dublin, and where they remained in control of most of the island till Brian Boru shattered their power at the battle of Clontarf in 1014.

Of all the migrations, however, the most important were those to Iceland. Here grew up an active civilization, fostered by absolute independence and by remoteness from the wars which wracked Norway, yet kept from degenerating into provincialism by the roving life of the people, which brought them constantly in contact with the culture of the South. Christianity, introduced throughout the Norse world about the year 1000, brought with it the stability of learning, and the Icelanders became not only the makers but also the students and recorders of history.

The years between 875 and 1100 were the great spontaneous period of oral literature. Most of the military and political leaders were also poets, and they composed a mass of lyric poetry concerning the authorship of which we know a good deal, and much of which has been preserved. Narrative prose also flourished, for the Icelander had a passion for story-telling and story-hearing. After 1100 came the day of the writers. These sagamen collected the material that for generations had passed from mouth to mouth, and gave it permanent form in writing. The greatest bulk of what we now have of Old Norse literature,—and the published part of it makes a formidable library,—originated thus in the earlier period before the introduction of writing, and was put into final shape by the scholars, most of them Icelanders, of the hundred years following 1150.

After 1250 came a rapid and tragic decline. Iceland lost its independence, becoming a Norwegian province. Later Norway too fell under alien rule, a Swede ascending the Norwegian throne in 1320. Pestilence and famine laid waste the whole North; volcanic disturbances worked havoc in Iceland. Literature did not quite die, but it fell upon evil days; for the vigorous native narratives and heroic poems of the older period were substituted translations of French romances. The poets wrote mostly doggerel; the prose writers were devoid of national or racial inspiration.

The mass of literature thus collected and written down largely between 1150 and 1250 may be roughly divided into four groups. The greatest in volume is made up of the sagas: narratives mainly in prose, ranging all the way from authentic history of the Norwegian kings and the early Icelandic settlements to fairy-tales. Embodied in the sagas is found the material composing the second group: the skaldic poetry, a vast collection of songs of praise, triumph, love, lamentation, and so on, almost uniformly characterized by an appalling complexity of figurative language. There is no absolute line to be drawn between the poetry of the skalds and the poems of the Edda, which we may call the third group; but in addition to the remarkable artificiality of style which marks the skaldic poetry, and which is seldom found in the poems of the Edda, the skalds dealt almost exclusively with their own emotions, whereas the Eddic poems are quite impersonal. Finally, there is the fourth group, made up of didactic works, religious and legal treatises, and so on, studies which originated chiefly in the later period of learned activity.




PRESERVATION OF THE EDDIC POEMS

Most of the poems of the Poetic Edda have unquestionably reached us in rather bad shape. During the long period of oral transmission they suffered all sorts of interpolations, omissions and changes, and some of them, as they now stand, are a bewildering hodge-podge of little-related fragments. To some extent the diligent twelfth century compiler to whom we owe the Codex Regius—Sæmund or another—was himself doubtless responsible for the patchwork process, often supplemented by narrative prose notes of his own; but in the days before written records existed, it was easy to lose stanzas and longer passages from their context, and equally easy to interpolate them where they did not by any means belong. Some few of the poems, however, appear to be virtually complete and unified as we now have them.

Under such circumstances it is clear that the establishment of a satisfactory text is a matter of the utmost difficulty. As the basis for this translation I have used the text prepared by Karl Hildebrand (1876) and revised by Hugo Gering (1904). Textual emendation has, however, been so extensive in every edition of the Edda, and has depended so much on the theories of the editor, that I have also made extensive use of many other editions, notably those by Finnur Jonsson, Neckel, Sijmons, and Detter and Heinzel, together with numerous commentaries. The condition of the text in both the principal codices is such that no great reliance can be placed on the accuracy of the copyists, and frequently two editions will differ fundamentally as to their readings of a given passage or even of an entire poem. For this reason, and because guesswork necessarily plays so large a part in any edition or translation of the Eddic poems, I have risked overloading the pages with textual notes in order to show, as nearly as possible, the exact state of the original together with all the more significant emendations. I have done this particularly in the case of transpositions, many of which appear absolutely necessary, and in the indication of passages which appear to be interpolations.




THE VERSE-FORMS OF THE EDDIC POEMS

The many problems connected with the verse-forms found in the Eddic poems have been analyzed in great detail by Sievers, Neckel, and others. The three verse-forms exemplified in the poems need only a brief comment here, however, in order to make clear the method used in this translation. All of these forms group the lines normally in four-line stanzas. In the so-called Fornyrthislag (“Old Verse”), for convenience sometimes referred to in the notes as four-four measure, these lines have all the same structure, each line being sharply divided by a cæsural pause into two half-lines, and each half-line having two accented syllables and two (sometimes three) unaccented ones. The two half-lines forming a complete line are bound together by the alliteration, or more properly initial-rhyme, of three (or two) of the accented syllables. The following is an example of the Fornyrthislag stanza, the accented syllables being in italics:


    Vreiþr vas Vingþórr,   |   es vaknaþi     ok síns hamars   |   of saknaþi;     skegg nam hrista,   |   skǫr nam dýja,     réþ Jarþar burr   |   umb at þreifask.


In the second form, the Ljothahattr (“Song Measure”), the first and third line of each stanza are as just described, but the second and fourth are shorter, have no cæsural pause, have three accented syllables, and regularly two initial-rhymed accented syllables, for which reason I have occasionally referred to Ljothahattr as four-three measure. The following is an example:


    Ar skal rísa   |   sás annars vill             fé eþa fjǫr hafa;     liggjandi ulfr   |   sjaldan láer of getr             né sofandi maþr sigr.


In the third and least commonly used form, the Malahattr (“Speech Measure”), a younger verse-form than either of the other two, each line of the four-line stanza is divided into two half-lines by a cæsural pause, each half-line having two accented syllables and three (sometimes four) unaccented ones; the initial rhyme is as in the Fornyrthislag. The following is an example:


    Horsk vas húsfreyja,   |   hugþi at mannviti,     lag heyrþi orþa,   |   hvat á laun máeltu;     þá vas vant vitri,   |   vildi þeim hjalpa:     skyldu of sáe sigla,   |   en sjǫlf né kvamskat.


A poem in Fornyrthislag is normally entitled -kvitha (Thrymskvitha, Guthrunarkvitha, etc.), which for convenience I have rendered as “lay,” while a poem in Ljothahattr is entitled -mol (Grimnismol, Skirnismol, etc.), which I have rendered as “ballad.” It is difficult to find any distinction other than metrical between the two terms, although it is clear that one originally existed.

Variations frequently appear in all three kinds of verse, and these I have attempted to indicate through the rhythm of the translation. In order to preserve so far as possible the effect of the Eddic verse, I have adhered, in making the English version, to certain of the fundamental rules governing the Norse line and stanza formations. The number of lines to each stanza conforms to what seems the best guess as to the original, and I have consistently retained the number of accented syllables. In translating from a highly inflected language into one depending largely on the use of subsidiary words, it has, however, been necessary to employ considerable freedom as to the number of unaccented syllables in a line. The initial-rhyme is generally confined to two accented syllables in each line. As in the original, all initial vowels are allowed to rhyme interchangeably, but I have disregarded the rule which lets certain groups of consonants rhyme only with themselves (e.g., I have allowed initial s or st to rhyme with sk or sl). In general, I have sought to preserve the effect of the original form whenever possible without an undue sacrifice of accuracy. For purposes of comparison, the translations of the three stanzas just given are here included:

Fornyrthislag:


    Wild was Vingthor   |   when he awoke,     And when his mighty   |   hammer he missed;     He shook his beard,   |   his hair was bristling,     To groping set   |   the son of Jorth.


Ljothahattr:


    He must early go forth   |   who fain the blood       Or the goods of another would get;     The wolf that lies idle   |   shall win little meat,       Or the sleeping man success.


Malahattr:


    Wise was the woman,   |   she fain would use wisdom,     She saw well what meant   |   all they said in secret;     From her heart it was hid   |   how help she might render,     The sea they should sail,   |   while herself she should go not.




PROPER NAMES

The forms in which the proper names appear in this translation will undoubtedly perplex and annoy those who have become accustomed to one or another of the current methods of anglicising old Norse names. The nominative ending -r it has seemed best to omit after consonants, although it has been retained after vowels; in Baldr the final -r is a part of the stem and is of course retained. I have rendered the Norse þ by “th” throughout, instead of spasmodically by “d,” as in many texts: e.g., Othin instead of Odin. For the Norse ø I have used its equivalent, “ö,” e.g., Völund; for the ǫ I have used “o” and not “a,” e.g., Voluspo, not Valuspa or Voluspa. To avoid confusion with accents the long vowel marks of the Icelandic are consistently omitted, as likewise in modern Icelandic proper names. The index at the end of the book indicates the pronunciation in each case.




CONCLUSION

That this translation may be of some value to those who can read the poems of the Edda in the original language I earnestly hope. Still more do I wish that it may lead a few who hitherto have given little thought to the Old Norse language and literature to master the tongue for themselves. But far above either of these I place the hope that this English version may give to some, who have known little of the ancient traditions of what is after all their own race, a clearer insight into the glories of that extraordinary past, and that I may through this medium be able to bring to others a small part of the delight which I myself have found in the poems of the Poetic Edda.








PART I

THE POETIC EDDA


VOLUME I

LAYS OF THE GODS








VOLUSPO

THE WISE-WOMAN’S PROPHECY


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

At the beginning of the collection in the Codex Regius stands the Voluspo, the most famous and important, as it is likewise the most debated, of all the Eddic poems. Another version of it is found in a huge miscellaneous compilation of about the year 1300, the Hauksbok, and many stanzas are included in the Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson. The order of the stanzas in the Hauksbok version differs materially from that in the Codex Regius, and in the published editions many experiments have been attempted in further rearrangements. On the whole, however, and allowing for certain interpolations, the order of the stanzas in the Codex Regius seems more logical than any of the wholesale “improvements” which have been undertaken.

The general plan of the Voluspo is fairly clear. Othin, chief of the gods, always conscious of impending disaster and eager for knowledge, calls on a certain “Volva,” or wise-woman, presumably bidding her rise from the grave. She first tells him of the past, of the creation of the world, the beginning of years, the origin of the dwarfs (at this point there is a clearly interpolated catalogue of dwarfs’ names, stanzas 10–16), of the first man and woman, of the world-ash Yggdrasil, and of the first war, between the gods and the Vanir, or, in Anglicized form, the Wanes. Then, in stanzas 27–29, as a further proof of her wisdom, she discloses some of Othin’s own secrets and the details of his search for knowledge. Rewarded by Othin for what she has thus far told (stanza 30), she then turns to the real prophesy, the disclosure of the final destruction of the gods. This final battle, in which fire and flood overwhelm heaven and earth as the gods fight with their enemies, is the great fact in Norse mythology; the phrase describing it, ragna rök, “the fate of the gods,” has become familiar, by confusion with the word rökkr, “twilight,” in the German Götterdämmerung. The wise-woman tells of the Valkyries who bring the slain warriors to support Othin and the other gods in the battle, of the slaying of Baldr, best and fairest of the gods, through the wiles of Loki, of the enemies of the gods, of the summons to battle on both sides, and of the mighty struggle, till Othin is slain, and “fire leaps high about heaven itself” (stanzas 31–58). But this is not all. A new and beautiful world is to rise on the ruins of the old; Baldr comes back, and “fields unsowed bear ripened fruit” (stanzas 59–66).

This final passage, in particular, has caused wide differences of opinion as to the date and character of the poem. That the poet was heathen and not Christian seems almost beyond dispute; there is an intensity and vividness in almost every stanza which no archaizing Christian could possibly have achieved. On the other hand, the evidences of Christian influence are sufficiently striking to outweigh the arguments of Finnur Jonsson, Müllenhoff and others who maintain that the Voluspo is purely a product of heathendom. The roving Norsemen of the tenth century, very few of whom had as yet accepted Christianity, were nevertheless in close contact with Celtic races which had already been converted, and in many ways the Celtic influence was strongly felt. It seems likely, then, that the Voluspo was the work of a poet living chiefly in Iceland, though possibly in the “Western Isles,” in the middle of the tenth century, a vigorous believer in the old gods, and yet with an imagination active enough to be touched by the vague tales of a different religion emanating from his neighbor Celts.

How much the poem was altered during the two hundred years between its composition and its first being committed to writing is largely a matter of guesswork, but, allowing for such an obvious interpolation as the catalogue of dwarfs, and for occasional lesser errors, it seems quite needless to assume such great changes as many editors do. The poem was certainly not composed to tell a story with which its early hearers were quite familiar; the lack of continuity which baffles modern readers presumably did not trouble them in the least. It is, in effect, a series of gigantic pictures, put into words with a directness and sureness which bespeak the poet of genius. It is only after the reader, with the help of the many notes, has familiarized himself with the names and incidents involved that he can begin to understand the effect which this magnificent poem must have produced on those who not only understood but believed it.





1.  Hearing I ask   |   from the holy races,     From Heimdall’s sons,   |   both high and low;     Thou wilt, Valfather,   |   that well I relate     Old tales I remember   |   of men long ago.

2.  I remember yet   |   the giants of yore,     Who gave me bread   |   in the days gone by;     Nine worlds I knew,   |   the nine in the tree     With mighty roots   |   beneath the mold.

3.  Of old was the age   |   when Ymir lived;     Sea nor cool waves   |   nor sand there were;     Earth had not been,   |   nor heaven above,     But a yawning gap,   |   and grass nowhere.

4.  Then Bur’s sons lifted   |   the level land,     Mithgarth the mighty   |   there they made;     The sun from the south   |   warmed the stones of earth,     And green was the ground   |   with growing leeks.

5.  The sun, the sister   |   of the moon, from the south     Her right hand cast   |   over heaven’s rim;     No knowledge she had   |   where her home should be,     The moon knew not   |   what might was his,     The stars knew not   |   where their stations were.

6.  Then sought the gods   |   their assembly-seats,     The holy ones,   |   and council held;     Names then gave they   |   to noon and twilight,     Morning they named,   |   and the waning moon,     Night and evening,   |   the years to number.

7.  At Ithavoll met   |   the mighty gods,     Shrines and temples   |   they timbered high;     Forges they set,   |   and they smithied ore,     Tongs they wrought,   |   and tools they fashioned.

8.  In their dwellings at peace   |   they played at tables,     Of gold no lack   |   did the gods then know,—     Till thither came up   |   giant-maids three,     Huge of might,   |   out of Jotunheim.

9.  Then sought the gods   |   their assembly-seats,     The holy ones,   |   and council held,     To find who should raise   |   the race of dwarfs     Out of Brimir’s blood   |   and the legs of Blain.

10. There was Motsognir   |   the mightiest made     Of all the dwarfs,   |   and Durin next;     Many a likeness   |   of men they made,     The dwarfs in the earth,   |   as Durin said.

11. Nyi and Nithi,   |   Northri and Suthri,     Austri and Vestri,   |   Althjof, Dvalin,     Nar and Nain,   |   Niping, Dain,     Bifur, Bofur,   |   Bombur, Nori,     An and Onar,   |   Ai, Mjothvitnir.

12. Vigg and Gandalf,   |   Vindalf, Thrain,     Thekk and Thorin,   |   Thror, Vit and Lit,     Nyr and Nyrath,—   |   now have I told—     Regin and Rathsvith—   |   the list aright.

13. Fili, Kili,   |   Fundin, Nali,     Heptifili,   |   Hannar, Sviur,     Frar, Hornbori,   |   Fræg and Loni,     Aurvang, Jari,   |   Eikinskjaldi.

14. The race of the dwarfs   |   in Dvalin’s throng     Down to Lofar   |   the list must I tell;     The rocks they left,   |   and through wet lands     They sought a home   |   in the fields of sand.

15. There were Draupnir   |   and Dolgthrasir,     Hor, Haugspori,   |   Hlevang, Gloin,     Dori, Ori,   |   Duf, Andvari,     Skirfir, Virfir,   |   Skafith, Ai.

16. Alf and Yngvi,   |   Eikinskjaldi,     Fjalar and Frosti,   |   Fith and Ginnar;     So for all time   |   shall the tale be known,     The list of all   |   the forbears of Lofar.

17. Then from the throng   |   did three come forth,     From the home of the gods,   |   the mighty and gracious;     Two without fate   |   on the land they found,     Ask and Embla,   |   empty of might.

18. Soul they had not,   |   sense they had not,     Heat nor motion,   |   nor goodly hue;     Soul gave Othin,   |   sense gave Hönir,     Heat gave Lothur   |   and goodly hue.

19. An ash I know,   |   Yggdrasil its name,     With water white   |   is the great tree wet;     Thence come the dews   |   that fall in the dales,     Green by Urth’s well   |   does it ever grow.

20. Thence come the maidens   |   mighty in wisdom,     Three from the dwelling   |   down ’neath the tree;     Urth is one named,   |   Verthandi the next,—     On the wood they scored,—   |   and Skuld the third.     Laws they made there,   |   and life allotted     To the sons of men,   |   and set their fates.

21. The war I remember,   |   the first in the world,     When the gods with spears   |   had smitten Gollveig,     And in the hall   |   of Hor had burned her,—     Three times burned,   |   and three times born,     Oft and again,   |   yet ever she lives.

22. Heith they named her   |   who sought their home,     The wide-seeing witch,   |   in magic wise;     Minds she bewitched   |   that were moved by her magic,     To evil women   |   a joy she was.

23. On the host his spear   |   did Othin hurl,     Then in the world   |   did war first come;     The wall that girdled   |   the gods was broken,     And the field by the warlike   |   Wanes was trodden.

24. Then sought the gods   |   their assembly-seats,     The holy ones,   |   and council held,     Whether the gods   |   should tribute give,     Or to all alike   |   should worship belong.

25. Then sought the gods   |   their assembly-seats,     The holy ones,   |   and council held,     To find who with venom   |   the air had filled,     Or had given Oth’s bride   |   to the giants’ brood.

26. In swelling rage   |   then rose up Thor,—     Seldom he sits   |   when he such things hears,—     And the oaths were broken,   |   the words and bonds,     The mighty pledges   |   between them made.

27. I know of the horn   |   of Heimdall, hidden     Under the high-reaching   |   holy tree;     On it there pours   |   from Valfather’s pledge     A mighty stream:   |   would you know yet more?

28. Alone I sat   |   when the Old One sought me,     The terror of gods,   |   and gazed in mine eyes:     “What hast thou to ask?   |   why comest thou hither?     Othin, I know   |   where thine eye is hidden.”

29. I know where Othin’s   |   eye is hidden,     Deep in the wide-famed   |   well of Mimir;     Mead from the pledge   |   of Othin each morn     Does Mimir drink:   |   would you know yet more?

30. Necklaces had I   |   and rings from Heerfather,     Wise was my speech   |   and my magic wisdom;     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     Widely I saw   |   over all the worlds.

31. On all sides saw I   |   Valkyries assemble,     Ready to ride   |   to the ranks of the gods;     Skuld bore the shield,   |   and Skogul rode next,     Guth, Hild, Gondul,   |   and Geirskogul.     Of Herjan’s maidens   |   the list have ye heard,     Valkyries ready   |   to ride o’er the earth.

32. I saw for Baldr,   |   the bleeding god,     The son of Othin,   |   his destiny set:     Famous and fair   |   in the lofty fields,     Full grown in strength   |   the mistletoe stood.

33. From the branch which seemed   |   so slender and fair     Came a harmful shaft   |   that Hoth should hurl;     But the brother of Baldr   |   was born ere long,     And one night old   |   fought Othin’s son.

34. His hands he washed not,   |   his hair he combed not,     Till he bore to the bale-blaze   |   Baldr’s foe.     But in Fensalir   |   did Frigg weep sore     For Valhall’s need:   |   would you know yet more?

35. One did I see   |   in the wet woods bound,     A lover of ill,   |   and to Loki like;     By his side does Sigyn   |   sit, nor is glad     To see her mate:   |   would you know yet more?

36. From the east there pours   |   through poisoned vales     With swords and daggers   |   the river Slith.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

37. Northward a hall   |   in Nithavellir     Of gold there rose   |   for Sindri’s race;     And in Okolnir   |   another stood,     Where the giant Brimir   |   his beer-hall had.

38. A hall I saw,   |   far from the sun,     On Nastrond it stands,   |   and the doors face north;     Venom drops   |   through the smoke-vent down,     For around the walls   |   do serpents wind.

39. I saw there wading   |   through rivers wild     Treacherous men   |   and murderers too,     And workers of ill   |   with the wives of men;     There Nithhogg sucked   |   the blood of the slain,     And the wolf tore men;   |   would you know yet more?

40. The giantess old   |   in Ironwood sat,     In the east, and bore   |   the brood of Fenrir;     Among these one   |   in monster’s guise     Was soon to steal   |   the sun from the sky.

41. There feeds he full   |   on the flesh of the dead,     And the home of the gods   |   he reddens with gore;     Dark grows the sun,   |   and in summer soon     Come mighty storms:   |   would you know yet more?

42. On a hill there sat,   |   and smote on his harp,     Eggther the joyous,   |   the giants’ warder;     Above him the cock   |   in the bird-wood crowed,     Fair and red   |   did Fjalar stand.

43. Then to the gods   |   crowed Gollinkambi,     He wakes the heroes   |   in Othin’s hall;     And beneath the earth   |   does another crow,     The rust-red bird   |   at the bars of Hel.

44. Now Garm howls loud   |   before Gnipahellir,     The fetters will burst,   |   and the wolf run free;     Much do I know,   |   and more can see     Of the fate of the gods,   |   the mighty in fight.

45. Brothers shall fight   |   and fell each other,     And sisters’ sons   |   shall kinship stain;     Hard is it on earth,   |   with mighty whoredom;     Axe-time, sword-time,   |   shields are sundered,     Wind-time, wolf-time,   |   ere the world falls;     Nor ever shall men   |   each other spare.

46. Fast move the sons   |   of Mim, and fate     Is heard in the note   |   of the Gjallarhorn;     Loud blows Heimdall,   |   the horn is aloft,     In fear quake all   |   who on Hel-roads are.

47. Yggdrasil shakes,   |   and shiver on high     The ancient limbs,   |   and the giant is loose;     To the head of Mim   |   does Othin give heed,     But the kinsman of Surt   |   shall slay him soon.

48. How fare the gods?   |   how fare the elves?     All Jotunheim groans,   |   the gods are at council;     Loud roar the dwarfs   |   by the doors of stone,     The masters of the rocks:   |   would you know yet more?

49. Now Garm howls loud   |   before Gnipahellir,     The fetters will burst,   |   and the wolf run free;     Much do I know,   |   and more can see     Of the fate of the gods,   |   the mighty in fight.

50. From the east comes Hrym   |   with shield held high;     In giant-wrath   |   does the serpent writhe;     O’er the waves he twists,   |   and the tawny eagle     Gnaws corpses screaming;   |   Naglfar is loose.

51. O’er the sea from the north   |   there sails a ship     With the people of Hel,   |   at the helm stands Loki;     After the wolf   |   do wild men follow,     And with them the brother   |   of Byleist goes.

52. Surt fares from the south   |   with the scourge of branches,     The sun of the battle-gods   |   shone from his sword;     The crags are sundered,   |   the giant-women sink,     The dead throng Hel-way,   |   and heaven is cloven.

53. Now comes to Hlin   |   yet another hurt,     When Othin fares   |   to fight with the wolf,     And Beli’s fair slayer   |   seeks out Surt,     For there must fall   |   the joy of Frigg.

54. Then comes Sigfather’s   |   mighty son,     Vithar, to fight   |   with the foaming wolf;     In the giant’s son   |   does he thrust his sword     Full to the heart:   |   his father is avenged.

55. Hither there comes   |   the son of Hlothyn,     The bright snake gapes   |   to heaven above;     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     Against the serpent   |   goes Othin’s son.

56. In anger smites   |   the warder of earth,—     Forth from their homes   |   must all men flee;—     Nine paces fares   |   the son of Fjorgyn,     And, slain by the serpent,   |   fearless he sinks.

57. The sun turns black,   |   earth sinks in the sea,     The hot stars down   |   from heaven are whirled;     Fierce grows the steam   |   and the life-feeding flame,     Till fire leaps high   |   about heaven itself.

58. Now Garm howls loud   |   before Gnipahellir,     The fetters will burst,   |   and the wolf run free;     Much do I know,   |   and more can see     Of the fate of the gods,   |   the mighty in fight.

59. Now do I see   |   the earth anew     Rise all green   |   from the waves again;     The cataracts fall,   |   and the eagle flies,     And fish he catches   |   beneath the cliffs.

60. The gods in Ithavoll   |   meet together,     Of the terrible girdler   |   of earth they talk,     And the mighty past   |   they call to mind,     And the ancient runes   |   of the Ruler of Gods.

61. In wondrous beauty   |   once again     Shall the golden tables   |   stand mid the grass,     Which the gods had owned   |   in the days of old,     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

62. Then fields unsowed   |   bear ripened fruit,     All ills grow better,   |   and Baldr comes back;     Baldr and Hoth dwell   |   in Hropt’s battle-hall,     And the mighty gods:   |   would you know yet more?

63. Then Hönir wins   |   the prophetic wand,     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     And the sons of the brothers   |   of Tveggi abide     In Vindheim now:   |   would you know yet more?

64. More fair than the sun,   |   a hall I see,     Roofed with gold,   |   on Gimle it stands;     There shall the righteous   |   rulers dwell,     And happiness ever   |   there shall they have.

65. There comes on high,   |   all power to hold,     A mighty lord,   |   all lands he rules.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

66. From below the dragon   |   dark comes forth,     Nithhogg flying   |   from Nithafjoll;     The bodies of men   |   on his wings he bears,     The serpent bright:   |   but now must I sink.








NOTES


1. A few editors, following Bugge, in an effort to clarify the poem, place stanzas 22, 28 and 30 before stanzas 1–20, but the arrangement in both manuscripts, followed here, seems logical. In stanza 1 the Volva, or wise-woman, called upon by Othin, answers him and demands a hearing. Evidently she belongs to the race of the giants (cf. stanza 2), and thus speaks to Othin unwillingly, being compelled to do so by his magic power. Holy: omitted in Regius; the phrase “holy races” probably means little more than mankind in general. Heimdall: the watchman of the gods; cf. stanza 46 and note. Why mankind should be referred to as Heimdall’s sons is uncertain, and the phrase has caused much perplexity. Heimdall seems to have had various attributes, and in the Rigsthula, wherein a certain Rig appears as the ancestor of the three great classes of men, a fourteenth century annotator identifies Rig with Heimdall, on what authority we do not know, for the Rig of the poem seems much more like Othin (cf. Rigsthula, introductory prose and note). Valfather (“Father of the Slain”): Othin, chief of the gods, so called because the slain warriors were brought to him at Valhall (“Hall of the Slain”) by the Valkyries (“Choosers of the Slain”).

2. Nine worlds: the worlds of the gods (Asgarth), of the Wanes (Vanaheim, cf. stanza 21 and note), of the elves (Alfheim), of men (Mithgarth), of the giants (Jotunheim), of fire (Muspellsheim, cf. stanza 47 and note), of the dark elves (Svartalfaheim), of the dead (Niflheim), and presumably of the dwarfs (perhaps Nithavellir, cf. stanza 37 and note, but the ninth world is uncertain). The tree: the world-ash Yggdrasil, symbolizing the universe; cf. Grimnismol, 29–35 and notes, wherein Yggdrasil is described at length.

3. Ymir: the giant out of whose body the gods made the world; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 21. In this stanza as quoted in Snorri’s Edda the first line runs: “Of old was the age   |   ere aught there was.” Yawning gap: this phrase, “Ginnunga-gap,” is sometimes used as a proper name.

4. Bur’s sons: Othin, Vili, and Ve. Of Bur we know only that his wife was Bestla, daughter of Bolthorn; cf. Hovamol, 141. Vili and Ve are mentioned by name in the Eddic poems only in Lokasenna, 26. Mithgarth (“Middle Dwelling”): the world of men. Leeks: the leek was often used as the symbol of fine growth (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 17), and it was also supposed to have magic power (cf. Sigrdrifumol, 7).

5. Various editors have regarded this stanza as interpolated; Hoffory thinks it describes the northern summer night in which the sun does not set. Lines 3–5 are quoted by Snorri. In the manuscripts line 4 follows line 5. Regarding the sun and moon as daughter and son of Mundilferi, cf. Vafthruthnismol, 23 and note, and Grimnismol, 37 and note.

6. Possibly an interpolation, but there seems no strong reason for assuming this. Lines 1–2 are identical with lines 1–2 of stanza 9, and line 2 may have been inserted here from that later stanza.

7. Ithavoll (“Field of Deeds”?): mentioned only here and in stanza 60 as the meeting-place of the gods; it appears in no other connection.

8. Tables: the exact nature of this game, and whether it more closely resembled chess or checkers, has been made the subject of a 400-page treatise, Willard Fiske’s “Chess in Iceland.” Giant-maids: perhaps the three great Norns, corresponding to the three fates; cf. stanza 20 and note. Possibly, however, something has been lost after this stanza, and the missing passage, replaced by the catalogue of the dwarfs (stanzas 9–16), may have explained the “giant-maids” otherwise than as Norns. In Vafthruthnismol, 49, the Norns (this time “three throngs” instead of simply “three”) are spoken of as giant-maidens; Fafnismol, 13, indicates the existence of many lesser Norns, belonging to various races. Jotunheim: the world of the giants.

9. Here apparently begins the interpolated catalogue of the dwarfs, running through stanza 16; possibly, however, the interpolated section does not begin before stanza 11. Snorri quotes practically the entire section, the names appearing in a somewhat changed order. Brimir and Blain: nothing is known of these two giants, and it has been suggested that both are names for Ymir (cf. stanza 3). Brimir, however, appears in stanza 37 in connection with the home of the dwarfs. Some editors treat the words as common rather than proper nouns, Brimir meaning “the bloody moisture” and Blain being of uncertain significance.

10. Very few of the dwarfs named in this and the following stanzas are mentioned elsewhere. It is not clear why Durin should have been singled out as authority for the list. The occasional repetitions suggest that not all the stanzas of the catalogue came from the same source. Most of the names presumably had some definite significance, as Northri, Suthri, Austri, and Vestri (“North,” “South,” “East,” and “West”), Althjof (“Mighty Thief”), Mjothvitnir (“Mead-Wolf”), Gandalf (“Magic Elf”), Vindalf (“Wind Elf”), Rathsvith (“Swift in Counsel”), Eikinskjaldi (“Oak Shield”), etc., but in many cases the interpretations are sheer guesswork.

12. The order of the lines in this and the succeeding four stanzas varies greatly in the manuscripts and editions, and the names likewise appear in many forms. Regin: probably not identical with Regin the son of Hreithmar, who plays an important part in the Reginsmol and Fafnismol, but cf. note on Reginsmol, introductory prose.

14. Dvalin: in Hovamol, 144, Dvalin seems to have given magic runes to the dwarfs, probably accounting for their skill in craftsmanship, while in Fafnismol, 13, he is mentioned as the father of some of the lesser Norns. The story that some of the dwarfs left the rocks and mountains to find a new home on the sands is mentioned, but unexplained, in Snorri’s Edda; of Lofar we know only that he was descended from these wanderers.

15. Andvari: this dwarf appears prominently in the Reginsmol, which tells how the god Loki treacherously robbed him of his wealth; the curse which he laid on his treasure brought about the deaths of Sigurth, Gunnar, Atli, and many others.

17. Here the poem resumes its course after the interpolated section. Probably, however, something has been lost, for there is no apparent connection between the three giant-maids of stanza 8 and the three gods, Othin, Hönir and Lothur, who in stanza 17 go forth to create man and woman. The word “three” in stanzas 8 and 17 very likely confused some early reciter, or perhaps the compiler himself. Ask and Embla: ash and elm; Snorri gives them simply as the names of the first man and woman, but says that the gods made this pair out of trees.

18. Hönir: little is known of this god, save that he occasionally appears in the poems in company with Othin and Loki, and that he survives the destruction, assuming in the new age the gift of prophesy (cf. stanza 63). He was given by the gods as a hostage to the Wanes after their war, in exchange for Njorth (cf. stanza 21 and note). Lothur: apparently an older name for Loki, the treacherous but ingenious son of Laufey, whose divinity Snorri regards as somewhat doubtful. He was adopted by Othin, who subsequently had good reason to regret it. Loki probably represents the blending of two originally distinct figures, one of them an old fire-god, hence his gift of heat to the newly created pair.

19. Yggdrasil: cf. stanza 2 and note, and Grimnismol, 29–35 and notes. Urth (“The Past”): one of the three great Norns. The world-ash is kept green by being sprinkled with the marvelous healing water from her well.

20. The maidens: the three Norns; possibly this stanza should follow stanza 8. Dwelling: Regius has “sæ” (sea) instead of “sal” (hall, home), and many editors have followed this reading, although Snorri’s prose paraphrase indicates “sal.” Urth, Verthandi and Skuld: “Past,” “Present” and “Future.” Wood, etc.: the magic signs (runes) controlling the destinies of men were cut on pieces of wood. Lines 3–4 are probably interpolations from some other account of the Norns.

21. This follows stanza 20 in Regius; in the Hauksbok version stanzas 25, 26, 27, 40 and 41 come between stanzas 20 and 21. Editors have attempted all sorts of rearrangements. The war: the first war was that between the gods and the Wanes. The cult of the Wanes (Vanir) seems to have originated among the seafaring folk of the Baltic and the southern shores of the North Sea, and to have spread thence into Norway in opposition to the worship of the older gods; hence the “war.” Finally the two types of divinities were worshipped in common; hence the treaty which ended the war with the exchange of hostages. Chief among the Wanes were Njorth and his children, Freyr and Freyja, all of whom became conspicuous among the gods. Beyond this we know little of the Wanes, who seem originally to have been water-deities. I remember: the manuscripts have “she remembers,” but the Volva is apparently still speaking of her own memories, as in stanza 2. Gollveig (“Gold-Might”): apparently the first of the Wanes to come among the gods, her ill-treatment being the immediate cause of the war. Müllenhoff maintains that Gollveig is another name for Freyja. Lines 5–6, one or both of them probably interpolated, seem to symbolize the refining of gold by fire. Hor (“The High One”): Othin.

22. Heith (“Shining One”?): a name often applied to wise-women and prophetesses. The application of this stanza to Gollveig is far from clear, though the reference may be to the magic and destructive power of gold. It is also possible that the stanza is an interpolation. Bugge maintains that it applies to the Volva who is reciting the poem, and makes it the opening stanza, following it with stanzas 28 and 30, and then going on with stanzas 1 ff. The text of line 2 is obscure, and has been variously emended.

23. This stanza and stanza 24 have been transposed from the order in the manuscripts, for the former describes the battle and the victory of the Wanes, after which the gods took council, debating whether to pay tribute to the victors, or to admit them, as was finally done, to equal rights of worship.

25. Possibly, as Finn Magnusen long ago suggested, there is something lost after stanza 24, but it was not the custom of the Eddic poets to supply transitions which their hearers could generally be counted on to understand. The story referred to in stanzas 25–26 (both quoted by Snorri) is that of the rebuilding of Asgarth after its destruction by the Wanes. The gods employed a giant as builder, who demanded as his reward the sun and moon, and the goddess Freyja for his wife. The gods, terrified by the rapid progress of the work, forced Loki, who had advised the bargain, to delay the giant by a trick, so that the work was not finished in the stipulated time (cf. Grimnismol, 44, note). The enraged giant then threatened the gods, whereupon Thor slew him. Oth’s bride: Freyja; of Oth little is known beyond the fact that Snorri refers to him as a man who “went away on long journeys.”

26. Thor: the thunder-god, son of Othin and Jorth (Earth); cf. particularly Harbarthsljoth and Thrymskvitha, passim. Oaths, etc.: the gods, by violating their oaths to the giant who rebuilt Asgarth, aroused the undying hatred of the giants’ race, and thus the giants were among their enemies in the final battle.

27. Here the Volva turns from her memories of the past to a statement of some of Othin’s own secrets in his eternal search for knowledge (stanzas 27–29). Bugge puts this stanza after stanza 29. The horn of Heimdall: the Gjallarhorn (“Shrieking Horn”), with which Heimdall, watchman of the gods, will summon them to the last battle. Till that time the horn is buried under Yggdrasil. Valfather’s pledge: Othin’s eye (the sun?), which he gave to the water-spirit Mimir (or Mim) in exchange for the latter’s wisdom. It appears here and in stanza 29 as a drinking-vessel, from which Mimir drinks the magic mead, and from which he pours water on the ash Yggdrasil. Othin’s sacrifice of his eye in order to gain knowledge of his final doom is one of the series of disasters leading up to the destruction of the gods. There were several differing versions of the story of Othin’s relations with Mimir; another one, quite incompatible with this, appears in stanza 47. In the manuscripts I know and I see appear as “she knows” and “she sees” (cf. note on 21).

28. The Hauksbok version omits all of stanzas 28–34, stanza 27 being there followed by stanzas 40 and 41. Regius indicates stanzas 28 and 29 as a single stanza. Bugge puts stanza 28 after stanza 22, as the second stanza of his reconstructed poem. The Volva here addresses Othin directly, intimating that, although he has not told her, she knows why he has come to her, and what he has already suffered in his search for knowledge regarding his doom. Her reiterated “would you know yet more?” seems to mean: “I have proved my wisdom by telling of the past and of your own secrets; is it your will that I tell likewise of the fate in store for you?” The Old One: Othin.

29. The first line, not in either manuscript, is a conjectural emendation based on Snorri’s paraphrase. Bugge puts this stanza after stanza 20.

30. This is apparently the transitional stanza, in which the Volva, rewarded by Othin for her knowledge of the past (stanzas 1–29), is induced to proceed with her real prophecy (stanzas 31–66). Some editors turn the stanza into the third person, making it a narrative link. Bugge, on the other hand, puts it after stanza 28 as the third stanza of the poem. No lacuna is indicated in the manuscripts, and editors have attempted various emendations. Heerfather (“Father of the Host”): Othin.

31. Valkyries: these “Choosers of the Slain” (cf. stanza 1, note) bring the bravest warriors killed in battle to Valhall, in order to re-enforce the gods for their final struggle. They are also called “Wish-Maidens,” as the fulfillers of Othin’s wishes. The conception of the supernatural warrior-maiden was presumably brought to Scandinavia in very early times from the South-Germanic races, and later it was interwoven with the likewise South-Germanic tradition of the swan-maiden. A third complication developed when the originally quite human women of the hero-legends were endowed with the qualities of both Valkyries and swan-maidens, as in the cases of Brynhild (cf. Gripisspo, introductory note), Svava (cf. Helgakvitha Hjorvarthssonar, prose after stanza 5 and note) and Sigrun (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 17 and note). The list of names here given may be an interpolation; a quite different list is given in Grimnismol, 36. Ranks of the gods: some editors regard the word thus translated as a specific place name. Herjan (“Leader of Hosts”): Othin. It is worth noting that the name Hild (“Warrior”) is the basis of Bryn-hild (“Warrior in Mail-Coat”).

32. Baldr: The death of Baldr, the son of Othin and Frigg, was the first of the great disasters to the gods. The story is fully told by Snorri. Frigg had demanded of all created things, saving only the mistletoe, which she thought too weak to be worth troubling about, an oath that they would not harm Baldr. Thus it came to be a sport for the gods to hurl weapons at Baldr, who, of course, was totally unharmed thereby. Loki, the trouble-maker, brought the mistletoe to Baldr’s blind brother, Hoth, and guided his hand in hurling the twig. Baldr was slain, and grief came upon all the gods. Cf. Baldrs Draumar.

33. The lines in this and the following stanza have been combined in various ways by editors, lacunæ having been freely conjectured, but the manuscript version seems clear enough. The brother of Baldr: Vali, whom Othin begot expressly to avenge Baldr’s death. The day after his birth he fought and slew Hoth.

34. Frigg: Othin’s wife. Some scholars have regarded her as a solar myth, calling her the sun-goddess, and pointing out that her home in Fensalir (“the sea-halls”) symbolizes the daily setting of the sun beneath the ocean horizon.

35. The translation here follows the Regius version. The Hauksbok has the same final two lines, but in place of the first pair has, “I know that Vali   |   his brother gnawed, / With his bowels then   |   was Loki bound.” Many editors have followed this version of the whole stanza or have included these two lines, often marking them as doubtful, with the four from Regius. After the murder of Baldr, the gods took Loki and bound him to a rock with the bowels of his son Narfi, who had just been torn to pieces by Loki’s other son, Vali. A serpent was fastened above Loki’s head, and the venom fell upon his face. Loki’s wife, Sigyn, sat by him with a basin to catch the venom, but whenever the basin was full, and she went away to empty it, then the venom fell on Loki again, till the earth shook with his struggles. “And there he lies bound till the end.” Cf. Lokasenna, concluding prose.

36. Stanzas 36–39 describe the homes of the enemies of the gods: the giants (36), the dwarfs (37), and the dead in the land of the goddess Hel (38–39). The Hauksbok version omits stanzas 36 and 37. Regius unites 36 with 37, but most editors have assumed a lacuna. Slith (“the Fearful”): a river in the giants’ home. The “swords and daggers” may represent the icy cold.

37. Nithavellir (“the Dark Fields”): a home of the dwarfs. Perhaps the word should be “Nithafjoll” (“the Dark Crags”). Sindri: the great worker in gold among the dwarfs. Okolnir (“the Not Cold”): possibly a volcano. Brimir: the giant (possibly Ymir) out of whose blood, according to stanza 9, the dwarfs were made; the name here appears to mean simply the leader of the dwarfs.

38. Stanzas 38 and 39 follow stanza 43 in the Hauksbok version. Snorri quotes stanzas 38, 39, 40 and 41, though not consecutively. Nastrond (“Corpse-Strand”): the land of the dead, ruled by the goddess Hel. Here the wicked undergo tortures. Smoke-vent: the phrase gives a picture of the Icelandic house, with its opening in the roof serving instead of a chimney.

39. The stanza is almost certainly in corrupt form. The third line is presumably an interpolation, and is lacking in most of the late paper manuscripts. Some editors, however, have called lines 1–3 the remains of a full stanza, with the fourth line lacking, and lines 4–5 the remains of another. The stanza depicts the torments of the two worst classes of criminals known to Old Norse morality—oath-breakers and murderers. Nithhogg (“the Dread Biter”): the dragon that lies beneath the ash Yggdrasil and gnaws at its roots, thus symbolizing the destructive elements in the universe; cf. Grimnismol, 32, 35. The wolf: presumably the wolf Fenrir, one of the children of Loki and the giantess Angrbotha (the others being Mithgarthsorm and the goddess Hel), who was chained by the gods with the marvelous chain Gleipnir, fashioned by a dwarf “out of six things: the noise of a cat’s step, the beards of women, the roots of mountains, the nerves of bears, the breath of fishes, and the spittle of birds.” The chaining of Fenrir cost the god Tyr his right hand; cf. stanza 44.

40. The Hauksbok version inserts after stanza 39 the refrain-stanza (44), and puts stanzas 40 and 41 between 27 and 21. With this stanza begins the account of the final struggle itself. The giantess: her name is nowhere stated, and the only other reference to Ironwood is in Grimnismol, 39, in this same connection. The children of this giantess and the wolf Fenrir are the wolves Skoll and Hati, the first of whom steals the sun, the second the moon. Some scholars naturally see here an eclipse-myth.

41. In the third line many editors omit the comma after “sun,” and put one after “soon,” making the two lines run: “Dark grows the sun   | in summer soon, / Mighty storms—” etc. Either phenomenon in summer would be sufficiently striking.

42. In the Hauksbok version stanzas 42 and 43 stand between stanzas 44 and 38. Eggther: this giant, who seems to be the watchman of the giants, as Heimdall is that of the gods and Surt of the dwellers in the fire-world, is not mentioned elsewhere in the poems. Fjalar, the cock whose crowing wakes the giants for the final struggle.

43. Gollinkambi (“Gold-Comb”): the cock who wakes the gods and heroes, as Fjalar does the giants. The rust-red bird: the name of this bird, who wakes the people of Hel’s domain, is nowhere stated.

44. This is a refrain-stanza. In Regius it appears in full only at this point, but is repeated in abbreviated form before stanzas 50 and 59. In the Hauksbok version the full stanza comes first between stanzas 35 and 42, then, in abbreviated form, it occurs four times: before stanzas 45, 50, 55, and 59. In the Hauksbok line 3 runs: “Farther I see   |   and more can say.” Garm: the dog who guards the gates of Hel’s kingdom; cf. Baldrs Draumar, 2 ff, and Grimnismol, 44. Gnipahellir (“the Cliff-Cave”): the entrance to the world of the dead. The wolf: Fenrir; cf. stanza 39 and note.

45. From this point on through stanza 57 the poem is quoted by Snorri, stanza 49 alone being omitted. There has been much discussion as to the status of stanza 45. Lines 4 and 5 look like an interpolation. After line 5 the Hauksbok has a line running: “The world resounds,   |   the witch is flying.” Editors have arranged these seven lines in various ways, with lacunæ freely indicated. Sisters’ sons: in all Germanic countries the relations between uncle and nephew were felt to be particularly close.

46. Regius combines the first three lines of this stanza with lines 3, 2, and 1 of stanza 47 as a single stanza. Line 4, not found in Regius, is introduced from the Hauksbok version, where it follows line 2 of stanza 47. The sons of Mim: the spirits of the water. On Mim (or Mimir) cf. stanza 27 and note. Gjallarhorn: the “Shrieking Horn” with which Heimdall, the watchman of the gods, calls them to the last battle.

47. In Regius lines 3, 2, and 1, in that order, follow stanza 46 without separation. Line 4 is not found in Regius, but is introduced from the Hauksbok version. Yggdrasil: cf. stanza 19 and note, and Grimnismol, 29–35. The giant: Fenrir. The head of Mim: various myths were current about Mimir. This stanza refers to the story that he was sent by the gods with Hönir as a hostage to the Wanes after their war (cf. stanza 21 and note), and that the Wanes cut off his head and returned it to the gods. Othin embalmed the head, and by magic gave it the power of speech, thus making Mimir’s noted wisdom always available. Of course this story does not fit with that underlying the references to Mimir in stanzas 27 and 29. The kinsman of Surt: the wolf Fenrir, who slays Othin in the final struggle; cf. stanza 53. Surt is the giant who rules the fire-world, Muspellsheim; cf. stanza 52.

48. This stanza in Regius follows stanza 51; in the Hauksbok it stands, as here, after 47. Jotunheim: the land of the giants.

49. Identical with stanza 44. In the manuscripts it is here abbreviated.

50. Hrym: the leader of the giants, who comes as the helmsman of the ship Naglfar (line 4). The serpent: Mithgarthsorm, one of the children of Loki and Angrbotha (cf. stanza 39, note). The serpent was cast into the sea, where he completely encircles the land; cf. especially Hymiskvitha, passim. The eagle: the giant Hræsvelg, who sits at the edge of heaven in the form of an eagle, and makes the winds with his wings; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 37, and Skirnismol, 27. Naglfar: the ship which was made out of dead men’s nails to carry the giants to battle.

51. North: a guess; the manuscripts have “east,” but there seems to be a confusion with stanza 50, line 1. People of Hel: the manuscripts have “people of Muspell,” but these came over the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow), which broke beneath them, whereas the people of Hel came in a ship steered by Loki. The wolf: Fenrir. The brother of Byleist: Loki. Of Byleist (or Byleipt) no more is known.

52. Surt: the ruler of the fire-world. The scourge of branches: fire. This is one of the relatively rare instances in the Eddic poems of the type of poetic diction which characterizes the skaldic verse.

53. Hlin: apparently another name for Frigg, Othin’s wife. After losing her son Baldr, she is fated now to see Othin slain by the wolf Fenrir. Beli’s slayer: the god Freyr, who killed the giant Beli with his fist; cf. Skirnismol, 16 and note. On Freyr, who belonged to the race of the Wanes, and was the brother of Freyja, see especially Skirnismol, passim. The joy of Frigg: Othin.

54. As quoted by Snorri the first line of this stanza runs: “Fares Othin’s son   |   to fight with the wolf.” Sigfather (“Father of Victory”): Othin. His son, Vithar, is the silent god, famed chiefly for his great shield, and his strength, which is little less than Thor’s. He survives the destruction. The giant’s son: Fenrir.

55. This and the following stanza are clearly in bad shape. In Regius only lines 1 and 4 are found, combined with stanza 56 as a single stanza. Line 1 does not appear in the Hauksbok version, the stanza there beginning with line 2. Snorri, in quoting these two stanzas, omits 55, 2–4, and 56, 3, making a single stanza out of 55, 1, and 56, 4, 2, 1, in that order. Moreover, the Hauksbok manuscript at this point is practically illegible. The lacuna (line 3) is, of course, purely conjectural, and all sorts of arrangements of the lines have been attempted by editors. Hlothyn: another name for Jorth (“Earth”), Thor’s mother; his father was Othin. The snake: Mithgarthsorm; cf. stanza 5c and note. Othin’s son: Thor. The fourth line in Regius reads “against the wolf,” but if this line refers to Thor at all, and not to Vithar, the Hauksbok reading, “serpent,” is correct.

56. The warder of earth: Thor. The son of Fjorgyn: again Thor, who, after slaying the serpent, is overcome by his venomous breath, and dies. Fjorgyn appears in both a masculine and a feminine form. In the masculine it is a name for Othin; in the feminine, as here and in Harbarthsljoth, 56, it apparently refers to Jorth.

57. With this stanza ends the account of the destruction.

58. Again the refrain-stanza (cf. stanza 44 and note), abbreviated in both manuscripts, as in the case of stanza 49. It is probably misplaced here.

59. Here begins the description of the new world which is to rise out of the wreck of the old one. It is on this passage that a few critics have sought to base their argument that the poem is later than the introduction of Christianity (circa 1000), but this theory has never seemed convincing (cf. introductory note).

60. The third line of this stanza is not found in Regius. Ithavoll: cf. stanza 7 and note. The girdler of earth: Mithgarthsorm, who, lying in the sea, surrounded the land. The Ruler of Gods: Othin. The runes were both magic signs, generally carved on wood, and sung or spoken charms.

61. The Hauksbok version of the first two lines runs:


    “The gods shall find there,   |   wondrous fair,     The golden tables   |   amid the grass.”


No lacuna (line 4) is indicated in the manuscripts. Golden tables: cf. stanza 8 and note.

62. Baldr: cf. stanza 32 and note. Baldr and his brother, Hoth, who unwittingly slew him at Loki’s instigation, return together, their union being a symbol of the new age of peace. Hropt: another name for Othin. His “battle-hall” is Valhall.

63. No lacuna (line 2) indicated in the manuscripts. Hönir: cf. stanza 18 and note. In this new age he has the gift of foretelling the future. Tveggi (“The Twofold”): another name for Othin. His brothers are Vili and Ve (cf. Lokasenna, 26, and note). Little is known of them, and nothing, beyond this reference, of their sons. Vindheim (“Home of the Wind”): heaven.

64. This stanza is quoted by Snorri. Gimle: Snorri makes this the name of the hall itself, while here it appears to refer to a mountain on which the hall stands. It is the home of the happy, as opposed to another hall, not here mentioned, for the dead. Snorri’s description of this second hall is based on Voluspo, 38, which he quotes, and perhaps that stanza properly belongs after 64.

65. This stanza is not found in Regius, and is probably spurious. No lacuna is indicated in the Hauksbok version, but late paper manuscripts add two lines, running:


    “Rule he orders,   |   and rights he fixes,     Laws he ordains   |   that ever shall live.”


The name of this new ruler is nowhere given, and of course the suggestion of Christianity is unavoidable. It is not certain, however, that even this stanza refers to Christianity, and if it does, it may have been interpolated long after the rest of the poem was composed.

66. This stanza, which fits so badly with the preceding ones, may well have been interpolated. It has been suggested that the dragon, making a last attempt to rise, is destroyed, this event marking the end of evil in the world. But in both manuscripts the final half-line does not refer to the dragon, but, as the gender shows, to the Volva herself, who sinks into the earth; a sort of conclusion to the entire prophecy. Presumably the stanza (barring the last half-line, which was probably intended as the conclusion of the poem) belongs somewhere in the description of the great struggle. Nithhogg: the dragon at the roots of Yggdrasil; cf. stanza 39 and note. Nithafjoll (“the Dark Crags”); nowhere else mentioned. Must I: the manuscripts have “must she.”








HOVAMOL

THE BALLAD OF THE HIGH ONE


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

This poem follows the Voluspo in the Codex Regius, but is preserved in no other manuscript. The first stanza is quoted by Snorri, and two lines of stanza 84 appear in one of the sagas.

In its present shape it involves the critic of the text in more puzzles than any other of the Eddic poems. Without going in detail into the various theories, what happened seems to have been somewhat as follows. There existed from very early times a collection of proverbs and wise counsels, which were attributed to Othin just as the Biblical proverbs were to Solomon. This collection, which presumably was always elastic in extent, was known as “The High One’s Words,” and forms the basis of the present poem. To it, however, were added other poems and fragments dealing with wisdom which seemed by their nature to imply that the speaker was Othin. Thus a catalogue of runes, or charms, was tacked on, and also a set of proverbs, differing essentially in form from those comprising the main collection. Here and there bits of verse more nearly narrative crept in; and of course the loose structure of the poem made it easy for any reciter to insert new stanzas almost at will. This curious miscellany is what we now have as the Hovamol.

Five separate elements are pretty clearly recognizable: (1) the Hovamol proper (stanzas 1–80), a collection of proverbs and counsels for the conduct of life; (2) the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111–138), a collection somewhat similar to the first, but specifically addressed to a certain Loddfafnir; (3) the Ljothatal (stanzas 147–165), a collection of charms; (4) the love-story of Othin and Billing’s daughter (stanzas 96–102), with an introductory dissertation on the faithlessness of women in general (stanzas 81–95), which probably crept into the poem first, and then pulled the story, as an apt illustration, after it; (5) the story of how Othin got the mead of poetry—the draught which gave him the gift of tongues—from the maiden Gunnloth (stanzas 103–110). There is also a brief passage (stanzas 139–146) telling how Othin won the runes, this passage being a natural introduction to the Ljothatal, and doubtless brought into the poem for that reason.

It is idle to discuss the authorship or date of such a series of accretions as this. Parts of it are doubtless among the oldest relics of ancient Germanic poetry; parts of it may have originated at a relatively late period. Probably, however, most of its component elements go pretty far back, although we have no way of telling how or when they first became associated.

It seems all but meaningless to talk about “interpolations” in a poem which has developed almost solely through the process of piecing together originally unrelated odds and ends. The notes, therefore, make only such suggestions as are needed to keep the main divisions of the poem distinct.

Few gnomic collections in the world’s literary history present sounder wisdom more tersely expressed than the Hovamol. Like the Book of Proverbs it occasionally rises to lofty heights of poetry. If it presents the worldly wisdom of a violent race, it also shows noble ideals of loyalty, truth, and unfaltering courage.





1.  Within the gates   |   ere a man shall go,       (Full warily let him watch,)       Full long let him look about him;     For little he knows   |   where a foe may lurk,       And sit in the seats within.

2.  Hail to the giver!   |   a guest has come;       Where shall the stranger sit?     Swift shall he be   |   who with swords shall try       The proof of his might to make.

3.  Fire he needs   |   who with frozen knees       Has come from the cold without;     Food and clothes   |   must the farer have,       The man from the mountains come.

4.  Water and towels   |   and welcoming speech       Should he find who comes to the feast;     If renown he would get,   |   and again be greeted,       Wisely and well must he act.

5.  Wits must he have   |   who wanders wide,       But all is easy at home;     At the witless man   |   the wise shall wink       When among such men he sits.

6.  A man shall not boast   |   of his keenness of mind,       But keep it close in his breast;     To the silent and wise   |   does ill come seldom       When he goes as guest to a house;     (For a faster friend   |   one never finds       Than wisdom tried and true.)

7.  The knowing guest   |   who goes to the feast,       In silent attention sits;     With his ears he hears,   |   with his eyes he watches,       Thus wary are wise men all.

8.  Happy the one   |   who wins for himself       Favor and praises fair;     Less safe by far   |   is the wisdom found       That is hid in another’s heart.

9.  Happy the man   |   who has while he lives       Wisdom and praise as well,     For evil counsel   |   a man full oft       Has from another’s heart.

10. A better burden   |   may no man bear       For wanderings wide than wisdom;     It is better than wealth   |   on unknown ways,       And in grief a refuge it gives.

11. A better burden   |   may no man bear       For wanderings wide than wisdom;     Worse food for the journey   |   he brings not afield       Than an over-drinking of ale.

12. Less good there lies   |   than most believe       In ale for mortal men;     For the more he drinks   |   the less does man       Of his mind the mastery hold.

13. Over beer the bird   |   of forgetfulness broods,       And steals the minds of men;     With the heron’s feathers   |   fettered I lay       And in Gunnloth’s house was held.

14. Drunk I was,   |   I was dead-drunk,       When with Fjalar wise I was;     ’Tis the best of drinking   |   if back one brings       His wisdom with him home.

15. The son of a king   |   shall be silent and wise,       And bold in battle as well;     Bravely and gladly   |   a man shall go,       Till the day of his death is come.

16. The sluggard believes   |   he shall live forever,       If the fight he faces not;     But age shall not grant him   |   the gift of peace,       Though spears may spare his life.

17. The fool is agape   |   when he comes to the feast,       He stammers or else is still;     But soon if he gets   |   a drink is it seen       What the mind of the man is like.

18. He alone is aware   |   who has wandered wide,       And far abroad has fared,     How great a mind   |   is guided by him       That wealth of wisdom has.

19. Shun not the mead,   |   but drink in measure;       Speak to the point or be still;     For rudeness none   |   shall rightly blame thee       If soon thy bed thou seekest.

20. The greedy man,   |   if his mind be vague,       Will eat till sick he is;     The vulgar man,   |   when among the wise,       To scorn by his belly is brought.

21. The herds know well   |   when home they shall fare,       And then from the grass they go;     But the foolish man   |   his belly’s measure       Shall never know aright.

22. A paltry man   |   and poor of mind       At all things ever mocks;     For never he knows,   |   what he ought to know,       That he is not free from faults.

23. The witless man   |   is awake all night,       Thinking of many things;     Care-worn he is   |   when the morning comes,       And his woe is just as it was.

24. The foolish man   |   for friends all those       Who laugh at him will hold;     When among the wise   |   he marks it not       Though hatred of him they speak.

25. The foolish man   |   for friends all those       Who laugh at him will hold;     But the truth when he comes   |   to the council he learns,       That few in his favor will speak.

26. An ignorant man   |   thinks that all he knows,       When he sits by himself in a corner;     But never what answer   |   to make he knows,       When others with questions come.

27. A witless man,   |   when he meets with men,       Had best in silence abide;     For no one shall find   |   that nothing he knows,       If his mouth is not open too much.     (But a man knows not,   |   if nothing he knows,       When his mouth has been open too much.)

28. Wise shall he seem   |   who well can question,       And also answer well;     Nought is concealed   |   that men may say       Among the sons of men.

29. Often he speaks   |   who never is still       With words that win no faith;     The babbling tongue,   |   if a bridle it find not,       Oft for itself sings ill.

30. In mockery no one   |   a man shall hold,       Although he fare to the feast;     Wise seems one oft,   |   if nought he is asked,       And safely he sits dry-skinned.

31. Wise a guest holds it   |   to take to his heels,       When mock of another he makes;     But little he knows   |   who laughs at the feast,       Though he mocks in the midst of his foes.

32. Friendly of mind   |   are many men,       Till feasting they mock at their friends;     To mankind a bane   |   must it ever be       When guests together strive.

33. Oft should one make   |   an early meal,       Nor fasting come to the feast;     Else he sits and chews   |   as if he would choke,       And little is able to ask.

34. Crooked and far   |   is the road to a foe,       Though his house on the highway be;     But wide and straight   |   is the way to a friend,       Though far away he fare.

35. Forth shall one go,   |   nor stay as a guest       In a single spot forever;     Love becomes loathing   |   if long one sits       By the hearth in another’s home.

36. Better a house,   |   though a hut it be,       A man is master at home;     A pair of goats   |   and a patched-up roof       Are better far than begging.

37. Better a house,   |   though a hut it be,       A man is master at home;     His heart is bleeding   |   who needs must beg       When food he fain would have.

38. Away from his arms   |   in the open field       A man should fare not a foot;     For never he knows   |   when the need for a spear       Shall arise on the distant road.

39. If wealth a man   |   has won for himself,       Let him never suffer in need;     Oft he saves for a foe   |   what he plans for a friend,       For much goes worse than we wish.

40. None so free with gifts   |   or food have I found       That gladly he took not a gift,     Nor one who so widely   |   scattered his wealth       That of recompense hatred he had.

41. Friends shall gladden each other   |   with arms and garments,       As each for himself can see;     Gift-givers’ friendships   |   are longest found,       If fair their fates may be.

42. To his friend a man   |   a friend shall prove,       And gifts with gifts requite;     But men shall mocking   |   with mockery answer,       And fraud with falsehood meet.

43. To his friend a man   |   a friend shall prove,       To him and the friend of his friend;     But never a man   |   shall friendship make       With one of his foeman’s friends.

44. If a friend thou hast   |   whom thou fully wilt trust,       And good from him wouldst get,     Thy thoughts with his mingle,   |   and gifts shalt thou make,       And fare to find him oft.

45. If another thou hast   |   whom thou hardly wilt trust,       Yet good from him wouldst get,     Thou shalt speak him fair,   |   but falsely think,       And fraud with falsehood requite.

46. So is it with him   |   whom thou hardly wilt trust,       And whose mind thou mayst not know;     Laugh with him mayst thou,   |   but speak not thy mind,       Like gifts to his shalt thou give.

47. Young was I once,   |   and wandered alone,       And nought of the road I knew;     Rich did I feel   |   when a comrade I found,       For man is man’s delight.

48. The lives of the brave   |   and noble are best,       Sorrows they seldom feed;     But the coward fear   |   of all things feels,       And not gladly the niggard gives.

49. My garments once   |   in a field I gave       To a pair of carven poles;     Heroes they seemed   |   when clothes they had,       But the naked man is nought.

50. On the hillside drear   |   the fir-tree dies,       All bootless its needles and bark;     It is like a man   |   whom no one loves,—       Why should his life be long?

51. Hotter than fire   |   between false friends       Does friendship five days burn;     When the sixth day comes   |   the fire cools,       And ended is all the love.

52. No great thing needs   |   a man to give,       Oft little will purchase praise;     With half a loaf   |   and a half-filled cup       A friend full fast I made.

53. A little sand   |   has a little sea,       And small are the minds of men;     Though all men are not   |   equal in wisdom,       Yet half-wise only are all.

54. A measure of wisdom   |   each man shall have,       But never too much let him know;     The fairest lives   |   do those men live       Whose wisdom wide has grown.

55. A measure of wisdom   |   each man shall have,       But never too much let him know;     For the wise man’s heart   |   is seldom happy,       If wisdom too great he has won.

56. A measure of wisdom   |   each man shall have,       But never too much let him know;     Let no man the fate   |   before him see,       For so is he freest from sorrow.

57. A brand from a brand   |   is kindled and burned,       And fire from fire begotten;     And man by his speech   |   is known to men,       And the stupid by their stillness.

58. He must early go forth   |   who fain the blood       Or the goods of another would get;     The wolf that lies idle   |   shall win little meat,       Or the sleeping man success.

59. He must early go forth   |   whose workers are few,       Himself his work to seek;     Much remains undone   |   for the morning-sleeper,       For the swift is wealth half won.

60. Of seasoned shingles   |   and strips of bark       For the thatch let one know his need,     And how much of wood   |   he must have for a month,       Or in half a year he will use.

61. Washed and fed   |   to the council fare,       But care not too much for thy clothes;     Let none be ashamed   |   of his shoes and hose,       Less still of the steed he rides,       (Though poor be the horse he has.)

62. When the eagle comes   |   to the ancient sea,       He snaps and hangs his head;     So is a man   |   in the midst of a throng,       Who few to speak for him finds.

63. To question and answer   |   must all be ready       Who wish to be known as wise;     Tell one thy thoughts,   |   but beware of two,—       All know what is known to three.

64. The man who is prudent   |   a measured use       Of the might he has will make;     He finds when among   |   the brave he fares       That the boldest he may not be.

65. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Oft for the words   |   that to others one speaks       He will get but an evil gift.

66. Too early to many   |   a meeting I came,       And some too late have I sought;     The beer was all drunk,   |   or not yet brewed;       Little the loathed man finds.

67. To their homes men would bid me   |   hither and yon,       If at meal-time I needed no meat,     Or would hang two hams   |   in my true friend’s house,       Where only one I had eaten.

68. Fire for men   |   is the fairest gift,       And power to see the sun;     Health as well,   |   if a man may have it,       And a life not stained with sin.

69. All wretched is no man,   |   though never so sick;       Some from their sons have joy,     Some win it from kinsmen,   |   and some from their wealth,       And some from worthy works.

70. It is better to live   |   than to lie a corpse,       The live man catches the cow;     I saw flames rise   |   for the rich man’s pyre,       And before his door he lay dead.

71. The lame rides a horse,   |   the handless is herdsman,       The deaf in battle is bold;     The blind man is better   |   than one that is burned,       No good can come of a corpse.

72. A son is better,   |   though late he be born,       And his father to death have fared;     Memory-stones   |   seldom stand by the road       Save when kinsman honors his kin.

73. Two make a battle,   |   the tongue slays the head;     In each furry coat   |   a fist I look for.

74. He welcomes the night   |   whose fare is enough.       (Short are the yards of a ship,)       Uneasy are autumn nights;     Full oft does the weather   |   change in a week,       And more in a month’s time.

75. A man knows not,   |   if nothing he knows,     That gold oft apes begets;     One man is wealthy   |   and one is poor,     Yet scorn for him none should know.

76. Among Fitjung’s sons   |   saw I well-stocked folds,—     Now bear they the beggar’s staff;     Wealth is as swift   |   as a winking eye,       Of friends the falsest it is.

77. Cattle die,   |   and kinsmen die,       And so one dies one’s self;     But a noble name   |   will never die,       If good renown one gets.

78. Cattle die,   |   and kinsmen die,       And so one dies one’s self;     One thing I know   |   that never dies,       The fame of a dead man’s deeds.

79. Certain is that   |   which is sought from runes,       That the gods so great have made,       And the Master-Poet painted;     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       .  .  .  .  . of the race of gods:       Silence is safest and best.

80. An unwise man,   |   if a maiden’s love       Or wealth he chances to win,     His pride will wax,   |   but his wisdom never,       Straight forward he fares in conceit.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

81. Give praise to the day at evening,   |   to a woman on her pyre,     To a weapon which is tried,   |   to a maid at wedlock,     To ice when it is crossed,   |   to ale that is drunk.

82. When the gale blows hew wood,   |   in fair winds seek the water;     Sport with maidens at dusk,   |   for day’s eyes are many;     From the ship seek swiftness,   |   from the shield protection,     Cuts from the sword,   |   from the maiden kisses.

83. By the fire drink ale,   |   over ice go on skates;     Buy a steed that is lean,   |   and a sword when tarnished,     The horse at home fatten,   |   the hound in thy dwelling.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

84. A man shall trust not   |   the oath of a maid,       Nor the word a woman speaks;     For their hearts on a whirling   |   wheel were fashioned,       And fickle their breasts were formed.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

85. In a breaking bow   |   or a burning flame,     A ravening wolf   |   or a croaking raven,     In a grunting boar,   |   a tree with roots broken,     In billowy seas   |   or a bubbling kettle,

86. In a flying arrow   |   or falling waters,     In ice new formed   |   or the serpent’s folds,     In a bride’s bed-speech   |   or a broken sword,     In the sport of bears   |   or in sons of kings,

87. In a calf that is sick   |   or a stubborn thrall,     A flattering witch   |   or a foe new slain.

88. In a brother’s slayer,   |   if thou meet him abroad,     In a half-burned house,   |   in a horse full swift—     One leg is hurt   |   and the horse is useless—     None had ever such faith   |   as to trust in them all.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

89. Hope not too surely   |   for early harvest,       Nor trust too soon in thy son;     The field needs good weather,   |   the son needs wisdom,       And oft is either denied.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

90. The love of women   |   fickle of will     Is like starting o’er ice   |   with a steed unshod,     A two-year-old restive   |   and little tamed,     Or steering a rudderless   |   ship in a storm,     Or, lame, hunting reindeer   |   on slippery rocks.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

91. Clear now will I speak,   |   for I know them both,       Men false to women are found;     When fairest we speak,   |   then falsest we think,       Against wisdom we work with deceit.

92. Soft words shall he speak   |   and wealth shall he offer       Who longs for a maiden’s love,     And the beauty praise   |   of the maiden bright;       He wins whose wooing is best.

93. Fault for loving   |   let no man find       Ever with any other;     Oft the wise are fettered,   |   where fools go free,       By beauty that breeds desire.

94. Fault with another   |   let no man find       For what touches many a man;     Wise men oft   |   into witless fools       Are made by mighty love.

95. The head alone knows   |   what dwells near the heart,       A man knows his mind alone;     No sickness is worse   |   to one who is wise       Than to lack the longed-for joy.

96. This found I myself,   |   when I sat in the reeds,       And long my love awaited;     As my life the maiden   |   wise I loved,       Yet her I never had.

97. Billing’s daughter   |   I found on her bed,       In slumber bright as the sun;     Empty appeared   |   an earl’s estate       Without that form so fair.

98. “Othin, again   |   at evening come,       If a woman thou wouldst win;     Evil it were   |   if others than we       Should know of such a sin.”

99. Away I hastened,   |   hoping for joy,       And careless of counsel wise;     Well I believed   |   that soon I should win       Measureless joy with the maid.

100. So came I next   |   when night it was,       The warriors all were awake;     With burning lights   |   and waving brands       I learned my luckless way.

101. At morning then,   |   when once more I came,       And all were sleeping still,     A dog I found   |   in the fair one’s place,       Bound there upon her bed.

102. Many fair maids,   |   if a man but tries them,       False to a lover are found;     That did I learn   |   when I longed to gain       With wiles the maiden wise;     Foul scorn was my meed   |   from the crafty maid,       And nought from the woman I won.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

103. Though glad at home,   |   and merry with guests,       A man shall be wary and wise;     The sage and shrewd,   |   wide wisdom seeking,       Must see that his speech be fair;     A fool is he named   |   who nought can say,       For such is the way of the witless.

104. I found the old giant,   |   now back have I fared,       Small gain from silence I got;     Full many a word,   |   my will to get,       I spoke in Suttung’s hall.

105. The mouth of Rati   |   made room for my passage,       And space in the stone he gnawed;     Above and below   |   the giants’ paths lay,       So rashly I risked my head.

106. Gunnloth gave   |   on a golden stool       A drink of the marvelous mead;     A harsh reward   |   did I let her have       For her heroic heart,       And her spirit troubled sore.

107. The well-earned beauty   |   well I enjoyed,       Little the wise man lacks;     So Othrörir now   |   has up been brought       To the midst of the men of earth.

108. Hardly, methinks,   |   would I home have come,       And left the giants’ land,     Had not Gunnloth helped me,   |   the maiden good,       Whose arms about me had been.

109. The day that followed,   |   the frost-giants came,        Some word of Hor to win,       (And into the hall of Hor;)     Of Bolverk they asked,   |   were he back midst the gods,       Or had Suttung slain him there?

110. On his ring swore Othin   |   the oath, methinks;       Who now his troth shall trust?     Suttung’s betrayal   |   he sought with drink,       And Gunnloth to grief he left.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

111. It is time to chant   |   from the chanter’s stool;       By the wells of Urth I was,     I saw and was silent,   |   I saw and thought,       And heard the speech of Hor.     (Of runes heard I words,   |   nor were counsels wanting,       At the hall of Hor,       In the hall of Hor;       Such was the speech I heard.)

112. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Rise not at night,   |   save if news thou seekest,       Or fain to the outhouse wouldst fare.

113. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Beware of sleep   |   on a witch’s bosom,       Nor let her limbs ensnare thee.

114. Such is her might   |   that thou hast no mind       For the council or meeting of men;     Meat thou hatest,   |   joy thou hast not,       And sadly to slumber thou farest.

115. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Seek never to win   |   the wife of another,       Or long for her secret love.

116. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     If o’er mountains or gulfs   |   thou fain wouldst go,       Look well to thy food for the way.

117. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     An evil man   |   thou must not let       Bring aught of ill to thee;     For an evil man   |   will never make       Reward for a worthy thought.

118. I saw a man   |   who was wounded sore       By an evil woman’s word;     A lying tongue   |   his death-blow launched,       And no word of truth there was.

119. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     If a friend thou hast   |   whom thou fully wilt trust,       Then fare to find him oft;     For brambles grow   |   and waving grass       On the rarely trodden road.

120. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     A good man find   |   to hold in friendship,      And give heed to his healing charms.

121. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Be never the first   |   to break with thy friend       The bond that holds you both;     Care eats the heart   |   if thou canst not speak       To another all thy thought.

122. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Exchange of words   |   with a witless ape      Thou must not ever make.

123. For never thou mayst   |   from an evil man       A good requital get;     But a good man oft   |   the greatest love       Through words of praise will win thee.

124. Mingled is love   |   when a man can speak       To another all his thought;     Nought is so bad   |   as false to be,       No friend speaks only fair.

125. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     With a worse man speak not   |   three words in dispute,       Ill fares the better oft       When the worse man wields a sword.

126. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     A shoemaker be,   |   or a maker of shafts,       For only thy single self;     If the shoe is ill made,   |   or the shaft prove false,       Then evil of thee men think.

127. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     If evil thou knowest,   |   as evil proclaim it,       And make no friendship with foes.

128. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     In evil never   |   joy shalt thou know,       But glad the good shall make thee.

129. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Look not up   |   when the battle is on,—     (Like madmen the sons   |   of men become,—)       Lest men bewitch thy wits.

130. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     If thou fain wouldst win   |   a woman’s love,       And gladness get from her,     Fair be thy promise   |   and well fulfilled;       None loathes what good he gets.

131. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     I bid thee be wary,   |   but be not fearful;     (Beware most with ale   |   or another’s wife,     And third beware   |   lest a thief outwit thee.)

132. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Scorn or mocking   |   ne’er shalt thou make       Of a guest or a journey-goer.

133. Oft scarcely he knows   |   who sits in the house       What kind is the man who comes;     None so good is found   |   that faults he has not,       Nor so wicked that nought he is worth.

134. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Scorn not ever   |   the gray-haired singer,       Oft do the old speak good;     (Oft from shrivelled skin   |   come skillful counsels,       Though it hang with the hides,       And flap with the pelts,       And is blown with the bellies.)

135. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     Curse not thy guest,   |   nor show him thy gate,       Deal well with a man in want.

136. Strong is the beam   |   that raised must be       To give an entrance to all;     Give it a ring,   |   or grim will be       The wish it would work on thee.

137. I rede thee, Loddfafnir!   |   and hear thou my rede,—       Profit thou hast if thou hearest,       Great thy gain if thou learnest:     When ale thou drinkest,   |   seek might of earth,     (For earth cures drink,   |   and fire cures ills,     The oak cures tightness,   |   the ear cures magic,     Rye cures rupture,   |   the moon cures rage,     Grass cures the scab,   |   and runes the sword-cut;)       The field absorbs the flood.

138. Now are Hor’s words   |   spoken in the hall,       Kind for the kindred of men,       Cursed for the kindred of giants:     Hail to the speaker,   |   and to him who learns!       Profit be his who has them!       Hail to them who hearken

        *    *    *    *    *    *

139. I ween that I hung   |   on the windy tree,       Hung there for nights full nine;     With the spear I was wounded,   |   and offered I was       To Othin, myself to myself,     On the tree that none   |   may ever know       What root beneath it runs.

140. None made me happy   |   with loaf or horn,       And there below I looked;     I took up the runes,   |   shrieking I took them,       And forthwith back I fell.

141. Nine mighty songs   |   I got from the son       Of Bolthorn, Bestla’s father;     And a drink I got   |   of the goodly mead       Poured out from Othrörir.

142. Then began I to thrive,   |   and wisdom to get,       I grew and well I was;     Each word led me on   |   to another word,       Each deed to another deed.

143. Runes shalt thou find,   |   and fateful signs,       That the king of singers colored,       And the mighty gods have made;     Full strong the signs,   |   full mighty the signs       That the ruler of gods doth write.

144. Othin for the gods,   |   Dain for the elves,       And Dvalin for the dwarfs,     Alsvith for giants   |   and all mankind,       And some myself I wrote.

145. Knowest how one shall write,   |   knowest how one shall rede?     Knowest how one shall tint,   |   knowest how one makes trial?     Knowest how one shall ask,   |   knowest how one shall offer?     Knowest how one shall send,   |   knowest how one shall sacrifice?

146. Better no prayer   |   than too big an offering,       By thy getting measure thy gift;     Better is none   |   than too big a sacrifice,       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     So Thund of old wrote   |   ere man’s race began,     Where he rose on high   |   when home he came.

        *    *    *    *    *    *

147. The songs I know   |   that king’s wives know not,       Nor men that are sons of men;     The first is called help,   |   and help it can bring thee       In sorrow and pain and sickness.

148. A second I know,   |   that men shall need       Who leechcraft long to use;     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

149. A third I know,   |   if great is my need       Of fetters to hold my foe;     Blunt do I make   |   mine enemy’s blade,       Nor bites his sword or staff.

150. A fourth I know,   |   if men shall fasten       Bonds on my bended legs;     So great is the charm   |   that forth I may go,       The fetters spring from my feet,       Broken the bonds from my hands.

151. A fifth I know,   |   if I see from afar       An arrow fly ’gainst the folk;     It flies not so swift   |   that I stop it not,       If ever my eyes behold it.

152. A sixth I know,   |   if harm one seeks       With a sapling’s roots to send me;     The hero himself   |   who wreaks his hate       Shall taste the ill ere I.

153. A seventh I know,   |   if I see in flames       The hall o’er my comrades’ heads;     It burns not so wide   |   that I will not quench it,       I know that song to sing.

154. An eighth I know,   |   that is to all       Of greatest good to learn;     When hatred grows   |   among heroes’ sons,       I soon can set it right.

155. A ninth I know,   |   if need there comes       To shelter my ship on the flood;     The wind I calm   |   upon the waves,       And the sea I put to sleep.

156. A tenth I know,   |   what time I see       House-riders flying on high;     So can I work   |   that wildly they go,       Showing their true shapes,       Hence to their own homes.

157. An eleventh I know,   |   if needs I must lead       To the fight my long-loved friends;     I sing in the shields,   |   and in strength they go       Whole to the field of fight,       Whole from the field of fight,       And whole they come thence home.

158. A twelfth I know,   |   if high on a tree       I see a hanged man swing;     So do I write   |   and color the runes       That forth he fares,       And to me talks.

159. A thirteenth I know,   |   if a thane full young       With water I sprinkle well;     He shall not fall,   |   though he fares mid the host,       Nor sink beneath the swords.

160. A fourteenth I know,   |   if fain I would name       To men the mighty gods;     All know I well   |   of the gods and elves,—       Few be the fools know this.

161. A fifteenth I know,   |   that before the doors       Of Delling sang Thjothrörir the dwarf;     Might he sang for the gods,   |   and glory for elves,       And wisdom for Hroptatyr wise.

162. A sixteenth I know,   |   if I seek delight       To win from a maiden wise;     The mind I turn   |   of the white-armed maid,       And thus change all her thoughts.

163. A seventeenth I know,   |   so that seldom shall go       A maiden young from me;     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

164. Long these songs   |   thou shalt, Loddfafnir,       Seek in vain to sing;     Yet good it were   |   if thou mightest get them,       Well, if thou wouldst them learn,       Help, if thou hadst them.

165. An eighteenth I know,   |   that ne’er will I tell       To maiden or wife of man,—     The best is what none   |   but one’s self doth know,       So comes the end of the songs,—     Save only to her   |   in whose arms I lie,       Or who else my sister is.








NOTES


1. This stanza is quoted by Snorri, the second line being omitted in most of the Prose Edda manuscripts.

2. Probably the first and second lines had originally nothing to do with the third and fourth, the last two not referring to host or guest, but to the general danger of backing one’s views with the sword.

6. Lines 5 and 6 appear to have been added to the stanza.

12. Some editors have combined this stanza in various ways with the last two lines of stanza 11, as in the manuscript the first two lines of the latter are abbreviated, and, if they belong there at all, are presumably identical with the first two lines of stanza 10.

13. The heron: the bird of forgetfulness, referred to in line 1. Gunnloth: the daughter of the giant Suttung, from whom Othin won the mead of poetry. For this episode see stanzas 104–110.

14. Fjalar: apparently another name for Suttung. This stanza, and probably 13, seem to have been inserted as illustrative.

25. The first two lines are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 24.

27. The last two lines were probably added as a commentary on lines 3 and 4.

36. The manuscript has “little” in place of “a hut” in line 1, but this involves an error in the initial-rhymes, and the emendation has been generally accepted.

37. Lines 1 and 2 are abbreviated in the manuscript, but are doubtless identical with the first two lines of stanza 36.

39. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 40.

40. The key-word in line 3 is missing in the manuscript, but editors have agreed in inserting a word meaning “generous.”

41. In line 3 the manuscript adds “givers again” to “gift-givers.”

55–56. The first pairs of lines are abbreviated in the manuscript.

61. The fifth line is probably a spurious addition.

62. This stanza follows stanza 63 in the manuscript, but there are marks therein indicating the transposition.

65. The manuscript indicates no lacuna (lines 1 and 2). Many editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts, the passage running:


    “A man must be watchful   |   and wary as well,       And fearful of trusting a friend.”


70. The manuscript has “and a worthy life” in place of “than to lie a corpse” in line 1, but Rask suggested the emendation as early as 1818, and most editors have followed him.

73–74. These seven lines are obviously a jumble. The two lines of stanza 73 not only appear out of place, but the verse-form is unlike that of the surrounding stanzas. In 74, the second line is clearly interpolated, and line 1 has little enough connection with lines 3, 4 and 5. It looks as though some compiler (or copyist) had inserted here various odds and ends for which he could find no better place.

75. The word “gold” in line 2 is more or less conjectural, the manuscript being obscure. The reading in line 4 is also doubtful.

76. In the manuscript this stanza follows 78, the order being: 77, 78, 76, 80, 79, 81. Fitjung (“the Nourisher”): Earth.

79. This stanza is certainly in bad shape, and probably out of place here. Its reference to runes as magic signs suggests that it properly belongs in some list of charms like the Ljothatal (stanzas 147–165). The stanza-form is so irregular as to show either that something has been lost or that there have been interpolations. The manuscript indicates no lacuna; Gering fills out the assumed gap as follows:


    “Certain is that   |   which is sought from runes,       The runes—,” etc.


81. With this stanza the verse-form, as indicated in the translation, abruptly changes to Malahattr. What has happened seems to have been something like this. Stanza 80 introduces the idea of man’s love for woman. Consequently some reciter or compiler (or possibly even a copyist) took occasion to insert at this point certain stanzas concerning the ways of women. Thus stanza 80 would account for the introduction of stanzas 81 and 82, which, in turn, apparently drew stanza 83 in with them. Stanza 84 suggests the fickleness of women, and is immediately followed—again with a change of verse-form—by a list of things equally untrustworthy (stanzas 85–90). Then, after a few more stanzas on love in the regular measure of the Hovamol (stanzas 91–95), is introduced, by way of illustration, Othin’s story of his adventure with Billing’s daughter (stanzas 96–102). Some such process of growth, whatever its specific stages may have been, must be assumed to account for the curious chaos of the whole passage from stanza 81 to stanza 102.

84. Lines 3 and 4 are quoted in the Fostbræthrasaga.

85. Stanzas 85–88 and 90 are in Fornyrthislag, and clearly come from a different source from the rest of the Hovamol.

87. The stanza is doubtless incomplete. Some editors add from a late paper manuscript two lines running:


    “In a light, clear sky   |   or a laughing throng,     In the howl of a dog   |   or a harlot’s grief.”


88. This stanza follows stanza 89 in the manuscript. Many editors have changed the order, for while stanza 89 is pretty clearly an interpolation wherever it stands, it seriously interferes with the sense if it breaks in between 87 and 88.

96. Here begins the passage (stanzas 96–102) illustrating the falseness of woman by the story of Othin’s unsuccessful love-affair with Billing’s daughter. Of this person we know nothing beyond what is here told, but the story needs little comment.

102. Rask adds at the beginning of this stanza two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:


    “Few are so good   |   that false they are never       To cheat the mind of a man.”


He makes these two lines plus lines 1 and 2 a full stanza, and lines 3, 4, 5, and 6 a second stanza.

103. With this stanza the subject changes abruptly, and apparently the virtues of fair speech, mentioned in the last three lines, account for the introduction, from what source cannot be known, of the story of Othin and the mead of song (stanzas 104–110).

104. The giant Suttung (“the old giant”) possessed the magic mead, a draught of which conferred the gift of poetry. Othin, desiring to obtain it, changed himself into a snake, bored his way through a mountain into Suttung’s home, made love to the giant’s daughter, Gunnloth, and by her connivance drank up all the mead. Then he flew away in the form of an eagle, leaving Gunnloth to her fate. While with Suttung he assumed the name of Bolverk (“the Evil-Doer”).

105. Rati (“the Traveller”): the gimlet with which Othin bored through the mountain to reach Suttung’s home.

106. Probably either the fourth or the fifth line is a spurious addition.

107. Othrörir: here the name of the magic mead itself, whereas in stanza 141 it is the name of the vessel containing it. Othin had no intention of bestowing any of the precious mead upon men, but as he was flying over the earth, hotly pursued by Suttung, he spilled some of it out of his mouth, and in this way mankind also won the gift of poetry.

109. Hor: Othin (“the High One”). The frost-giants, Suttung’s kinsmen, appear not to have suspected Othin of being identical with Bolverk, possibly because the oath referred to in stanza 110 was an oath made by Othin to Suttung that there was no such person as Bolverk among the gods. The giants, of course, fail to get from Othin the information they seek concerning Bolverk, but Othin is keenly conscious of having violated the most sacred of oaths, that sworn on his ring.

111. With this stanza begins the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111–138). Loddfafnir is apparently a wandering singer, who, from his “chanter’s stool,” recites the verses which he claims to have received from Othin. Wells of Urth: cf. Voluspo, 19 and note. Urth (“the Past”) is one of the three Norns. This stanza is apparently in corrupt form, and editors have tried many experiments with it, both in rejecting lines as spurious and in rearranging the words and punctuation. It looks rather as though the first four lines formed a complete stanza, and the last four had crept in later. The phrase translated “the speech of Hor” is “Hova mol,” later used as the title for the entire poem.

112. Lines 1–3 are the formula, repeated (abbreviated in the manuscript) in most of the stanzas, with which Othin prefaces his counsels to Loddfafnir, and throughout this section, except in stanzas 111 and 138, Loddfafnir represents himself as simply quoting Othin’s words. The material is closely analogous to that contained in the first eighty stanzas of the poem. In some cases (e.g., stanzas 117, 119, 121, 126 and 130) the formula precedes a full four-line stanza instead of two (or three) lines.

129. Line 5 is apparently interpolated.

131. Lines 5–6 probably were inserted from a different poem.

133. Many editors reject the last two lines of this stanza as spurious, putting the first two lines at the end of the preceding stanza. Others, attaching lines 3 and 4 to stanza 132, insert as the first two lines of stanza 133 two lines from a late paper manuscript, running:


    “Evil and good   |   do men’s sons ever       Mingled bear in their breasts.”


134. Presumably the last four lines have been added to this stanza, for the parallelism in the last three makes it probable that they belong together. The wrinkled skin of the old man is compared with the dried skins and bellies of animals kept for various purposes hanging in an Icelandic house.

136. This stanza suggests the dangers of too much hospitality. The beam (bolt) which is ever being raised to admit guests becomes weak thereby. It needs a ring to help it in keeping the door closed, and without the ability at times to ward off guests a man becomes the victim of his own generosity.

137. The list of “household remedies” in this stanza is doubtless interpolated. Their nature needs no comment here.

138. In the manuscript this stanza comes at the end of the entire poem, following stanza 165. Most recent editors have followed Müllenhoff in shifting it to this position, as it appears to conclude the passage introduced by the somewhat similar stanza III.

139. With this stanza begins the most confusing part of the Hovamol: the group of eight stanzas leading up to the Ljothatal, or list of charms. Certain paper manuscripts have before this stanza a title: “Othin’s Tale of the Runes.” Apparently stanzas 139, 140 and 142 are fragments of an account of how Othin obtained the runes; 141 is erroneously inserted from some version of the magic mead story (cf. stanzas 104–110); and stanzas 143, 144, 145, and 146 are from miscellaneous sources, all, however, dealing with the general subject of runes. With stanza 147 a clearly continuous passage begins once more. The windy tree: the ash Yggdrasil (literally “the Horse of Othin,” so called because of this story), on which Othin, in order to win the magic runes, hanged himself as an offering to himself, and wounded himself with his own spear. Lines 5 and 6 have presumably been borrowed from Svipdagsmol, 30.

141. This stanza, interrupting as it does the account of Othin’s winning the runes, appears to be an interpolation. The meaning of the stanza is most obscure. Bolthorn was Othin’s grandfather, and Bestla his mother. We do not know the name of the uncle here mentioned, but it has been suggested that this son of Bolthorn was Mimir (cf. Voluspo, 27 and note, and 47 and note). In any case, the nine magic songs which he learned from his uncle seem to have enabled him to win the magic mead (cf. stanzas 104–110). Concerning Othrörir, here used as the name of the vessel containing the mead, cf. stanza 107 and note.

143. This and the following stanza belong together, and in many editions appear as a single stanza. They presumably come from some lost poem on the authorship of the runes. Lines 2 and 3 follow line 4 in the manuscript; the transposition was suggested by Bugge. The king of singers: Othin. The magic signs (runes) were commonly carved in wood, then colored red.

144. Dain and Dvalin: dwarfs; cf. Voluspo, 14, and note. Dain, however, may here be one of the elves rather than the dwarf of that name. The two names also appear together in Grimnismol, 33, where they are applied to two of the four harts that nibble at the topmost twigs of Yggdrasil. Alsvith (“the All-Wise”) appears nowhere else as a giant’s name. Myself: Othin. We have no further information concerning the list of those who wrote the runes for the various races, and these four lines seem like a confusion of names in the rather hazy mind of some reciter.

145. This Malahattr stanza appears to be a regular religious formula, concerned less with the runes which one “writes” and “tints” (cf. stanza 79) than with the prayers which one “asks” and the sacrifices which one “offers” and “sends.” Its origin is wholly uncertain, but it is clearly an interpolation here. In the manuscript the phrase “knowest?” is abbreviated after the first line.

146. This stanza as translated here follows the manuscript reading, except in assuming a gap between lines 3 and 5. In Vigfusson and Powell’s Corpus Poeticum Boreale the first three lines have somehow been expanded into eight. The last two lines are almost certainly misplaced; Bugge suggests that they belong at the end of stanza 144. Thund: another name for Othin. When home he came: presumably after obtaining the runes as described in stanzas 139 and 140.

147. With this stanza begins the Ljothatal, or list of charms. The magic songs themselves are not given, but in each case the peculiar application of the charm is explained. The passage, which is certainly approximately complete as far as it goes, runs to the end of the poem. In the manuscript and in most editions line 4 falls into two half-lines, running:


    “In sickness and pain   |   and every sorrow.”


148. Second, etc., appear in the manuscript as Roman numerals. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 2.

152. The sending of a root with runes written thereon was an excellent way of causing death. So died the Icelandic hero Grettir the Strong.

156. House-riders: witches, who ride by night on the roofs of houses, generally in the form of wild beasts. Possibly one of the last two lines is spurious.

157. The last line looks like an unwarranted addition, and line 4 may likewise be spurious.

158. Lines 4–5 are probably expanded from a single line.

159. The sprinkling of a child with water was an established custom long before Christianity brought its conception of baptism.

161. This stanza, according to Müllenhoff, was the original conclusion of the poem, the phrase “a fifteenth” being inserted only after stanzas 162–165 had crept in. Delling: a seldom mentioned god who married Not (Night). Their son was Dag (Day). Thjothrörir: not mentioned elsewhere. Hroptatyr: Othin.

163. Some editors have combined these two lines with stanza 164. Others have assumed that the gap follows the first half-line, making “so that—from me” the end of the stanza.

164. This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, and seems to have been introduced after the list of charms and the Loddfafnismol (stanzas 111–138) were combined in a single poem, for there is no other apparent excuse for the reference to Loddfafnir at this point. The words “if thou mightest get them” are a conjectural emendation.

165. This stanza is almost totally obscure. The third and fourth lines look like interpolations.









VAFTHRUTHNISMOL

THE BALLAD OF VAFTHRUTHNIR


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Vafthruthnismol follows the Hovamol in the Codex Regius. From stanza 20 on it is also included in the Arnamagnæan Codex, the first part evidently having appeared on a leaf now lost. Snorri quotes eight stanzas of it in the Prose Edda, and in his prose text closely paraphrases many others.

The poem is wholly in dialogue form except for a single narrative stanza (stanza 5). After a brief introductory discussion between Othin and his wife, Frigg, concerning the reputed wisdom of the giant Vafthruthnir, Othin, always in quest of wisdom, seeks out the giant, calling himself Gagnrath. The giant immediately insists that they shall demonstrate which is the wiser of the two, and propounds four questions (stanzas 11, 13, 15, and 17), each of which Othin answers. It is then the god’s turn to ask, and he begins with a series of twelve numbered questions regarding the origins and past history of life. These Vafthruthnir answers, and Othin asks five more questions, this time referring to what is to follow the destruction of the gods, the last one asking the name of his own slayer. Again Vafthruthnir answers, and Othin finally propounds the unanswerable question: “What spake Othin himself in the ears of his son, ere in the bale-fire he burned?” Vafthruthnir, recognizing his questioner as Othin himself, admits his inferiority in wisdom, and so the contest ends.

The whole poem is essentially encyclopædic in character, and thus was particularly useful to Snorri in his preparation of the Prose Edda. The encyclopædic poem with a slight narrative outline seems to have been exceedingly popular; the Grimnismol and the much later Alvissmol represent different phases of the same type. The Vafthruthnismol and Grimnismol together, indeed, constitute a fairly complete dictionary of Norse mythology. There has been much discussion as to the probable date of the Vafthruthnismol, but it appears to belong to about the same period as the Voluspo: in other words, the middle of the tenth century. While there may be a few interpolated passages in the poem as we now have it, it is clearly a united whole, and evidently in relatively good condition.





Othin spake:


1.  “Counsel me, Frigg,   |   for I long to fare,       And Vafthruthnir fain would find;     In wisdom old   |   with the giant wise       Myself would I seek to match.”


Frigg spake:


2.  “Heerfather here   |   at home would I keep,       Where the gods together dwell;     Amid all the giants   |   an equal in might       To Vafthruthnir know I none.”


Othin spake:


3.  “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got from the gods;     And fain would I know   |   how Vafthruthnir now       Lives in his lofty hall.”


Frigg spake:


4.  “Safe mayst thou go,   |   safe come again,       And safe be the way thou wendest!     Father of men,   |   let thy mind be keen       When speech with the giant thou seekest.”

5.  The wisdom then   |   of the giant wise       Forth did he fare to try;     He found the hall   |   of the father of Im,       And in forthwith went Ygg.


Othin spake:


6.  “Vafthruthnir, hail!   |   to thy hall am I come,       For thyself I fain would see;     And first would I ask   |   if wise thou art,       Or, giant, all wisdom hast won.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


7.  “Who is the man   |   that speaks to me,       Here in my lofty hall?     Forth from our dwelling   |   thou never shalt fare,       Unless wiser than I thou art.”


Othin spake:


8.  “Gagnrath they call me,   |   and thirsty I come       From a journey hard to thy hall;     Welcome I look for,   |   for long have I fared,       And gentle greeting, giant.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


9.  “Why standest thou there   |   on the floor whilst thou     speakest?       A seat shalt thou have in my hall;     Then soon shall we know   |   whose knowledge is more,       The guest’s or the sage’s gray.”


Othin spake:


10. “If a poor man reaches   |   the home of the rich,       Let him wisely speak or be still;     For to him who speaks   |   with the hard of heart       Will chattering ever work ill.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


11. “Speak forth now, Gagnrath,   |   if there from the floor       Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:     What name has the steed   |   that each morn anew       The day for mankind doth draw?”


Othin spake:


12. “Skinfaxi is he,   |   the steed who for men       The glittering day doth draw;     The best of horses   |   to heroes he seems,       And brightly his mane doth burn.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


13. “Speak forth now, Gagnrath,   |   if there from the floor       Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:     What name has the steed   |   that from East anew       Brings night for the noble gods?”


Othin spake:


14. “Hrimfaxi name they   |   the steed that anew       Brings night for the noble gods;     Each morning foam   |   from his bit there falls,       And thence come the dews in the dales.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


15. “Speak forth now, Gagnrath,   |   if there from the floor       Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:     What name has the river   |   that ’twixt the realms       Of the gods and the giants goes?”


Othin spake:


16. “Ifing is the river   |   that ’twixt the realms       Of the gods and the giants goes;     For all time ever   |   open it flows,       No ice on the river there is.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


17. “Speak forth now, Gagnrath,   |   if there from the floor       Thou wouldst thy wisdom make known:     What name has the field   |   where in fight shall meet       Surt and the gracious gods?”


Othin spake:


18. “Vigrith is the field   |   where in fight shall meet       Surt and the gracious gods;     A hundred miles   |   each way does it measure,       And so are its boundaries set.”


Vafthruthnir spake:


19. “Wise art thou, guest!   |   To my bench shalt thou go,       In our seats let us speak together;     Here in the hall   |   our heads, O guest,       hall we wager our wisdom upon.”


Othin spake:


20. “First answer me well,   |   if thy wisdom avails,       And thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     In earliest time   |   whence came the earth,       Or the sky, thou giant sage?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


21. “Out of Ymir’s flesh   |   was fashioned the earth,       And the mountains were made of his bones;     The sky from the frost-cold   |   giant’s skull,       And the ocean out of his blood.”


Othin spake:


22. “Next answer me well,   |   if thy wisdom avails,       And thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     Whence came the moon,   |   o’er the world of men       That fares, and the flaming sun?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


23. “Mundilferi is he   |   who begat the moon,       And fathered the flaming sun;     The round of heaven   |   each day they run,       To tell the time for men.”


Othin spake:


24. “Third answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     Whence came the day,   |   o’er mankind that fares,       Or night with the narrowing moon?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


25. “The father of day   |   is Delling called,       And the night was begotten by Nor;     Full moon and old   |   by the gods were fashioned,       To tell the time for men.”


Othin spake:


26. “Fourth answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     Whence did winter come,   |   or the summer warm,       First with the gracious gods?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


27. “Vindsval he was   |   who was winter’s father,       And Svosuth summer begat;”     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .


Othin spake:


28. “Fifth answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     What giant first   |   was fashioned of old,       And the eldest of Ymir’s kin?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


29. “Winters unmeasured   |   ere earth was made       Was the birth of Bergelmir;     Thruthgelmir’s son   |   was the giant strong,       And Aurgelmir’s grandson of old.”


Othin spake:


30. “Sixth answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     Whence did Aurgelmir come   |   with the giants’ kin,       Long since, thou giant sage?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


31. “Down from Elivagar   |   did venom drop,       And waxed till a giant it was;     And thence arose   |   our giants’ race,       And thus so fierce are we found.”


Othin spake:


32. “Seventh answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     How begat he children,   |   the giant grim,       Who never a giantess knew?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


33. “They say ’neath the arms   |   of the giant of ice       Grew man-child and maid together;     And foot with foot   |   did the wise one fashion       A son that six heads bore.”


Othin spake:


34. “Eighth answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     What farthest back   |   dost thou bear in mind?       For wide is thy wisdom, giant!”


Vafthruthnir spake:


35. “Winters unmeasured   |   ere earth was made       Was the birth of Bergelmir;     This first knew I well,   |   when the giant wise       In a boat of old was borne.”


Othin spake:


36. “Ninth answer me well,   |   if wise thou art called,       If thou knowest it, Vafthruthnir, now:     Whence comes the wind   |   that fares o’er the waves       Yet never itself is seen?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


37. “In an eagle’s guise   |   at the end of heaven       Hræsvelg sits, they say;     And from his wings   |   does the wind come forth       To move o’er the world of men.”


Othin spake:


38. “Tenth answer me now,   |   if thou knowest all       The fate that is fixed for the gods:     Whence came up Njorth   |   to the kin of the gods,—     (Rich in temples   |   and shrines he rules,—)       Though of gods he was never begot?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


39. “In the home of the Wanes   |   did the wise ones create him,       And gave him as pledge to the gods;     At the fall of the world   |   shall he fare once more       Home to the Wanes so wise.”


Othin spake:


40. “Eleventh answer me well,   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     What men .  .  .  .  .  .   |   in .  .  .  .  .  . home       Each day to fight go forth?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


41. “The heroes all   |   in Othin’s hall       Each day to fight go forth;     They fell each other,   |   and fare from the fight       All healed full soon to sit.”


Othin spake:


42. “Twelfth answer me now   |   how all thou knowest       Of the fate that is fixed for the gods;     Of the runes of the gods   |   and the giants’ race       The truth indeed dost thou tell,       (And wide is thy wisdom, giant!)”


Vafthruthnir spake:


43. “Of the runes of the gods   |   and the giants’ race       The truth indeed can I tell,       (For to every world have I won;)     To nine worlds came I,   |   to Niflhel beneath,       The home where dead men dwell.”


Othin spake:


44. “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got of the gods:     What shall live of mankind   |   when at last there comes       The mighty winter to men?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


45. “In Hoddmimir’s wood   |   shall hide themselves     Lif and Lifthrasir then;     The morning dews   |   for meat shall they have,       Such food shall men then find.”


Othin spake:


46. “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got of the gods:     Whence comes the sun   |   to the smooth sky back,       When Fenrir has snatched it forth?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


47. “A daughter bright   |   Alfrothul bears       Ere Fenrir snatches her forth;     Her mother’s paths   |   shall the maiden tread       When the gods to death have gone.”


Othin spake:


48. “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got of the gods:     What maidens are they,   |   so wise of mind,       That forth o’er the sea shall fare?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


49. “O’er Mogthrasir’s hill   |   shall the maidens pass,       And three are their throngs that come;     They all shall protect   |   the dwellers on earth,       Though they come of the giants’ kin.”


Othin spake:


50. “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got of the gods:     Who then shall rule   |   the realm of the gods,       When the fires of Surt have sunk?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


51. “In the gods’ home Vithar   |   and Vali shall dwell,       When the fires of Surt have sunk;     Mothi and Magni   |   shall Mjollnir have       When Vingnir falls in fight.”


Othin spake:


52. “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got of the gods:     What shall bring the doom   |   of death to Othin,       When the gods to destruction go?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


53. “The wolf shall fell   |   the father of men,       And this shall Vithar avenge;     The terrible jaws   |   shall he tear apart,       And so the wolf shall he slay.”


Othin spake:


54. “Much have I fared,   |   much have I found,       Much have I got from the gods:     What spake Othin himself   |   in the ears of his son,       Ere in the bale-fire he burned?”


Vafthruthnir spake:


55. “No man can tell   |   what in olden time       Thou spak’st in the ears of thy son;     With fated mouth   |   the fall of the gods       And mine olden tales have I told;     With Othin in knowledge   |   now have I striven,       And ever the wiser thou art.”








NOTES


1. The phrases “Othin spake,” “Frigg spake,” etc., appear in abbreviated form in both manuscripts. Frigg: Othin’s wife; cf. Voluspo, 34 and note. Vafthruthnir (“the Mighty in Riddles”): nothing is known of this giant beyond what is told in this poem.

2. Heerfather (“Father of the Host”): Othin.

5. This single narrative stanza is presumably a later interpolation. Im: the name appears to be corrupt, but we know nothing of any son of Vafthruthnir. Ygg (“the Terrible”): Othin.

8. Gagnrath (“the Gain-Counsellor”): Othin on his travels always assumes a name other than his own.

10. This stanza sounds very much like many of those in the first part of the Hovamol, and may have been introduced here from some such source.

12. Skinfaxi: “Shining-Mane.”

13. Here, and in general throughout the poem, the two-line introductory formulæ are abbreviated in the manuscripts.

14. Hrimfaxi: “Frosty-Mane.”

16. Ifing: there is no other reference to this river, which never freezes, so that the giants cannot cross it.

17. Surt: the ruler of the fire-world (Muspellsheim), who comes to attack the gods in the last battle; cf. Voluspo, 52.

18. Vigrith: “the Field of Battle.” Snorri quotes this stanza. A hundred miles: a general phrase for a vast distance.

19. With this stanza Vafthruthnir, sufficiently impressed with his guest’s wisdom to invite him to share his own seat, resigns the questioning to Othin.

20. The fragmentary version of this poem in the Arnamagnæan Codex begins in the middle of the first line of this stanza.

21. Ymir: the giant out of whose body the gods made the world; cf. Voluspo, 3 and note.

22. In this and in Othin’s following questions, both manuscripts replace the words “next,” “third,” “fourth,” etc., by Roman numerals.

23. Mundilferi (“the Turner”?): known only as the father of Mani (the Moon) and Sol (the Sun). Note that, curiously enough, Mani is the boy and Sol the girl. According to Snorri, Sol drove the horses of the sun, and Mani those of the moon, for the gods, indignant that they should have been given such imposing names, took them from their father to perform these tasks. Cf. Grimnismol, 37.

25. Delling (“the Dayspring”? Probably another form of the name, Dogling, meaning “Son of the Dew” is more correct): the husband of Not (Night); their son was Dag (Day); cf. Hovamol, 161. Nor: Snorri calls the father of Night Norvi or Narfi, and puts him among the giants. Lines 3–4: cf. Voluspo, 6.

27. Neither the Regius nor the Arnamagnæan Codex indicates a lacuna. Most editors have filled out the stanza with two lines from late paper manuscripts: “And both of these   |   shall ever be, / Till the gods to destruction go.” Bugge ingeniously paraphrases Snorri’s prose: “Vindsval’s father   |   was Vosuth called, / And rough is all his race.” Vindsval: “the Wind-Cold,” also called Vindljoni, “the Wind-Man.” Svosuth: “the Gentle.”

28. Ymir’s kin: the giants.

29. Bergelmir: when the gods slew Ymir in order to make the world out of his body, so much blood flowed from him that all the frost-giants were drowned except Bergelmir and his wife, who escaped in a boat; cf. stanza 35. Of Thruthgelmir (“the Mightily Burning”) we know nothing, but Aurgelmir was the frost-giants’ name for Ymir himself. Thus Ymir was the first of the giants, and so Othin’s question is answered.

31. Snorri quotes this stanza, and the last two lines are taken from his version, as both of the manuscripts omit them. Elivagar (“Stormy Waves”): Mogk suggests that this river may have been the Milky Way. At any rate, the venom carried in its waters froze into ice-banks over Ginnunga-gap (the “yawning gap” referred to in Voluspo, 3), and then dripped down to make the giant Ymir.

33. Snorri gives, without materially elaborating on it, the same account of how Ymir’s son and daughter were born under his left arm, and how his feet together created a son. That this offspring should have had six heads is nothing out of the ordinary, for various giants had more than the normal number, and Hymir’s mother is credited with a little matter of nine hundred heads; cf. Hymiskvitha, 8. Of the career of Ymir’s six-headed son we know nothing; he may have been the Thruthgelmir of stanza 29.

35. Snorri quotes this stanza. Bergelmir: on him and his boat cf. stanza 29 and note.

37. Snorri quotes this stanza. Hræsvelg (“the Corpse-Eater”): on this giant in eagle’s form cf. Voluspo, 50, and Skirnismol, 27.

38. With this stanza the question-formula changes, and Othin’s questions from this point on concern more or less directly the great final struggle. Line 4 is presumably spurious. Njorth: on Njorth and the Wanes, who gave him as a hostage to the gods at the end of their war, cf. Voluspo, 21 and note.

40. In both manuscripts, apparently through the carelessness of some older copyist, stanzas 40 and 41 are run together: “Eleventh answer me well, what men in the home mightily battle each day? They fell each other, and fare from the fight all healed full soon to sit.” Luckily Snorri quotes stanza 41 in full, and the translation is from his version. Stanza 40 should probably run something like this: “Eleventh answer me well,   |   if thou knowest all / The fate that is fixed for the gods: / What men are they   |   who in Othin’s home / Each day to fight go forth?”

41. The heroes: those brought to Valhall by the Valkyries. After the day’s fighting they are healed of their wounds and all feast together.

43. Nine worlds: cf. Voluspo, 2. Niflhel: “Dark-Hell.”

44. The mighty winter: Before the final destruction three winters follow one another with no intervening summers.

45. Snorri quotes this stanza. Hoddmimir’s wood: probably this is the ash-tree Yggdrasil, which is sometimes referred to as “Mimir’s Tree,” because Mimir waters it from his well; cf. Voluspo, 27 and note, and Svipdagsmol, 30 and note. Hoddmimir is presumably another name for Mimir. Lif (“Life”) and Lifthrasir (“Sturdy of Life”?): nothing further is known of this pair, from whom the new race of men is to spring.

46. Fenrir: there appears to be a confusion between the wolf Fenrir (cf. Voluspo, 39 and note) and his son, the wolf Skoll, who steals the sun (cf. Voluspo, 40 and note).

47. Snorri quotes this stanza. Alfrothul (“the Elf-Beam”): the sun.

49. Mogthrasir (“Desiring Sons”): not mentioned elsewhere in the Eddic poems, or by Snorri. The maidens: apparently Norns, like the “giant-maids” in Voluspo, 8. These Norns, however, are kindly to men.

50. Surt: cf. Voluspo, 52 and note.

51. Vithar: a son of Othin, who slays the wolf Fenrir; cf. Voluspo, 54 and note. Vali: the son whom Othin begot to avenge Baldr’s death; cf. Voluspo, 33 and note. Mothi (“Wrath”) and Magni (“Might”): the sons of the god Thor, who after his death inherit his famous hammer, Mjollnir. Concerning this hammer cf. especially Thrymskvitha, passim. Vingnir (“the Hurler”): Thor. Concerning his death cf. Voluspo, 56. This stanza is quoted by Snorri.

53. The wolf: Fenrir; cf. Voluspo, 53 and 54.

54. His son: Baldr. Bugge changes lines 3–4 to run: “What did Othin speak   |   in the ear of Baldr, / When to the bale-fire they bore him?” For Baldr’s death cf. Voluspo, 32 and note. The question is, of course, unanswerable save by Othin himself, and so the giant at last recognizes his guest.

55. Fated: in stanza 19 Vafthruthnir was rash enough to wager his head against his guest’s on the outcome of the contest of wisdom, so he knows that his defeat means his death.








GRIMNISMOL

THE BALLAD OF GRIMNIR


INTRODUCTORY NOTE


The Grimnismol follows the Vafthruthnismol in the Codex Regius and is also found complete in the Arnamagnæan Codex, where also it follows the Vafthruthnismol. Snorri quotes over twenty of its stanzas.

Like the preceding poem, the Grimnismol is largely encyclopædic in nature, and consists chiefly of proper names, the last forty-seven stanzas containing no less than two hundred and twenty-five of these. It is not, however, in dialogue form. As Müllenhoff pointed out, there is underneath the catalogue of mythological names a consecutive and thoroughly dramatic story. Othin, concealed under the name of Grimnir, is through an error tortured by King Geirröth. Bound between two blazing fires, he begins to display his wisdom for the benefit of the king’s little son, Agnar, who has been kind to him. Gradually he works up to the great final moment, when he declares his true name, or rather names, to the terrified Geirröth, and the latter falls on his sword and is killed.

For much of this story we do not have to depend on guesswork, for in both manuscripts the poem itself is preceded by a prose narrative of considerable length, and concluded by a brief prose statement of the manner of Geirröth’s death. These prose notes, of which there are many in the Eddic manuscripts, are of considerable interest to the student of early literary forms. Presumably they were written by the compiler to whom we owe the Eddic collection, who felt that the poems needed such annotation in order to be clear. Linguistic evidence shows that they were written in the twelfth or thirteenth century, for they preserve none of the older word-forms which help us to date many of the poems two or three hundred years earlier.

Without discussing in detail the problems suggested by these prose passages, it is worth noting, first, that the Eddic poems contain relatively few stanzas of truly narrative verse; and second, that all of them are based on narratives which must have been more or less familiar to the hearers of the poems. In other words, the poems seldom aimed to tell stories, although most of them followed a narrative sequence of ideas. The stories themselves appear to have lived in oral prose tradition, just as in the case of the sagas; and the prose notes of the manuscripts, in so far as they contain material not simply drawn from the poems themselves, are relics of this tradition. The early Norse poets rarely conceived verse as a suitable means for direct story-telling, and in some of the poems even the simplest action is told in prose “links” between dialogue stanzas.

The applications of this fact, which has been too often overlooked, are almost limitless, for it suggests a still unwritten chapter in the history of ballad poetry and the so-called “popular” epic. It implies that narrative among early peoples may frequently have had a period of prose existence before it was made into verse, and thus puts, for example, a long series of transitional stages before such a poem as the Iliad. In any case, the prose notes accompanying the Eddic poems prove that in addition to the poems themselves there existed in the twelfth century a considerable amount of narrative tradition, presumably in prose form, on which these notes were based by the compiler.

Interpolations in such a poem as the Grimnismol could have been made easily enough, and many stanzas have undoubtedly crept in from other poems, but the beginning and end of the poem are clearly marked, and presumably it has come down to us with the same essential outline it had when it was composed, probably in the first half of the tenth century.





King Hrauthung had two sons: one was called Agnar, and the other Geirröth. Agnar was ten winters old, and Geirröth eight. Once they both rowed in a boat with their fishing-gear to catch little fish; and the wind drove them out into the sea. In the darkness of the night they were wrecked on the shore; and going up, they found a poor peasant, with whom they stayed through the winter. The housewife took care of Agnar, and the peasant cared for Geirröth, and taught him wisdom. In the spring the peasant gave him a boat; and when the couple led them to the shore, the peasant spoke secretly with Geirröth. They had a fair wind, and came to their father’s landing-place. Geirröth was forward in the boat; he leaped up on land, but pushed out the boat and said, “Go thou now where evil may have thee!” The boat drifted out to sea. Geirröth, however, went up to the house, and was well received, but his father was dead. Then Geirröth was made king, and became a renowned man.

Othin and Frigg sat in Hlithskjolf and looked over all the worlds. Othin said: “Seest thou Agnar, thy fosterling, how he begets children with a giantess in the cave? But Geirröth, my fosterling, is a king, and now rules over his land.” Frigg said: “He is so miserly that he tortures his guests if he thinks that too many of them come to him.” Othin replied that this was the greatest of lies; and they made a wager about this matter. Frigg sent her maid-servant, Fulla, to Geirröth. She bade the king beware lest a magician who was come thither to his land should bewitch him, and told this sign concerning him, that no dog was so fierce as to leap at him. Now it was a very great slander that King Geirröth was not hospitable; but nevertheless he had them take the man whom the dogs would not attack. He wore a dark-blue mantle and called himself Grimnir, but said no more about himself, though he was questioned. The king had him tortured to make him speak, and set him between two fires, and he sat there eight nights. King Geirröth had a son ten winters old, and called Agnar after his father’s brother. Agnar went to Grimnir, and gave him a full horn to drink from, and said that the king did ill in letting him be tormented without cause. Grimnir drank from the horn; the fire had come so near that the mantle burned on Grimnir’s back. He spake:


1.  Hot art thou, fire!   |   too fierce by far;       Get ye now gone, ye flames!     The mantle is burnt,   |   though I bear it aloft,       And the fire scorches the fur.

2.  ’Twixt the fires now   |   eight nights have I sat,       And no man brought meat to me,     Save Agnar alone,   |   and alone shall rule       Geirröth’s son o’er the Goths.

3.  Hail to thee, Agnar!   |   for hailed thou art       By the voice of Veratyr;     For a single drink   |   shalt thou never receive       A greater gift as reward.

4.  The land is holy   |   that lies hard by       The gods and the elves together;     And Thor shall ever   |   in Thruthheim dwell,       Till the gods to destruction go.

5.  Ydalir call they   |   the place where Ull       A hall for himself hath set;     And Alfheim the gods   |   to Freyr once gave       As a tooth-gift in ancient times.

6.  A third home is there,   |   with silver thatched       By the hands of the gracious gods:     Valaskjolf is it,   |   in days of old       Set by a god for himself.

7.  Sökkvabekk is the fourth,   |   where cool waves flow,       And amid their murmur it stands;     There daily do Othin   |   and Saga drink       In gladness from cups of gold.

8.  The fifth is Glathsheim,   |   and gold-bright there       Stands Valhall stretching wide;     And there does Othin   |   each day choose       The men who have fallen in fight.

9.  Easy is it to know   |   for him who to Othin       Comes and beholds the hall;     Its rafters are spears,   |   with shields is it roofed,       On its benches are breastplates strewn.

10. Easy is it to know   |   for him who to Othin       Comes and beholds the hall;     There hangs a wolf   |   by the western door,       And o’er it an eagle hovers.

11. The sixth is Thrymheim,   |   where Thjazi dwelt,       The giant of marvelous might;     Now Skathi abides,   |   the god’s fair bride,       In the home that her father had.

12. The seventh is Breithablik;   |   Baldr has there       For himself a dwelling set,     In the land I know   |   that lies so fair,       And from evil fate is free.

13. Himinbjorg is the eighth,   |   and Heimdall there       O’er men holds sway, it is said;     In his well-built house   |   does the warder of heaven       The good mead gladly drink.

14. The ninth is Folkvang,   |   where Freyja decrees       Who shall have seats in the hall;     The half of the dead   |   each day does she choose,       And half does Othin have.

15. The tenth is Glitnir;   |   its pillars are gold,       And its roof with silver is set;     There most of his days   |   does Forseti dwell,       And sets all strife at end.

16. The eleventh is Noatun;   |   there has Njorth       For himself a dwelling set;     The sinless ruler   |   of men there sits       In his temple timbered high.

17. Filled with growing trees   |   and high-standing grass       Is Vithi, Vithar’s land;     But there did the son   |   from his steed leap down,       When his father he fain would avenge.

18. In Eldhrimnir   |   Andhrimnir cooks       Sæhrimnir’s seething flesh,—     The best of food,   |   but few men know       On what fare the warriors feast.

19. Freki and Geri   |   does Heerfather feed,       The far-famed fighter of old:     But on wine alone   |   does the weapon-decked god,       Othin, forever live.

20. O’er Mithgarth Hugin   |   and Munin both       Each day set forth to fly;     For Hugin I fear   |   lest he come not home,       But for Munin my care is more.

21. Loud roars Thund,   |   and Thjothvitnir’s fish       Joyously fares in the flood;     Hard does it seem   |   to the host of the slain       To wade the torrent wild.

22. There Valgrind stands,   |   the sacred gate,       And behind are the holy doors;     Old is the gate,   |   but few there are       Who can tell how it tightly is locked.

23. Five hundred doors   |   and forty there are,       I ween, in Valhall’s walls;     Eight hundred fighters   |   through one door fare       When to war with the wolf they go.

24. Five hundred rooms   |   and forty there are       I ween, in Bilskirnir built;     Of all the homes   |   whose roofs I beheld,       My son’s the greatest meseemed.

25. Heithrun is the goat   |   who stands by Heerfather’s hall,       And the branches of Lærath she bites;     The pitcher she fills   |   with the fair, clear mead,       Ne’er fails the foaming drink.

26. Eikthyrnir is the hart   |   who stands by Heerfather’s hall       And the branches of Lærath he bites;     From his horns a stream   |   into Hvergelmir drops,       Thence all the rivers run.

27. Sith and Vith,   |   Sækin and Ækin,     Svol and Fimbulthul,   |   Gunnthro and Fjorm,       Rin and Rinnandi,     Gipul and Gopul,   |   Gomul and Geirvimul,       That flow through the fields of the gods;     Thyn and Vin,   |   Thol and Hol,       Groth and Gunnthorin.

28. Vino is one,   |   Vegsvin another,       And Thjothnuma a third;     Nyt and Not,   |   Non and Hron,     Slith and Hrith,   |   Sylg and Ylg,     Vith and Von,   |   Vond and Strond,     Gjol and Leipt,   |   that go among men,       And hence they fall to Hel.

29. Kormt and Ormt   |   and the Kerlaugs twain       Shall Thor each day wade through,     (When dooms to give   |   he forth shall go       To the ash-tree Yggdrasil;)     For heaven’s bridge   |   burns all in flame,       And the sacred waters seethe.

30. Glath and Gyllir,   |   Gler and Skeithbrimir,       Silfrintopp and Sinir,     Gisl and Falhofnir,   |   Golltopp and Lettfeti,       On these steeds the gods shall go     When dooms to give   |   each day they ride       To the ash-tree Yggdrasil.

31. Three roots there are   |   that three ways run       ’Neath the ash-tree Yggdrasil;     ’Neath the first lives Hel,   |   ’neath the second the     frost-giants,       ’Neath the last are the lands of men.

32. Ratatosk is the squirrel   |   who there shall run       On the ash-tree Yggdrasil;     From above the words   |   of the eagle he bears,       And tells them to Nithhogg beneath.

33. Four harts there are,   |   that the highest twigs     Nibble with necks bent back;     Dain and Dvalin,   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       Duneyr and Dyrathror.

34. More serpents there are   |   beneath the ash       Than an unwise ape would think;     Goin and Moin,   |   Grafvitnir’s sons,       Grabak and Grafvolluth,     Ofnir and Svafnir   |   shall ever, methinks,       Gnaw at the twigs of the tree.

35. Yggdrasil’s ash   |   great evil suffers,       Far more than men do know;     The hart bites its top,   |   its trunk is rotting,       And Nithhogg gnaws beneath.

36. Hrist and Mist   |   bring the horn at my will,       Skeggjold and Skogul;     Hild and Thruth,   |   Hlokk and Herfjotur,       Gol and Geironul,     Randgrith and Rathgrith   |   and Reginleif       Beer to the warriors bring.

37. Arvak and Alsvith   |   up shall drag       Weary the weight of the sun;     But an iron cool   |   have the kindly gods       Of yore set under their yokes.

38. In front of the sun   |   does Svalin stand,       The shield for the shining god;     Mountains and sea   |   would be set in flames       If it fell from before the sun.

39. Skoll is the wolf   |   that to Ironwood       Follows the glittering god,     And the son of Hrothvitnir,   |   Hati, awaits       The burning bride of heaven.

40. Out of Ymir’s flesh   |   was fashioned the earth,       And the ocean out of his blood;     Of his bones the hills,   |   of his hair the trees,       Of his skull the heavens high.

41. Mithgarth the gods   |   from his eyebrows made,       And set for the sons of men;     And out of his brain   |   the baleful clouds       They made to move on high.

42. His the favor of Ull   |   and of all the gods       Who first in the flames will reach;     For the house can be seen   |   by the sons of the gods       If the kettle aside were cast.

43. In days of old   |   did Ivaldi’s sons       Skithblathnir fashion fair,     The best of ships   |   for the bright god Freyr,       The noble son of Njorth.

44. The best of trees   |   must Yggdrasil be,       Skithblathnir best of boats;     Of all the gods   |   is Othin the greatest,       And Sleipnir the best of steeds;     Bilrost of bridges,   |   Bragi of skalds,     Hobrok of hawks,   |   and Garm of hounds.

45. To the race of the gods   |   my face have I raised,       And the wished-for aid have I waked;     For to all the gods   |   has the message gone       That sit in Ægir’s seats,       That drink within Ægir’s doors.

46. Grim is my name,   |   Gangleri am I,       Herjan and Hjalmberi,     Thekk and Thrithi,   |   Thuth and Uth,       Helblindi and Hor;

47. Sath and Svipal   |   and Sanngetal,       Herteit and Hnikar,     Bileyg, Baleyg,   |   Bolverk, Fjolnir,     Grim and Grimnir,   |   Glapsvith, Fjolsvith.

48. Sithhott, Sithskegg,   |   Sigfather, Hnikuth,     Allfather, Valfather,   |   Atrith, Farmatyr:     A single name   |   have I never had       Since first among men I fared.

49. Grimnir they call me   |   in Geirröth’s hall,       With Asmund Jalk am I;     Kjalar I was   |   when I went in a sledge,       At the council Thror am I called,       As Vithur I fare to the fight;     Oski, Biflindi,   |   Jafnhor and Omi,       Gondlir and Harbarth midst gods.

50. I deceived the giant   |   Sokkmimir old       As Svithur and Svithrir of yore;     Of Mithvitnir’s son   |   the slayer I was       When the famed one found his doom.

51. Drunk art thou, Geirröth,   |   too much didst thou drink,       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Much hast thou lost,   |   for help no more       From me or my heroes thou hast.

52. Small heed didst thou take   |   to all that I told,       And false were the words of thy friends;     For now the sword   |   of my friend I see,       That waits all wet with blood.

53. Thy sword-pierced body   |   shall Ygg have soon,       For thy life is ended at last;     The maids are hostile;   |   now Othin behold!       Now come to me if thou canst!

54. Now am I Othin,   |   Ygg was I once,       Ere that did they call me Thund;     Vak and Skilfing,   |   Vofuth and Hroptatyr,       Gaut and Jalk midst the gods;     Ofnir and Svafnir,   |   and all, methinks,       Are names for none but me.


King Geirröth sat and had his sword on his knee, half drawn from its sheath. But when he heard that Othin was come thither, then he rose up and sought to take Othin from the fire. The sword slipped from his hand, and fell with the hilt down. The king stumbled and fell forward, and the sword pierced him through, and slew him. Then Othin vanished, but Agnar long ruled there as king.








NOTES


Prose. The texts of the two manuscripts differ in many minor details. Hrauthung: this mythical king is not mentioned elsewhere. Geirröth: the manuscripts spell his name in various ways. Frigg: Othin’s wife. She and Othin nearly always disagreed in some such way as the one outlined in this story. Hlithskjolf (“Gate-Shelf”): Othin’s watch-tower in heaven, whence he can overlook all the nine worlds; cf. Skirnismol, introductory prose. Grimnir: “the Hooded One.”

2. In the original lines 2 and 4 are both too long for the meter, and thus the true form of the stanza is doubtful. For line 4 both manuscripts have “the land of the Goths” instead of simply “the Goths.” The word “Goths” apparently was applied indiscriminately to any South-Germanic people, including the Burgundians as well as the actual Goths, and thus here has no specific application; cf. Gripisspo, 35 and note.

3. Veratyr (“Lord of Men”): Othin. The “gift” which Agnar receives is Othin’s mythological lore.

4. Thruthheim (“the Place of Might”): the place where Thor, the strongest of the gods, has his hall, Bilskirnir, described in stanza 24.

5. Ydalir (“Yew-Dales”): the home of Ull, the archer among the gods, a son of Thor’s wife, Sif, by another marriage. The wood of the yew-tree was used for bows in the North just as it was long afterwards in England. Alfheim: the home of the elves. Freyr: cf. Skirnismol, introductory prose and note. Tooth-gift: the custom of making a present to a child when it cuts its first tooth is, according to Vigfusson, still in vogue in Iceland.

6. Valaskjolf (“the Shelf of the Slain”): Othin’s home, in which is his watch-tower, Hlithskjolf. Gering identifies this with Valhall, and as that is mentioned in stanza 8, he believes stanza 6 to be an interpolation.

7. Sökkvabekk (“the Sinking Stream”): of this spot and of Saga, who is said to live there, little is known. Saga may be an hypostasis of Frigg, but Snorri calls her a distinct goddess, and the name suggests some relation to history or story-telling.

8. Glathsheim (“the Place of Joy”): Othin’s home, the greatest and most beautiful hall in the world. Valhall (“Hall of the Slain”): cf. Voluspo, 31 and note. Valhall is not only the hall whither the slain heroes are brought by the Valkyries, but also a favorite home of Othin.

10. The opening formula is abbreviated in both manuscripts. A wolf: probably the wolf and the eagle were carved figures above the door.

11. Thrymheim (“the Home of Clamor”): on this mountain the giant Thjazi built his home. The god, or rather Wane, Njorth (cf. Voluspo, 21, note) married Thjazi’s daughter, Skathi. She wished to live in her father’s hall among the mountains, while Njorth loved his home, Noatun, by the sea. They agreed to compromise by spending nine nights at Thrymheim and then three at Noatun, but neither could endure the surroundings of the other’s home, so Skathi returned to Thrymheim, while Njorth stayed at Noatun. Snorri quotes stanzas 11–15.

12. Breithablik (“Wide-Shining”): the house in heaven, free from everything unclean, in which Baldr (cf. Voluspo, 32, note), the fairest and best of the gods, lived.

13. Himinbjorg (“Heaven’s Cliffs”): the dwelling at the end of the bridge Bifrost (the rainbow), where Heimdall (cf. Voluspo, 27) keeps watch against the coming of the giants. In this stanza the two functions of Heimdall—as father of mankind (cf. Voluspo, 1 and note, and Rigsthula, introductory prose and note) and as warder of the gods—seem both to be mentioned, but the second line in the manuscripts is apparently in bad shape, and in the editions is more or less conjectural.

14. Folkvang (“Field of the Folk”): here is situated Freyja’s hall, Sessrymnir (“Rich in Seats”). Freyja, the sister of Freyr, is the fairest of the goddesses, and the most kindly disposed to mankind, especially to lovers. Half of the dead: Mogk has made it clear that Freyja represents a confusion between two originally distinct divinities: the wife of Othin (Frigg) and the northern goddess of love. This passage appears to have in mind her attributes as Othin’s wife. Snorri has this same confusion, but there is no reason why the Freyja who was Freyr’s sister should share the slain with Othin.

15. Glitnir (“the Shining”): the home of Forseti, a god of whom we know nothing beyond what Snorri tells us: “Forseti is the son of Baldr and Nanna, daughter of Nep. All those who come to him with hard cases to settle go away satisfied; he is the best judge among gods and men.”

16. Noatun (“Ships’-Haven”): the home of Njorth, who calms the waves; cf. stanza 11 and Voluspo, 21.

17. Vithi: this land is not mentioned elsewhere. Vithar avenged his father, Othin, by slaying the wolf Fenrir.

18. Stanzas 18–20 appear also in Snorri’s Edda. Very possibly they are an interpolation here. Eldhrimnir (“Sooty with Fire”): the great kettle in Valhall, wherein the gods’ cook, Andhrimnir (“The Sooty-Faced”) daily cooks the flesh of the boar Sæhrimnir (“The Blackened”). His flesh suffices for all the heroes there gathered, and each evening he becomes whole again, to be cooked the next morning.

19. Freki (“The Greedy”) and Geri (“The Ravenous”): the two wolves who sit by Othin’s side at the feast, and to whom he gives all the food set before him, since wine is food and drink alike for him. Heerfather: Othin.

20. Mithgarth (“The Middle Home”): the earth. Hugin (“Thought”) and Munin (“Memory”): the two ravens who sit on Othin’s shoulders, and fly forth daily to bring him news of the world.

21. Thund (“The Swollen” or “The Roaring”): the river surrounding Valhall. Thjothvitnir’s fish: presumably the sun, which was caught by the wolf Skoll (cf. Voluspo, 40), Thjothvitnir meaning “the mighty wolf.” Such a phrase, characteristic of all Skaldic poetry, is rather rare in the Edda. The last two lines refer to the attack on Valhall by the people of Hel; cf. Voluspo, 51.

22. Valgrind (“The Death-Gate”): the outer gate of Valhall; cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 68 and note.

23. This and the following stanza stand in reversed order in Regius. Snorri quotes stanza 23 as a proof of the vast size of Valhall. The last two lines refer to the final battle with Fenrir and the other enemies.

24. This stanza is almost certainly an interpolation, brought in through a confusion of the first two lines with those of stanza 23. Its description of Thor’s house, Bilskirnir (cf. stanza 4 and note) has nothing to do with that of Valhall. Snorri quotes the stanza in his account of Thor.

25. The first line in the original is, as indicated in the translation, too long, and various attempts to amend it have been made. Heithrun: the she-goat who lives on the twigs of the tree Lærath (presumably the ash Yggdrasil), and daily gives mead which, like the boar’s flesh, suffices for all the heroes in Valhall. In Snorri’s Edda Gangleri foolishly asks whether the heroes drink water, whereto Har replies, “Do you imagine that Othin invites kings and earls and other noble men, and then gives them water to drink?”

26. Eikthyrnir (“The Oak-Thorned,” i.e., with antlers, “thorns,” like an oak): this animal presumably represents the clouds. The first line, like that of stanza 25, is too long in the original. Lærath: cf. stanza 25, note. Hvergelmir: according to Snorri, this spring, “the Cauldron-Roaring,” was in the midst of Niflheim, the world of darkness and the dead, beneath the third root of the ash Yggdrasil. Snorri gives a list of the rivers flowing thence nearly identical with the one in the poem.

27. The entire passage from stanza 27 through stanza 35 is confused. The whole thing may well be an interpolation. Bugge calls stanzas 27–30 an interpolation, and editors who have accepted the passage as a whole have rejected various lines. The spelling of the names of the rivers varies greatly in the manuscripts and editions. It is needless here to point out the many attempted emendations of this list. For a passage presenting similar problems, cf. Voluspo, 10–16. Snorri virtually quotes stanzas 27–28 in his prose, though not consecutively. The name Rin, in line 3, is identical with that for the River Rhine which appears frequently in the hero poems, but the similarity is doubtless purely accidental.

28. Slith may possibly be the same river as that mentioned in Voluspo, 36, as flowing through the giants’ land. Leipt: in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 29, this river is mentioned as one by which a solemn oath is sworn, and Gering points the parallel to the significance of the Styx among the Greeks. The other rivers here named are not mentioned elsewhere in the poems.

29. This stanza looks as though it originally had had nothing to do with the two preceding it. Snorri quotes it in his description of the three roots of Yggdrasil, and the three springs beneath them. “The third root of the ash stands in heaven and beneath this root is a spring which is very holy, and is called Urth’s well.” (Cf. Voluspo, 19) “There the gods have their judgment-seat, and thither they ride each day over Bifrost, which is also called the Gods’ Bridge.” Thor has to go on foot in the last days of the destruction, when the bridge is burning. Another interpretation, however, is that when Thor leaves the heavens (i.e., when a thunder-storm is over) the rainbow-bridge becomes hot in the sun. Nothing more is known of the rivers named in this stanza. Lines 3–4 are almost certainly interpolated from stanza 30.

30. This stanza, again possibly an interpolation, is closely paraphrased by Snorri following the passage quoted in the previous note. Glath (“Joyous”): identified in the Skaldskaparmal with Skinfaxi, the horse of day; cf. Vafthruthnismol, 12. Gyllir: “Golden.” Gler: “Shining.” Skeithbrimir: “Swift-Going.” Silfrintopp: “Silver-Topped.” Sinir: “Sinewy.” Gisl: the meaning is doubtful; Gering suggests “Gleaming.” Falhofnir: “Hollow-Hoofed.” Golltopp (“Gold-Topped”): this horse belonged to Heimdall (cf. Voluspo, 1 and 46). It is noteworthy that gold was one of the attributes of Heimdall’s belongings, and, because his teeth were of gold, he was also called Gullintanni (“Gold-Toothed”). Lettfeti: “Light-Feet.” Othin’s eight-footed horse, Sleipnir, is not mentioned in this list.

31. The first of these roots is the one referred to in stanza 26; the second in stanza 29 (cf. notes). Of the third root there is nothing noteworthy recorded. After this stanza it is more than possible that one has been lost, paraphrased in the prose of Snorri’s Edda thus: “An eagle sits in the branches of the ash-tree, and he is very wise; and between his eyes sits the hawk who is called Vethrfolnir.”

32. Ratatosk (“The Swift-Tusked”): concerning this squirrel, the Prose Edda has to add only that he runs up and down the tree conveying the abusive language of the eagle (see note on stanza 31) and the dragon Nithhogg (cf. Voluspo, 39 and note) to each other. The hypothesis that Ratatosk “represents the undying hatred between the sustaining and the destroying elements—the gods and the giants,” seems a trifle far-fetched.

33. Stanzas 33–34 may well be interpolated, and are certainly in bad shape in the Mss. Bugge points out that they are probably of later origin than those surrounding them. Snorri closely paraphrases stanza 33, but without elaboration, and nothing further is known of the four harts. It may be guessed, however, that they are a late multiplication of the single hart mentioned in stanza 26, just as the list of dragons in stanza 34 seems to have been expanded out of Nithhogg, the only authentic dragon under the root of the ash. Highest twigs: a guess; the Mss. words are baffling. Something has apparently been lost from lines 3–4, but there is no clue as to its nature.

34. Cf. note on previous stanza. Nothing further is known of any of the serpents here listed, and the meanings of many of the names are conjectural. Snorri quotes this stanza. Editors have altered it in various ways in an attempt to regularize the meter. Goin and Moin: meaning obscure. Grafvitnir: “The Gnawing Wolf.” Grabak: “Gray-Back.” Grafvolluth: “The Field-Gnawer.” Ofnir and Svafnir (“The Bewilderer” and “The Sleep-Bringer”): it is noteworthy that in stanza 54 Othin gives himself these two names.

35. Snorri quotes this stanza, which concludes the passage, beginning with stanza 25, describing Yggdrasil. If we assume that stanzas 27–34 are later interpolations—possibly excepting 32—this section of the poem reads clearly enough.

36. Snorri quotes this list of the Valkyries, concerning whom cf. Voluspo, 31 and note, where a different list of names is given. Hrist: “Shaker.” Mist: “Mist.” Skeggjold: “Ax-Time.” Skogul: “Raging” (?). Hild: “Warrior.” Thruth: “Might.” Hlokk: “Shrieking.” Herfjotur: “Host-Fetter.” Gol: “Screaming.” Geironul: “Spear-Bearer.” Randgrith: “Shield-Bearer.” Rathgrith: Gering guesses “Plan-Destroyer.” Reginleif: “Gods’-Kin.” Manuscripts and editions vary greatly in the spelling of these names, and hence in their significance.

37. Müllenhoff suspects stanzas 37–41 to have been interpolated, and Edzardi thinks they may have come from the Vafthruthnismol. Snorri closely paraphrases stanzas 37–39, and quotes 40–41. Arvak (“Early Waker”) and Alsvith (“All-Swift”): the horses of the sun, named also in Sigrdrifumol, 15. According to Snorri: “There was a man called Mundilfari, who had two children; they were so fair and lovely that he called his son Mani and his daughter Sol. The gods were angry at this presumption, and took the children and set them up in heaven; and they bade Sol drive the horses that drew the car of the sun which the gods had made to light the world from the sparks which flew out of Muspellsheim. The horses were called Alsvith and Arvak, and under their yokes the gods set two bellows to cool them, and in some songs these are called ‘the cold iron.’”

38. Svalin (“The Cooling”): the only other reference to this shield is in Sigrdrifumol, 15.

39. Skoll and Hati: the wolves that devour respectively the sun and moon. The latter is the son of Hrothvitnir (“The Mighty Wolf,” i.e. Fenrir); cf. Voluspo, 40, and Vafthruthnismol, 46–47, in which Fenrir appears as the thief. Ironwood: a conjectural emendation of an obscure phrase; cf. Voluspo, 40.

40. This and the following stanza are quoted by Snorri. They seem to have come from a different source from the others of this poem; Edzardi suggests an older version of the Vafthruthnismol. This stanza is closely parallel to Vafthruthnismol, 21, which see, as also Voluspo, 3. Snorri, following this account, has a few details to add. The stones were made out of Ymir’s teeth and such of his bones as were broken. Mithgarth was a mountain-wall made out of Ymir’s eyebrows, and set around the earth because of the enmity of the giants.

42. With this stanza Othin gets back to his immediate situation, bound as he is between two fires. He calls down a blessing on the man who will reach into the fire and pull aside the great kettle which, in Icelandic houses, hung directly under the smoke-vent in the roof, and thus kept any one above from looking down into the interior. On Ull, the archer-god, cf. stanza 5 and note. He is specified here apparently for no better reason than that his name fits the initial-rhyme.

43. This and the following stanza are certainly interpolated, for they have nothing to do with the context, and stanza 45 continues the dramatic conclusion of the poem begun in stanza 42. This stanza is quoted by Snorri. Ivaldi (“The Mighty”): he is known only as the father of the craftsmen-dwarfs who made not only the ship Skithblathnir, but also Othin’s spear Gungnir, and the golden hair for Thor’s wife, Sif, after Loki had maliciously cut her own hair off. Skithblathnir: this ship (“Wooden-Bladed”) always had a fair wind, whenever the sail was set; it could be folded up at will and put in the pocket. Freyr: concerning him and his father, see Voluspo, 21, note, and Skirnismol, introductory prose and note.

44. Snorri quotes this stanza. Like stanza 43 an almost certain interpolation, it was probably drawn in by the reference to Skithblathnir in the stanza interpolated earlier. It is presumably in faulty condition. One Ms. has after the fifth line half of a sixth,—“Brimir of swords.” Yggdrasil: cf. stanzas 25–35. Skithblathnir: cf. stanza 43, note. Sleipnir: Othin’s eight-legged horse, one of Loki’s numerous progeny, borne by him to the stallion Svathilfari. This stallion belonged to the giant who built a fortress for the gods, and came so near to finishing it, with Svathilfari’s aid, as to make the gods fear he would win his promised reward—Freyja and the sun and moon. To delay the work, Loki turned himself into a mare, whereupon the stallion ran away, and the giant failed to complete his task within the stipulated time. Bilrost: probably another form of Bifrost (which Snorri has in his version of the stanza), on which cf. stanza 29. Bragi: the god of poetry. He is one of the later figures among the gods, and is mentioned only three times in the poems of the Edda. In Snorri’s Edda, however, he is of great importance. His wife is Ithun, goddess of youth. Perhaps the Norwegian skald Bragi Boddason, the oldest recorded skaldic poet, had been traditionally apotheosized as early as the tenth century. Hobrok: nothing further is known of him. Garm: cf. Voluspo, 44.

45. With this stanza the narrative current of the poem is resumed. Ægir: the sea-god; cf. Lokasenna, introductory prose.

46. Concerning the condition of stanzas 46–50, quoted by Snorri, nothing definite can be said. Lines and entire stanzas of this “catalogue” sort undoubtedly came and went with great freedom all through the period of oral transmission. Many of the names are not mentioned elsewhere, and often their significance is sheer guesswork. As in nearly every episode Othin appeared in disguise, the number of his names was necessarily almost limitless. Grim: “The Hooded.” Gangleri: “The Wanderer.” Herjan: “The Ruler.” Hjalmberi: “The Helmet-Bearer.” Thekk: “The Much-Loved.” Thrithi: “The Third” (in Snorri’s Edda the stories are all told in the form of answers to questions, the speakers being Har, Jafnhar and Thrithi. Just what this tripartite form of Othin signifies has been the source of endless debate. Probably this line is late enough to betray the somewhat muddled influence of early Christianity.) Thuth and Uth: both names defy guesswork. Helblindi: “Hel-Blinder” (two manuscripts have Herblindi—“Host-Blinder”). Hor: “The High One.”

47. Sath: “The Truthful.” Svipal: “The Changing.” Sanngetal: “The Truth-Teller.” Herteit: “Glad of the Host.” Hnikar: “The Overthrower.” Bileyg: “The Shifty-Eyed.” Baleyg: “The Flaming-Eyed.” Bolverk: “Doer of Ill” (cf. Hovamol, 104 and note). Fjolnir: “The Many-Shaped.” Grimnir: “The Hooded.” Glapsvith: “Swift in Deceit.” Fjolsvith: “Wide of Wisdom.”

48. Sithhott: “With Broad Hat.” Sithskegg: “Long-Bearded.” Sigfather: “Father of Victory.” Hnikuth: “Overthrower.” Valfather: “Father of the Slain.” Atrith: “The Rider.” Farmatyr: “Helper of Cargoes” (i.e., god of sailors).

49. Nothing is known of Asmund, of Othin’s appearance as Jalk, or of the occasion when he “went in a sledge” as Kjalar (“Ruler of Keels”?). Thror and Vithur are also of uncertain meaning. Oski: “God of Wishes.” Biflindi: the manuscripts vary widely in the form of this name. Jafnhor: “Equally High” (cf. note on stanza 46). Omi: “The Shouter.” Gondlir: “Wand-Bearer.” Harbarth: “Graybeard” (cf. Harbarthsljoth, introduction).

50. Nothing further is known of the episode here mentioned. Sokkmimir is presumably Mithvitnir’s son. Snorri quotes the names Svithur and Svithrir, but omits all the remainder of the stanza.

51. Again the poem returns to the direct action, Othin addressing the terrified Geirröth. The manuscripts show no lacuna. Some editors supply a second line from paper manuscripts: “Greatly by me art beguiled.”

53. Ygg: Othin (“The Terrible”). The maids: the three Norns.

54. Possibly out of place, and probably more or less corrupt. Thund: “The Thunderer.” Vak: “The Wakeful.” Skilfing: “The Shaker.” Vofuth: “The Wanderer.” Hroptatyr: “Crier of the Gods.” Gaut: “Father.” Ofnir and Svafnir: cf. stanza 34.








SKIRNISMOL

THE BALLAD OF SKIRNIR


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Skirnismol is found complete in the Codex Regius, and through stanza 27 in the Arnamagnæan Codex. Snorri quotes the concluding stanza. In Regius the poem is entitled “For Scirnis” (“Skirnir’s Journey”).

The Skirnismol differs sharply from the poems preceding it, in that it has a distinctly ballad quality. As a matter of fact, however, its verse is altogether dialogue, the narrative being supplied in the prose “links,” concerning which cf. introductory note to the Grimnismol. The dramatic effectiveness and vivid characterization of the poem seem to connect it with the Thrymskvitha, and the two may possibly have been put into their present form by the same man. Bugge’s guess that the Skirnismol was the work of the author of the Lokasenna is also possible, though it has less to support it.

Critics have generally agreed in dating the poem as we now have it as early as the first half of the tenth century; Finnur Jonsson puts it as early as 900, and claims it, as usual, for Norway. Doubtless it was current in Norway, in one form or another, before the first Icelandic settlements, but his argument that the thistle (stanza 31) is not an Icelandic plant has little weight, for such curse-formulas must have traveled freely from place to place. In view of the evidence pointing to a western origin for many or all of the Eddic poems, Jonsson’s reiterated “Digtet er sikkert norsk og ikke islandsk” is somewhat exasperating. Wherever the Skirnismol was composed, it has been preserved in exceptionally good condition, and seems to be practically devoid of interpolations or lacunæ.





Freyr, the son of Njorth, had sat one day in Hlithskjolf, and looked over all the worlds. He looked into Jotunheim, and saw there a fair maiden, as she went from her father’s house to her bower. Forthwith he felt a mighty love-sickness. Skirnir was the name of Freyr’s servant; Njorth bade him ask speech of Freyr. He said:


1.  “Go now, Skirnir!   |   and seek to gain       Speech from my son;     And answer to win,   |   for whom the wise one       Is mightily moved.”


Skirnir spake:


2.  “Ill words do I now   |   await from thy son,       If I seek to get speech with him,     And answer to win,   |   for whom the wise one       Is mightily moved.”


Skirnir spake:


3.  “Speak prithee, Freyr,   |   foremost of the gods,       For now I fain would know;     Why sittest thou here   |   in the wide halls,       Days long, my prince, alone?”


Freyr spake:


4.  “How shall I tell thee,   |   thou hero young,       Of all my grief so great?     Though every day   |   the elfbeam dawns,       It lights my longing never.”


Skirnir spake:


5.  “Thy longings, methinks,   |   are not so large       That thou mayst not tell them to me;     Since in days of yore   |   we were young together,       We two might each other trust.”


Freyr spake:


6.  “From Gymir’s house   |   I beheld go forth       A maiden dear to me;     Her arms glittered,   |   and from their gleam       Shone all the sea and sky.

7.  “To me more dear   |   than in days of old       Was ever maiden to man;     But no one of gods   |   or elves will grant       That we both together should be.”


Skirnir spake:


8.  “Then give me the horse   |   that goes through the dark       And magic flickering flames;     And the sword as well   |   that fights of itself       Against the giants grim.”


Freyr spake:


9.  “The horse will I give thee   |   that goes through the dark       And magic flickering flames,     And the sword as well   |   that will fight of itself       If a worthy hero wields it.”


Skirnir spake to the horse:


10. “Dark is it without,   |   and I deem it time       To fare through the wild fells,       (To fare through the giants’ fastness;)     We shall both come back,   |   or us both together       The terrible giant will take.”


Skirnir rode into Jotunheim to Gymir’s house. There were fierce dogs bound before the gate of the fence which was around Gerth’s hall. He rode to where a herdsman sat on a hill, and said:


11. “Tell me, herdsman,   |   sitting on the hill,       And watching all the ways,     How may I win   |   a word with the maid       Past the hounds of Gymir here?”


The herdsman spake:


12. “Art thou doomed to die   |   or already dead,       Thou horseman that ridest hither?     Barred from speech   |   shalt thou ever be       With Gymir’s daughter good.”


Skirnir spake:


13. “Boldness is better   |   than plaints can be       For him whose feet must fare;     To a destined day   |   has mine age been doomed,       And my life’s span thereto laid.”


Gerth spake:


14. “What noise is that   |   which now so loud       I hear within our house?     The ground shakes,   |   and the home of Gymir       Around me trembles too.”


The Serving-Maid spake:


15. “One stands without   |   who has leapt from his steed,       And lets his horse loose to graze;”     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .


Gerth spake:


16. “Bid the man come in,   |   and drink good mead       Here within our hall;     Though this I fear,   |   that there without       My brother’s slayer stands.

17. “Art thou of the elves   |   or the offspring of gods,       Or of the wise Wanes?     How camst thou alone   |   through the leaping flame       Thus to behold our home?”


Skirnir spake:


18. “I am not of the elves,   |   nor the offspring of gods,       Nor of the wise Wanes;     Though I came alone   |   through the leaping flame       Thus to behold thy home.

19. “Eleven apples,   |   all of gold,       Here will I give thee, Gerth,     To buy thy troth   |   that Freyr shall be       Deemed to be dearest to you.”


Gerth spake:


20. “I will not take   |   at any man’s wish       These eleven apples ever;     Nor shall Freyr and I   |   one dwelling find       So long as we two live.”


Skirnir spake:


21. “Then do I bring thee   |   the ring that was burned       Of old with Othin’s son;     From it do eight   |   of like weight fall       On every ninth night.”


Gerth spake:


22. “The ring I wish not,   |   though burned it was       Of old with Othin’s son;     In Gymir’s home   |   is no lack of gold       In the wealth my father wields.”


Skirnir spake:


23. “Seest thou, maiden,   |   this keen, bright sword       That I hold here in my hand?     Thy head from thy neck   |   shall I straightway hew,       If thou wilt not do my