[RKV-poetic-edda  —  part 4 of 5, continuation of part 3]
============================================================

together,       (The sons of the glorious gods,)       Who bravest born shall seem;     Some are valiant   |   who redden no sword       In the blood of a foeman’s breast.”


Regin spake:


25. “Glad art thou, Sigurth,   |   of battle gained,       As Gram with grass thou cleansest;     My brother fierce   |   in fight hast slain,       And somewhat I did myself.”


Sigurth spake:


26. “Afar didst thou go   |   while Fafnir reddened       With his blood my blade so keen;     With the might of the dragon   |   my strength I matched,       While thou in the heather didst hide.”


Regin spake:


27. “Longer wouldst thou   |   in the heather have let       Yon hoary giant hide,     Had the weapon availed not   |   that once I forged,       The keen-edged blade thou didst bear.”


Sigurth spake:


28. “Better is heart   |   than a mighty blade       For him who shall fiercely fight;     The brave man well   |   shall fight and win,       Though dull his blade may be.

29. “Brave men better   |   than cowards be,       When the clash of battle comes;     And better the glad   |   than the gloomy man       Shall face what before him lies.

30. “Thy rede it was   |   that I should ride       Hither o’er mountains high;     The glittering worm   |   would have wealth and life       If thou hadst not mocked at my might.”


Then Regin went up to Fafnir and cut out his heart with his sword, that was named Rithil, and then he drank blood from the wounds. Regin said:


31. “Sit now, Sigurth,   |   for sleep will I,       Hold Fafnir’s heart to the fire;     For all his heart   |   shall eaten be,       Since deep of blood I have drunk.”


Sigurth took Fafnir’s heart and cooked it on a spit. When he thought that it was fully cooked, and the blood foamed out of the heart, then he tried it with his finger to see whether it was fully cooked. He burned his finger, and put it in his mouth. But when Fafnir’s heart’s-blood came on his tongue, he understood the speech of birds. He heard nut-hatches chattering in the thickets. A nut-hatch said:


32. “There sits Sigurth,   |   sprinkled with blood,     And Fafnir’s heart   |   with fire he cooks;     Wise were the breaker   |   of rings, I ween,     To eat the life-muscles   |   all so bright.”


A second spake:


33. “There Regin lies,   |   and plans he lays     The youth to betray   |   who trusts him well;     Lying words   |   with wiles will he speak,     Till his brother the maker   |   of mischief avenges.”


A third spake:


34. “Less by a head   |   let the chatterer hoary       Go from here to hell;     Then all of the wealth   |   he alone can wield,       The gold that Fafnir guarded.”


A fourth spake:


35. “Wise would he seem   |   if so he would heed     The counsel good   |   we sisters give;     Thought he would give,   |   and the ravens gladden,     There is ever a wolf   |   where his ears I spy.”


A fifth spake:


36. “Less wise must be   |   the tree of battle     Than to me would seem   |   the leader of men,     If forth he lets   |   one brother fare,     When he of the other   |   the slayer is.”


A sixth spake:


37. “Most foolish he seems   |   if he shall spare       His foe, the bane of the folk;     There Regin lies,   |   who hath wronged him so,       Yet falsehood knows he not.”


A seventh spake:


38. “Let the head from the frost-cold   |   giant be hewed,       And let him of rings be robbed;     Then all the wealth   |   which Fafnir’s was       Shall belong to thee alone.”


Sigurth spake:


39. “Not so rich a fate   |   shall Regin have       As the tale of my death to tell;     For soon the brothers   |   both shall die,       And hence to hell shall go.”


Sigurth hewed off Regin’s head, and then he ate Fafnir’s heart, and drank the blood of both Regin and Fafnir. Then Sigurth heard what the nut-hatch said:


40. “Bind, Sigurth, the golden   |   rings together,     Not kingly is it   |   aught to fear;     I know a maid,   |   there is none so fair,     Rich in gold,   |   if thou mightest get her.

41. “Green the paths   |   that to Gjuki lead,     And his fate the way   |   to the wanderer shows;     The doughty king   |   a daughter has,     That thou as a bride   |   mayst, Sigurth, buy.”


Another spake:


42. “A hall stands high   |   on Hindarfjoll,     All with flame   |   is it ringed without;     Warriors wise   |   did make it once     Out of the flaming   |   light of the flood.

43. “On the mountain sleeps   |   a battle-maid,     And about her plays   |   the bane of the wood;     Ygg with the thorn   |   hath smitten her thus,     For she felled the fighter   |   he fain would save.

44. “There mayst thou behold   |   the maiden helmed,     Who forth on Vingskornir   |   rode from the fight;     The victory-bringer   |   her sleep shall break not,     Thou heroes’ son,   |   so the Norns have set.”


Sigurth rode along Fafnir’s trail to his lair, and found it open. The gate-posts were of iron, and the gates; of iron, too, were all the beams in the house, which was dug down into the earth. There Sigurth found a mighty store of gold, and he filled two chests full thereof; he took the fear-helm and a golden mail-coat and the sword Hrotti, and many other precious things, and loaded Grani with them, but the horse would not go forward until Sigurth mounted on his back.








NOTES


Prose. The prose follows the concluding prose passage of the Reginsmol without any interruption; the heading “Of Fafnir’s Death” is written in the manuscript very faintly just before stanza 1. Gnitaheith: cf. Gripisspo, 11 and note. Fafnir: Regin’s brother: cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanza 14. Venom: in the Volsungasaga it was the blood, and not the venom, that poured down on Sigurth’s head. Sigurth was much worried about this danger, and before he dug the trench asked Regin what would happen if the dragon’s blood overcame him. Regin thereupon taunted him with cowardice (Sigurth refers to this taunt in stanza 30, but the stanza embodying it has disappeared). After Sigurth had dug his trench, an old man (Othin, of course) appeared and advised him to dig other trenches to carry off the blood, which he did, thereby escaping harm.

1. The first line in the original, as here, is unusually long, but dramatically very effective on that account.

3. The names of the speakers do not appear in the manuscript, though they seem originally to have been indicated in the margin for stanzas 3–30. The last two lines of stanza 3 are missing in the manuscript, with no gap indicated, but the Volsungasaga prose paraphrase indicates that something was omitted, and the lines here given are conjecturally reconstructed from this paraphrase.

4. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza.

5. Line 4, utterly obscure in the manuscript, is guesswork.

7. Fafnir here refers to the fact that Hjordis, mother of the still unborn Sigurth, was captured by Alf after Sigmund’s death; cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, note.

11. Stanzas 11–15 are probably interpolated, and come from a poem similar to Vafthruthnismol. The headland: Fafnir is apparently quoting proverbs; this one seems to mean that disaster (“the fate of the Norns”) awaits when one rounds the first headland (i.e., at the beginning of life’s voyage, in youth). The third line is a commentary on obstinate rashness. The Volsungasaga paraphrases stanzas 11–15 throughout.

12. Norns: cf. stanza 13 and note. Sigurth has no possible interest in knowing what Norns are helpful in childbirth, but interpolations were seldom logical.

13. Snorri quotes this stanza. There were minor Norns, or fates, in addition to the three great Norns, regarding whom cf. Voluspo, 20. Dvalin: chief of the dwarfs; cf. Voluspo, 14.

14. Surt: ruler of the fire world; the reference is to the last great battle. Sword-sweat: blood.

15. Oskopnir (“Not-Made”): apparently another name for Vigrith, which is named in Vafthruthnismol, 18, as the final battle-ground. Bilrost (or Bifrost): the rainbow bridge which breaks beneath Surt’s followers; cf. Grimnismol, 29 and note.

16. With this stanza Fafnir returns to the situation. Fear-helm: regarding the “ægis-hjalmr” cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanza 14 and note.

18. Lines 3–4 do not appear in the manuscript, and no gap is indicated; they are here conjecturally paraphrased from the prose passage in the Volsungasaga.

20. It has been suggested that this stanza is spurious, and that stanza 21 ought to follow stanza 22. Lines 3–4, abbreviated in the manuscript, are identical with lines 3–4 of stanza 9. The Volsungasaga paraphrase in place of these two lines makes Fafnir say: “For it often happens that he who gets a deadly wound yet avenges himself.” It is quite likely that two stanzas have been lost.

22. The Volsungasaga places its paraphrase of this stanza between those of stanzas 15 and 16.

24. Line 2 is probably spurious, but it is a phrase typical of such poems as Grimnismol or Vafthruthnismol.

25. Gram: Sigurth’s sword; cf. Reginsmol, prose after 14.

26. In the manuscript stanzas 26–29 stand after stanza 31, which fails to make clear sense; they are here rearranged in accordance with the Volsungasaga paraphrase.

28–29. Almost certainly interpolated from some such poem as the Hovamol. Even the faithful Volsungasaga fails to paraphrase stanza 29.

30. Something has evidently been lost before this stanza. Sigurth clearly refers to Regin’s reproach when he was digging the trench (cf. note on introductory prose), but the poem does not give such a passage.

Prose. Rithil (“Swift-Moving”): Snorri calls the sword Refil (“Serpent”).

32. That the birds’ stanzas come from more than one source is fairly apparent, but whether from two or from three or more is uncertain. It is also far from clear how many birds are speaking. The manuscript numbers II, III, and IV in the margin with numerals; the Volsungasaga makes a different bird speak each time. There are almost as many guesses as there are editions. I suspect that in the original poem there was one bird, speaking stanzas 34 and 37. Stanza 38 is little more than a repetition of stanza 34, and may well have been a later addition. As for the stanzas in Fornyrthislag (32–33 and 35–36), they apparently come from another poem, in which several birds speak (cf. “we sisters” in stanza 35). This may be the same poem from which stanzas 40–44 were taken, as well as some of the Fornyrthislag stanzas in the Sigrdrifumol.

34. Some editions turn this speech from the third person into the second, but the manuscript is clear enough.

35. Wolf, etc.: the phrase is nearly equivalent to “there must be fire where there is smoke.” The proverb appears elsewhere in Old Norse.

36. Tree of battle: warrior.

37. Here, as in stanza 34, some editions turn the speech from the third person into the second.

38. Giant: Regin was certainly not a frost-giant, and the whole stanza looks like some copyist’s blundering reproduction of stanza 34.

40. Neither the manuscript nor any of the editions suggest the existence of more than one bird in stanzas 40–44. It seems to me, however, that there are not only two birds, but two distinct stories. Stanzas 40–41 apply solely to Guthrun, and suggest that Sigurth will go straight to Gunnar’s hall. Stanzas 42–44, on the other hand, apply solely to Brynhild, and indicate that Sigurth will find her before he visits the Gjukungs. The confusion which existed between these two versions of the story, and which involved a fundamental difference in the final working out of Brynhild’s revenge, is commented on in the note on Gripisspo, 13. In the present passage it is possible that two birds are speaking, each reflecting one version of the story; it seems even more likely that one speech or the other (40–41 or 42–44) reflects the original form of the narrative, the other having been added, either later or from another poem. In the Volsungasaga the whole passage is condensed into a few words by one bird: “Wiser were it if he should then ride up on Hindarfjoll, where Brynhild sleeps, and there would he get much wisdom.” The Guthrun-bird does not appear at all.

41. Gjuki: father of Gunnar and Guthrun: cf. Gripisspo, 13 and note.

42. Hindarfjoll: “Mountain of the Hind.” Light of the flood: gold; cf. Reginsmol, 1 and note.

43. Battle-maid: Brynhild, here clearly defined as a Valkyrie. Bane of the wood: fire. Ygg: Othin; cf. Grimnismol, 53. The thorn: a prose note in Sigrdrifumol calls it “sleep-thorn.” The fighter: the story of the reason for Brynhild’s punishment is told in the prose following stanza 4 of Sigrdrifumol.

44. Vingskornir: Brynhild’s horse, not elsewhere mentioned. Victory-bringer: the word thus translated is in the original “sigrdrifa.” The compiler of the collection, not being familiar with this word, assumed that it was a proper name, and in the prose following stanza 4 of the Sigrdrifumol he specifically states that this was the Valkyrie’s name. Editors, until recently, have followed him in this error, failing to recognize that “sigrdrifa” was simply an epithet for Brynhild. It is from this blunder that the so-called Sigrdrifumol takes its name. Brynhild’s dual personality as a Valkyrie and as the daughter of Buthli has made plenty of trouble, but the addition of a second Valkyrie in the person of the supposed “Sigrdrifa” has made still more.

Prose. There is no break in the manuscript between the end of this prose passage and the beginning of the one introducing the Sigrdrifumol: some editors include the entire prose passage with one poem or the other. Hrotti; “Thruster.”








SIGRDRIFUMOL

THE BALLAD OF THE VICTORY-BRINGER


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The so-called Sigrdrifumol, which immediately follows the Fafnismol in the Codex Regius without any indication of a break, and without separate title, is unquestionably the most chaotic of all the poems in the Eddic collection. The end of it has been entirely lost, for the fifth folio of eight sheets is missing from Regius, the gap coming after the first line of stanza 29 of this poem. That stanza has been completed, and eight more have been added, from much later paper manuscripts, but even so the conclusion of the poem is in obscurity.

Properly speaking, however, the strange conglomeration of stanzas which the compiler of the collection has left for us, and which, in much the same general form, seems to have lain before the authors of the Volsungasaga, in which eighteen of its stanzas are quoted, is not a poem at all. Even its customary title is an absurd error. The mistake made by the annotator in thinking that the epithet “sigrdrifa,” rightly applied to Brynhild as a “bringer of victory,” was a proper name has already been explained and commented on (note on Fafnismol, 44). Even if the collection of stanzas were in any real sense a poem, which it emphatically is not, it is certainly not the “Ballad of Sigrdrifa” which it is commonly called. “Ballad of Brynhild” would be a sufficiently suitable title, and I have here brought the established name “Sigrdrifumol” into accord with this by translating the epithet instead of treating it as a proper name.

Even apart from the title, however, the Sigrdrifumol has little claim to be regarded as a distinct poem, nor is there any indication that the compiler did so regard it. Handicapped as we are by the loss of the concluding section, and of the material which followed it on those missing pages, we can yet see that the process which began with the prose Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, and which, interrupted by the insertion of the Gripisspo, went on through the Reginsmol and the Fafnismol, continued through as much of the Sigrdrifumol as is left to us. In other words, the compiler told the story of Sigurth in mixed prose and verse, using whatever verse he could find without much questioning as to its origin, and filling in the gaps with his own prose. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla, Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol are essentially a coherent unit, but one of the compiler’s making only; they represent neither one poem nor three distinct poems, and the divisions and titles which have been almost universally adopted by editors are both arbitrary and misleading.

The Sigrdrifumol section as we now have it is an extraordinary piece of patchwork. It is most unlikely that the compiler himself brought all these fragments together for the first time; little by little, through a process of accretion and also, unluckily, through one of elimination, the material grew into its present shape. Certainly the basis of it is a poem dealing with the finding of Brynhild by Sigurth, but of this original poem only five stanzas (2–4 and 20–21) can be identified with any degree of confidence. To these five stanzas should probably, however, be added some, if not all, of the passage (stanzas 6–12) in which Brynhild teaches Sigurth the magic runes. These stanzas of rune-lore attracted sundry similar passages from other sources, including stanza 5, in which a magic draught is administered (not necessarily by Brynhild or to Sigurth), the curious rune-chant in stanzas 15–17, and stanzas 13–14 and 18–19. Beginning with stanza 22, and running to the end of the fragment (stanza 37), is a set of numbered counsels closely resembling the Loddfafnismol (Hovamol, stanzas 111–138), which manifestly has nothing whatever to do with Brynhild. Even in this passage there are probably interpolations (stanzas 25, 27, 30, 34, and 36). Finally, and bespeaking the existence at some earlier time of another Sigurth-Brynhild poem, is stanza 1, sharply distinguished by its metrical form from stanzas 2–4 and 20–21. Many critics argue that stanzas 6–10 of Helreith Brynildar belonged originally to the same poem as stanza 1 of the Sigrdrifumol.

The Sigrdrifumol, then, must be regarded simply as a collection of fragments, most of them originally having no relation to the main subject. All of the story, the dialogue and the characterization are embodied in stanzas 1–4 and 20–21 and in the prose notes accompanying the first four stanzas; all of the rest might equally well (or better) be transferred to the Hovamol, where its character entitles it to a place. Yet stanzas 2–4 are as fine as anything in Old Norse poetry, and it is out of the scanty material of these three stanzas that Wagner constructed much of the third act of “Siegfried.”

The Sigrdrifumol represents almost exclusively the contributions of the North to the Sigurth tradition (cf. introductory note to the Gripisspo). Brynhild, here disguised by the annotator as “Sigrdrifa,” appears simply as a battle-maid and supernatural dispenser of wisdom; there is no trace of the daughter of Buthli and the rival of Guthrun. There is, however, so little of the “poem” which can definitely be assigned to the Sigurth cycle that it is impossible to trace back any of the underlying narrative substance.

The nature and condition of the material have made editorial conjectures and emendations very numerous, and as most of the guesses are neither conclusive nor particularly important, only a few of them are mentioned in the notes.





Sigurth rode up on Hindarfjoll and turned southward toward the land of the Franks. On the mountain he saw a great light, as if fire were burning, and the glow reached up to heaven. And when he came thither, there stood a tower of shields, and above it was a banner. Sigurth went into the shield-tower, and saw that a man lay there sleeping with all his war-weapons. First he took the helm from his head, and then he saw that it was a woman. The mail-coat was as fast as if it had grown to the flesh. Then he cut the mail-coat from the head-opening downward, and out to both the arm-holes. Then he took the mail-coat from her, and she awoke, and sat up and saw Sigurth, and said:


1.  “What bit through the byrnie?   |   how was broken my sleep?     Who made me free   |   of the fetters pale?”


He answered:


    “Sigmund’s son,   |   with Sigurth’s sword,     That late with flesh   |   hath fed the ravens.”


Sigurth sat beside her and asked her name. She took a horn full of mead and gave him a memory-draught.


2.  “Hail, day!   |   Hail, sons of day!       And night and her daughter now!     Look on us here   |   with loving eyes,       That waiting we victory win.

3.  “Hail to the gods!   |   Ye goddesses, hail,       And all the generous earth!     Give to us wisdom   |   and goodly speech,       And healing hands, life-long.

4.  “Long did I sleep,   |   my slumber was long,       And long are the griefs of life;     Othin decreed   |   that I could not break       The heavy spells of sleep.”


Her name was Sigrdrifa, and she was a Valkyrie. She said that two kings fought in battle; one was called Hjalmgunnar, an old man but a mighty warrior, and Othin had promised him the victory, and


    The other was Agnar,   |   brother of Autha,     None he found   |   who fain would shield him.


Sigrdrifa slew Hjalmgunnar in the battle, and Othin pricked her with the sleep-thorn in punishment for this, and said that she should never thereafter win victory in battle, but that she should be wedded. “And I said to him that I had made a vow in my turn, that I would never marry a man who knew the meaning of fear.” Sigurth answered and asked her to teach him wisdom, if she knew of what took place in all the worlds. Sigrdrifa said:


5.  “Beer I bring thee,   |   tree of battle,     Mingled of strength   |   and mighty fame;     Charms it holds   |   and healing signs,     Spells full good,   |   and gladness-runes.”

            *    *    *    *    *    *

6.  Winning-runes learn,   |   if thou longest to win,       And the runes on thy sword-hilt write;     Some on the furrow,   |   and some on the flat,       And twice shalt thou call on Tyr.

7.  Ale-runes learn,   |   that with lies the wife       Of another betray not thy trust;     On the horn thou shalt write,   |   and the backs of thy hands,       And Need shalt mark on thy nails.     Thou shalt bless the draught,   |   and danger escape,       And cast a leek in the cup;     (For so I know   |   thou never shalt see       Thy mead with evil mixed.)

8.  Birth-runes learn,   |   if help thou wilt lend,       The babe from the mother to bring;     On thy palms shalt write them,   |   and round thy joints,       And ask the fates to aid.

9.  Wave-runes learn,   |   if well thou wouldst shelter       The sail-steeds out on the sea;     On the stem shalt thou write,   |   and the steering-blade,       And burn them into the oars;     Though high be the breakers,   |   and black the waves,       Thou shalt safe the harbor seek.

10. Branch-runes learn,   |   if a healer wouldst be,       And cure for wounds wouldst work;     On the bark shalt thou write,   |   and on trees that be       With boughs to the eastward bent.

11. Speech-runes learn,   |   that none may seek       To answer harm with hate;     Well he winds   |   and weaves them all,       And sets them side by side,     At the judgment-place,   |   when justice there       The folk shall fairly win.

12. Thought-runes learn,   |   if all shall think       Thou art keenest minded of men.

            *    *    *    *    *    *

13. Them Hropt arranged,   |   and them he wrote,       And them in thought he made,     Out of the draught   |   that down had dropped       From the head of Heithdraupnir,       And the horn of Hoddrofnir.

14. On the mountain he stood   |   with Brimir’s sword,       On his head the helm he bore;     Then first the head   |   of Mim spoke forth,       And words of truth it told.

            *    *    *    *    *    *

15. He bade write on the shield   |   before the shining goddess,     On Arvak’s ear,   |   and on Alsvith’s hoof,     On the wheel of the car   |   of Hrungnir’s killer,     On Sleipnir’s teeth,   |   and the straps of the sledge.

16. On the paws of the bear,   |   and on Bragi’s tongue,     On the wolf’s claws bared,   |   and the eagle’s beak,     On bloody wings,   |   and bridge’s end,     On freeing hands   |   and helping foot-prints.

17. On glass and on gold,   |   and on goodly charms,     In wine and in beer,   |   and on well-loved seats,     On Gungnir’s point,   |   and on Grani’s breast,     On the nails of Norns,   |   and the night-owl’s beak.

            *    *    *    *    *    *

18. Shaved off were the runes   |   that of old were written,       And mixed with the holy mead,       And sent on ways so wide;     So the gods had them,   |   so the elves got them,       And some for the Wanes so wise,       And some for mortal men.

19. Beech-runes are there,   |   birth-runes are there,       And all the runes of ale,       And the magic runes of might;     Who knows them rightly   |   and reads them true,       Has them himself to help;       Ever they aid,       Till the gods are gone.


            *    *    *    *    *    *

Brynhild spake:


20. “Now shalt thou choose,   |   for the choice is given,       Thou tree of the biting blade;     Speech or silence,   |   ’tis thine to say,       Our evil is destined all.”


Sigurth spake:


21. “I shall not flee,   |   though my fate be near,       I was born not a coward to be;     Thy loving word   |   for mine will I win,       As long as I shall live.”

            *    *    *    *    *    *

22. Then first I rede thee,   |   that free of guilt       Toward kinsmen ever thou art;     No vengeance have,   |   though they work thee harm,       Reward after death thou shalt win.

23. Then second I rede thee,   |   to swear no oath       If true thou knowest it not;     Bitter the fate   |   of the breaker of troth,       And poor is the wolf of his word.

24. Then third I rede thee,   |   that thou at the Thing       Shalt fight not in words with fools;     For the man unwise   |   a worser word       Than he thinks doth utter oft.

25. Ill it is   |   if silent thou art,       A coward born men call thee,       And truth mayhap they tell;       Seldom safe is fame,       Unless wide renown be won;     On the day thereafter   |   send him to death,       Let him pay the price of his lies.

26. Then fourth I rede thee,   |   if thou shalt find       A wily witch on thy road,     It is better to go   |   than her guest to be,       Though night enfold thee fast.

27. Eyes that see   |   need the sons of men       Who fight in battle fierce;     Oft witches evil   |   sit by the way,       Who blade and courage blunt.

28. Then fifth I rede thee,   |   though maidens fair       Thou seest on benches sitting,     Let the silver of kinship   |   not rob thee of sleep,       And the kissing of women beware.

29. Then sixth I rede thee,   |   if men shall wrangle,       And ale-talk rise to wrath,     No words with a drunken   |   warrior have,       For wine steals many men’s wits.

30. Brawls and ale   |   full oft have been       An ill to many a man,     Death for some,   |   and sorrow for some;       Full many the woes of men.

31. Then seventh I rede thee,   |   if battle thou seekest       With a foe that is full of might;     It is better to fight   |   than to burn alive       In the hall of the hero rich.

32. Then eighth I rede thee,   |   that evil thou shun,       And beware of lying words;     Take not a maid,   |   nor the wife of a man,       Nor lure them on to lust.

33. Then ninth I rede thee:   |   burial render       If thou findest a fallen corpse,     Of sickness dead,   |   or dead in the sea,       Or dead of weapons’ wounds.

34. A bath shalt thou give them   |   who corpses be,       And hands and head shalt wash;     Wipe them and comb,   |   ere they go in the coffin,       And pray that they sleep in peace.

35. Then tenth I rede thee,   |   that never thou trust       The word of the race of wolves,       (If his brother thou broughtest to death,       Or his father thou didst fell;)     Often a wolf   |   in a son there is,       Though gold he gladly takes.

36. Battle and hate   |   and harm, methinks,       Full seldom fall asleep;     Wits and weapons   |   the warrior needs       If boldest of men he would be.

37. Then eleventh I rede thee,   |   that wrath thou shun,       And treachery false with thy friends;     Not long the leader’s   |   life shall be,       For great are the foes he faces.








NOTES


Prose. The introductory prose follows without break the prose concluding the Fafnismol, the point of division being arbitrary and not agreed upon by all editors. Hindarfjoll: cf. Fafnismol, 42 and note. Franks: this does not necessarily mean that Sigurth was on his way to the Gjukungs’ home, for Sigmund had a kingdom in the land of the Franks (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla). Shields: the annotator probably drew the notion of the shield-tower from the reference in Helreith Brynhildar, 9. The flame-girt tower was not uncommon; cf. Mengloth’s hall in Svipdagsmol.

1. This stanza, and the two lines included in the prose after stanza 4, and possibly stanza 5 as well, evidently come from a different poem from stanzas 2–4. Lines 3–4 in the original are obscure, though the general meaning is clear.

Prose (after stanza 1). In the manuscript stanza 4 stands before this prose note and stanzas 2–3. The best arrangement of the stanzas seems to be the one here given, following Müllenhoff’s suggestion, but the prose note is out of place anywhere. The first sentence of it ought to follow stanza 4 and immediately precede the next prose note; the second sentence ought to precede stanza 5.

2. Sons of day: the spirits of light. The daughter of night (Not), according to Snorri, was Jorth (Earth).

Prose (after stanza 4). Sigrdrifa: on the error whereby this epithet, “victory-bringer,” became a proper name cf. Fafnismol, 44 and note. Hjalmgunnar: in Helreith Brynhildar (stanza 8) he is called a king of the Goths, which means little; of him and his adversary, Agnar, we know nothing beyond what is told here. The two lines quoted apparently come from the same poem as stanza 1; the two first lines of the stanza have been reconstructed from the prose thus: “Hjalmgunnar was one,   |   the hoary king, / And triumph to him   |   had Heerfather promised.” A few editions insert in this prose passage stanzas 7–10 of Helreith Brynhildar, which may or may not have belonged originally to this poem.

5. This stanza is perhaps, but by no means surely, from the same poem as stanza 1. Tree of battle: warrior. Runes: the earliest runes were not letters, but simply signs supposed to possess magic power; out of them developed the “runic alphabet.”

6. Stanzas 6–12 give a list of runes which probably had no original connection with the Brynhild-Sigurth story. Tyr: the sword-god (cf. Hymiskvitha, 4 and note); “tyr” is also the name of a rune which became “T.”

7. Regius gives only lines 1–6; lines 7–8 are added from Volsungasaga. Lies, etc.: a guest on his arrival received a draught of ale from the hands of his host’s wife, and it was to prevent this draught from bewitching him that the runes were recommended. Need: the word “nauth,” meaning “need,” is also the name of the rune which became “N.” Leek: leeks were long supposed to have the power of counteracting poison or witchcraft.

9. Sail-steeds: ships.

10. Branch-runes: runes cut in the bark of trees. Such runes were believed to transfer sickness from the invalid to the tree. Some editors, however, have changed “limrunar” (“branch-runes”) to “lifrunar” (“life-runes”).

11. Lines 3–6 look like an accidental addition, replacing two lines now lost. They mean, apparently, that the man who interweaves his speech with “speech-runes” when he pleads his case at the “Thing,” or popular tribunal, will not unduly enrage his adversary in the argument of the case.

12. Here the list of runes breaks off, though the manuscript indicates no gap, and three short passages of a different type, though all dealing with runes, follow.

13. Stanzas 13–14 appear to have come from a passage regarding Othin’s getting of the runes similar to Hovamol, 139–146. Editors have tried various combinations of the lines in stanzas 12–14. Hropt: Othin; cf. Voluspo, 62. The draught, etc.: apparently the reference is to the head of Mim, from which Othin derived his wisdom in magic (cf. Voluspo, 47 and note); Heithdraupnir (“Light-Dropper”) and Hoddrofnir (“Treasure-Opener”) seem to be names for Mim.

14. This stanza is clearly in bad shape; perhaps, as the manuscript indicates, a new stanza, of which most has been lost, should begin with line 3. Brimir: a giant (cf. Voluspo, 9 and 37); why Othin should have his sword is unknown.

15. Stanzas 15–17 constitute a wholly distinct rune-chant. Line 1 is unusually long in the original, as here. Shield: the shield Svalin (“Cooling”) that stands in front of the sun; cf. Grimnismol, 38. Arvak (“Early Walter”) and Alsvith (“All-Swift”): the horses that draw the sun’s car; cf. Grimnismol, 37. Hrungnir: the slayer of the giant Hrungnir was Thor (cf. Harbarthsljoth, 14 and note), but the line is in bad shape; the name may not be Hrungnir, and “killer” is a conjectural addition. Sleipnir: Othin’s eight-legged horse; cf. Grimnismol, 44 and note. Sledge: perhaps the one mentioned in Grimnismol, 49.

16. Bragi: the god of poetry; cf. Grimnismol, 44 and note.

17. Charms: the wearing of amulets was very common. Gungnir: Othin’s spear, made by the dwarfs, which he occasionally lent to heroes to whom he granted victory. Grani: Sigurth’s horse; the Volsungasaga has “giantesses’.”

18. Stanzas 18–19, which editors have freely rearranged, apparently come from another source than any of the rest. Shaved off: the runes were shaved off by Othin from the wood on which they were carved, and the shavings bearing them were put into the magic mead. Wanes: cf. Voluspo, 21, note.

19. Lines 3, 6, and 7 look like spurious additions, but the whole stanza is chaotic. Beech-runes: runes carved on beech-trees.

20. Stanzas 20–21 are all that remains of the dialogue between Brynhild and Sigurth from the poem to which stanzas 2–4 belong; cf. Introductory Note. In the intervening lost stanzas Brynhild has evidently warned Sigurth of the perils that will follow if he swears loyalty to her; hence the choice to which she here refers. Tree, etc.: warrior. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of either this or the following stanza; the Volsungasaga names Sigurth before stanza 21.

21. It is quite possible that the original poem concluded with two stanzas after this, paraphrased thus in the Volsungasaga: “Sigurth said: ‘Nowhere is to be found any one wiser than thou, and this I swear, that I shall have thee for mine, and that thou art after my heart’s desire.’ She answered: ‘I would rather have thee though I might choose among all men.’ And this they bound between them with oaths.” Stanzas 22–37, which the Volsungasaga paraphrases, may have been introduced at a relatively early time, but can hardly have formed part of the original poem.

22. With this stanza begins the list of numbered counsels, closely resembling the Loddfafnismol (Hovamol, 111–138), here attributed to Brynhild. That the section originally had anything to do with Brynhild is more than improbable.

23. Wolf of his word: oath-destroyer, oath-breaker.

25. This chaotic and obscure jumble of lines has been unsuccessfully “improved” by various editors. It is clearly an interpolation, meaning, in substance: “It is dangerous to keep silent too long, as men may think you a coward; but if any one taunts you falsely because of your silence, do not argue with him, but the next morning kill him as proof that he is a liar.”

27. Probably another interpolation.

28. Silver of kinship: the passage is doubtful, but apparently it means the “marriage-price” for which a bride was “bought.”

29. Line 1 comes at the end of the thirty-second leaf of Regius, and whatever further was contained in that manuscript has vanished with the lost eight-leaf folio (cf. Introductory Note). The rest of stanza 29, and stanzas 30–37, are added from later paper manuscripts, which were undoubtedly copied from an old parchment, though probably not from the complete Regius. The Volsungasaga paraphrases these additional stanzas.

30. Probably an interpolation.

31. The meaning is that it is better to go forth to battle than to stay at home and be burned to death. Many a Norse warrior met his death in this latter way; the burning of the house in the Njalssaga is the most famous instance.

34. Probably an interpolation.

35. Lines 3–4 are probably interpolated. Race of wolves: family of a slain foe.

36. Probably an interpolation.

37. Lines 3–4 may well have come from the old Sigurth-Brynhild poem, like stanzas 2–4 and 20–21, being inserted here, where they do not fit particularly well, in place of the two lines with which the eleventh counsel originally ended. Perhaps they formed part of the stanza of warning which evidently preceded Brynhild’s speech in stanza 20. In the Volsungasaga they are paraphrased at the end of Brynhild’s long speech of advice (stanzas 20–37), and are immediately followed by the prose passage given in the note on stanza 21. It seems likely, therefore, that the paper manuscripts have preserved all of the so-called Sigrdrifumol which was contained in the lost section of Regius, with the possible exception of these two concluding stanzas, and these may very well have been given only in the form of a prose note, though it is practically certain that at one time they existed in verse form.








BROT AF SIGURTHARKVITHU

FRAGMENT OF A SIGURTH LAY


INTRODUCTORY NOTE


The gap of eight leaves in the Codex Regius (cf. introductory note to the Sigrdrifumol) is followed by a passage of twenty stanzas which is evidently the end of a longer poem, the greater part of it having been contained in the lost section of the manuscript. There is here little question of such a compilation as made up the so-called Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol; the extant fragment shows every sign of being part of a poem which, as it stood in the manuscript, was a complete and definite unit. The end is clearly marked; the following poem, Guthrunarkvitha I, carries a specific heading in the manuscript, so that there is no uncertainty as to where the fragment closes.

It seems altogether likely that the twenty stanzas thus remaining are the end of a poem entitled Sigurtharkvitha (Lay of Sigurth), and, more specifically, the “Long” Lay of Sigurth. The extant and complete Sigurth lay, a relatively late work, is referred to by the annotator as the “Short” Lay of Sigurth, which, of course, presupposes the existence of a longer poem with the same title. As the “short” lay is one of the longest poems in the whole collection (seventy stanzas), it follows that the other one must have been considerably more extensive in order to have been thus distinguished by its length. It may be guessed, then, that not less than eighty or a hundred stanzas, and possibly more, of the “Long” Lay of Sigurth have been lost with the missing pages of Regius.

The narrative, from the point at which the so-called Sigrdrifumol breaks off to that at which the Brot takes it up, is given with considerable detail in the Volsungasaga. In this prose narrative four stanzas are quoted, and one of them is specifically introduced with the phrase: “as is told in the Lay of Sigurth.” It is possible, but most unlikely, that the entire passage paraphrases this poem alone; such an assumption would give the Lay of Sigurth not less than two hundred and fifty stanzas (allowing about fifteen stanzas to each of the missing pages), and moreover there are inconsistencies in the Volsungasaga narrative suggesting that different and more or less conflicting poems were used as sources. The chances are that the “Long” Lay of Sigurth filled approximately the latter half of the lost section of the manuscript, the first half including poems of which the only trace is to be found in the Volsungasaga prose paraphrase and in two of the stanzas therein quoted.

The course of the Volsungasaga’s story from the Sigrdrifumol to the Brot is, briefly, as follows. After leaving the Valkyrie, Sigurth comes to the dwelling of Heimir, Brynhild’s brother-in-law, where he meets Brynhild and they swear oaths of fidelity anew (the Volsungasaga is no more lucid with regard to the Brynhild-Sigrdrifa confusion than was the annotator of the poems). Then the scene shifts to the home of the Gjukungs. Guthrun, Gjuki’s daughter, has a terrifying dream, and visits Brynhild to have it explained, which the latter does by foretelling pretty much everything that is going to happen; this episode was presumably the subject of a separate poem in the lost section of the manuscript. Guthrun returns home, and Sigurth soon arrives, to be made enthusiastically welcome. Grimhild, mother of Gunnar and Guthrun, gives him a magic draught which makes him forget all about Brynhild, and shortly thereafter he marries Guthrun.

Then follows the episode of the winning of Brynhild for Gunnar (cf. Gripisspo, 37 and note). This was certainly the subject of a poem, possibly of the first part of the “Long” Lay of Sigurth, although it seems more likely that the episode was dealt with in a separate poem. The Volsungasaga quotes two stanzas describing Sigurth’s triumphant passing through the flames after Gunnar has failed and the two have changed forms. They run thus:


    The fire raged,   |   the earth was rocked,     The flames leaped high   |   to heaven itself;     Few were the hardy   |   heroes would dare     To ride or leap   |   the raging flames.

    Sigurth urged Grani   |   then with his sword,     The fire slackened   |   before the hero,     The flames sank low   |   for the greedy of fame,     The armor flashed   |   that Regin had fashioned.


After Sigurth has spent three nights with Brynhild, laying his sword between them (cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note), he and Gunnar return home, while Brynhild goes to the dwelling of her brother-in-law, Heimir, and makes ready for her marriage with Gunnar, directing Heimir to care for her daughter by Sigurth, Aslaug. The wedding takes place, to be followed soon after by the quarrel between Guthrun and Brynhild, in which the former betrays the fact that it was Sigurth, and not Gunnar, who rode through the flames. Brynhild speaks with contempt of Guthrun and her whole family, and the following stanza, which presumably belongs to the same Sigurth lay as the Brot, is quoted at this point:


    Sigurth the dragon   |   slew, and that     Will men recall   |   while the world remains;     But little boldness   |   thy brother had     To ride or leap   |   the raging flames.


Gunnar and Sigurth alike try to appease the angry Brynhild, but in vain. After Sigurth has talked with her, his leaving her hall is described in the following stanza, introduced by the specific phrase: “as is said in the Lay of Sigurth”:


    Forth went Sigurth,   |   and speech he sought not,     The friend of heroes,   |   his head bowed down;     Such was his grief   |   that asunder burst     His mail-coat all   |   of iron wrought.


Brynhild then tells Gunnar that she had given herself wholly to Sigurth before she had become Gunnar’s wife (the confusion between the two stories is commented on in the note to Gripisspo, 47), and Gunnar discusses plans of vengeance with his brother, Hogni. It is at this point that the action of the Brot begins.

Beginning with this poem, and thence to the end of the cycle, the German features of the narrative predominate (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).





Hogni spake:


1.  “(What evil deed   |   has Sigurth) done,     That the hero’s life   |   thou fain wouldst have?”


Gunnar spake:


2.  “Sigurth oaths   |   to me hath sworn,     Oaths hath sworn,   |   and all hath broken;     He betrayed me there   |   where truest all     His oaths, methinks,   |   he ought to have kept.”


Hogni spake:


3.  “Thy heart hath Brynhild   |   whetted to hate,     Evil to work   |   and harm to win;     She grudges the honor   |   that Guthrun has,     And that joy of herself   |   thou still dost have.”

4.  They cooked a wolf,   |   they cut up a snake,     They gave to Gotthorm   |   the greedy one’s flesh,     Before the men,   |   to murder minded,     Laid their hands   |   on the hero bold.

5.  Slain was Sigurth   |   south of the Rhine;     From a limb a raven   |   called full loud:     “Your blood shall redden   |   Atli’s blade,     And your oaths shall bind   |   you both in chains.”

6.  Without stood Guthrun,   |   Gjuki’s daughter,     Hear now the speech   |   that first she spake:     “Where is Sigurth now,   |   the noble king,     That my kinsmen riding   |   before him come?”

7.  Only this   |   did Hogni answer:     “Sigurth we   |   with our swords have slain;     The gray horse mourns   |   by his master dead.”

8.  Then Brynhild spake,   |   the daughter of Buthli:     “Well shall ye joy   |   in weapons and lands;     Sigurth alone   |   of all had been lord,     If a little longer   |   his life had been.

9.  “Right were it not   |   that so he should rule     O’er Gjuki’s wealth   |   and the race of the Goths;     Five are the sons   |   for ruling the folk,     And greedy of fight,   |   that he hath fathered.”

10. Then Brynhild laughed—   |   and the building echoed—     Only once,   |   with all her heart;     “Long shall ye joy   |   in lands and men,     Now ye have slain   |   the hero noble.”

11. Then Guthrun spake,   |   the daughter of Gjuki:     “Much thou speakest   |   in evil speech;     Accursed be Gunnar,   |   Sigurth’s killer,     Vengeance shall come   |   for his cruel heart.”

12. Early came evening,   |   and ale was drunk,     And among them long   |   and loud they talked;     They slumbered all   |   when their beds they sought,     But Gunnar alone   |   was long awake.

13. His feet were tossing,   |   he talked to himself,     And the slayer of hosts   |   began to heed     What the twain from the tree   |   had told him then,     The raven and eagle,   |   as home they rode.

14. Brynhild awoke,   |   the daughter of Buthli,     The warrior’s daughter,   |   ere dawn of day:     “Love me or hate me,   |   the harm is done,     And my grief cries out,   |   or else I die.”

15. Silent were all   |   who heard her speak,     And nought of the heart   |   of the queen they knew,     Who wept such tears   |   the thing to tell     That laughing once   |   of the men she had won.


Brynhild spake:


16. “Gunnar, I dreamed   |   a dream full grim:     In the hall were corpses;   |   cold was my bed;     And, ruler, thou   |   didst joyless ride,     With fetters bound   |   in the foemen’s throng.

17. “.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Utterly now   |   your Niflung race     All shall die;   |   your oaths ye have broken.

18. “Thou hast, Gunnar,   |   the deed forgot,     When blood in your footprints   |   both ye mingled;     All to him   |   hast repaid with ill     Who fain had made thee   |   the foremost of kings.

19. “Well did he prove,   |   when proud he rode     To win me then   |   thy wife to be,     How true the host-slayer   |   ever had held     The oaths he had made   |   with the monarch young.

20. “The wound-staff then,   |   all wound with gold,     The hero let   |   between us lie;     With fire the edge   |   was forged full keen,     And with drops of venom   |   the blade was damp.”


Here it is told in this poem about the death of Sigurth, and the story goes here that they slew him out of doors, but some say that they slew him in the house, on his bed while he was sleeping. But German men say that they killed him out of doors in the forest; and so it is told in the old Guthrun lay, that Sigurth and Gjuki’s sons had ridden to the council-place, and that he was slain there. But in this they are all agreed, that they deceived him in his trust of them, and fell upon him when he was lying down and unprepared.








NOTES


1. The fragment begins with the last words of line 1 (probably line 3 of the stanza). A few editors ascribe this speech to Gunnar and the next to Brynhild; one reconstruction of lines 1–2 on this probably false assumption runs: “Why art thou, Brynhild,   |   daughter of Buthli, / Scheming ill   |   with evil counsel?” Hogni (German Hagene): brother of Gunnar and Guthrun.

2. A few editors ascribe this speech to Brynhild. Gunnar, if the stanza is his, has believed Brynhild’s statement regarding Sigurth’s disloyalty to his blood-brother.

4. The Volsungasaga quotes a somewhat different version of this stanza, in which the snake is called “wood-fish” and the third line adds “beer and many things.” Eating snakes and the flesh of beasts of prey was commonly supposed to induce ferocity. Gotthorm: Grimhild’s son, half-brother to Gunnar. He it is who, not having sworn brotherhood with Sigurth, does the killing.

5. In the manuscript this stanza stands between stanzas 11 and 12; most editions have made the change here indicated. South of the Rhine: the definite localization of the action shows how clearly all this part of the story was recognized in the North as of German origin. Atli (Attila; cf. introductory note to Gripisspo): the Northern version of the story makes him Brynhild’s brother. His marriage with Guthrun, and his slaying of her brothers, are told in the Atli poems. Regarding the manner of Sigurth’s death cf. concluding prose passage and note. Stanza 13 indicates that after stanza 5 a stanza containing the words of an eagle has been lost.

7. One line of this stanza, but it is not clear which, seems to have been lost. The gray horse: Grani.

8. Some editions set stanzas 8 and 9 after stanza 11; Sijmons marks them as spurious. Buthli: cf. Gripisspo, 19, note.

9. Goths: a generic term for any German race; cf. Gripisspo, 35 and note. Five sons: according to the Volsungasaga Sigurth had only one son, named Sigmund, who was killed at Brynhild’s behest. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma and Guthrunarkvitha II likewise mention only one son. The daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, Svanhild, marries Jormunrek (Ermanarich).

12. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and a few editions combine it with stanza 13.

13. Slayer of hosts: warrior (Gunnar). Raven and eagle: cf. note on stanza 5.

16. Mogk regards stanzas 16 and 17 as interpolated, but on not very satisfactory grounds. On the death of Gunnar cf. Drap Niflunga.

17. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and some editions attach these two lines to stanza 16. Niflungs: this name (German Nibelungen), meaning “sons of the mist,” seems to have belonged originally to the race of supernatural beings to which the treasure belonged in the German version. It was subsequently extended to include the Gjukungs and their Burgundians. This question, of minor importance in the Norse poems, has evoked an enormous amount of learned discussion in connection with the Nibelungenlied.

18. Footprints: the actual mingling of blood in one another’s footprints was a part of the ceremony of swearing blood-brotherhood, the oath which Gunnar and Sigurth had taken. The fourth line refers to the fact that Sigurth had won many battles for Gunnar.

20. Regarding the sword episode cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note. Wound-staff: sword.

Prose. This prose passage has in the manuscript, written in red, the phrase “Of Sigurth’s Death” as a heading; there is no break between it and the prose introducing Guthrunarkvitha I, the heading for that poem coming just before stanza 1. This note is of special interest as an effort at real criticism. The annotator, troubled by the two versions of the story of Sigurth’s death, feels it incumbent on him not only to point the fact out, but to cite the authority of “German men” for the form which appears in this poem. The alternative version, wherein Sigurth is slain in bed, appears in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, Guthrunarhvot, and Hamthesmol, and also in the Volsungasaga, which tells how Gotthorm tried twice to kill Sigurth but was terrified by the brightness of his eyes, and succeeded only after the hero had fallen asleep. That the annotator was correct in citing German authority for the slaying of Sigurth in the forest is shown by the Nibelungenlied and the Thithrekssaga. The “old” Guthrun lay is unquestionably Guthrunarkvitha II.








GUTHRUNARKVITHA I

THE FIRST LAY OF GUTHRUN


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The First Lay of Guthrun, entitled in the Codex Regius simply Guthrunarkvitha, immediately follows the remaining fragment of the “long” Sigurth lay in that manuscript. Unlike the poems dealing with the earlier part of the Sigurth cycle, the so-called Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol, it is a clear and distinct unit, apparently complete and with few and minor interpolations. It is also one of the finest poems in the entire collection, with an extraordinary emotional intensity and dramatic force. None of its stanzas are quoted elsewhere, and it is altogether probable that the compilers of the Volsungasaga were unfamiliar with it, for they do not mention the sister and daughter of Gjuki who appear in this poem, or Herborg, “queen of the Huns” (stanza 6).

The lament of Guthrun (Kriemhild) is almost certainly among the oldest parts of the story. The lament was one of the earliest forms of poetry to develop among the Germanic peoples, and I suspect, though the matter is not susceptible of proof, that the lament of Sigurth’s wife had assumed lyric form as early as the seventh century, and reached the North in that shape rather than in prose tradition (cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, introductory note). We find traces of it in the seventeenth Aventiure of the Nibelungenlied, and in the poems of the Edda it dominates every appearance of Guthrun. The two first Guthrun lays (I and II) are both laments, one for Sigurth’s death and the other including both that and the lament over the slaying of her brothers; the lament theme is apparent in the third Guthrun lay and in the Guthrunarhvot.

In their present forms the second Guthrun lay is undoubtedly older than the first; in the prose following the Brot the annotator refers to the “old” Guthrun lay in terms which can apply only to the second one in the collection. The shorter and “first” lay, therefore, can scarcely have been composed much before the year 1000, and may be somewhat later. The poet appears to have known and made use of the older lament; stanza 17, for example, is a close parallel to stanza 2 of the earlier poem; but whatever material he used he fitted into a definite poetic scheme of his own. And while this particular poem is, as critics have generally agreed, one of the latest of the collection, it probably represents one of the earliest parts of the entire Sigurth cycle to take on verse form.

Guthrunarkvitha I, so far as the narrative underlying it is concerned, shows very little northern addition to the basic German tradition. Brynhild appears only as Guthrun’s enemy and the cause of Sigurth’s death; the three women who attempt to comfort Guthrun, though unknown to the southern stories, seem to have been rather distinct creations of the poet’s than traditional additions to the legend. Regarding the relations of the various elements in the Sigurth cycle, cf. introductory note to Gripisspo.





Guthrun sat by the dead Sigurth; she did not weep as other women, but her heart was near to bursting with grief. The men and women came to her to console her, but that was not easy to do. It is told of men that Guthrun had eaten of Fafnir’s heart, and that she understood the speech of birds. This is a poem about Guthrun.


1.  Then did Guthrun   |   think to die,     When she by Sigurth   |   sorrowing sat;     Tears she had not,   |   nor wrung her hands,     Nor ever wailed,   |   as other women.

2.  To her the warriors   |   wise there came,     Longing her heavy   |   woe to lighten;     Grieving could not   |   Guthrun weep,     So sad her heart,   |   it seemed, would break.

3.  Then the wives   |   of the warriors came,     Gold-adorned,   |   and Guthrun sought;     Each one then   |   of her own grief spoke,     The bitterest pain   |   she had ever borne.

4.  Then spake Gjaflaug,   |   Gjuki’s sister:     “Most joyless of all   |   on earth am I;     Husbands five   |   were from me taken,     (Two daughters then,   |   and sisters three,)     Brothers eight,   |   yet I have lived.”

5.  Grieving could not   |   Guthrun weep,     Such grief she had   |   for her husband dead,     And so grim her heart   |   by the hero’s body.

6.  Then Herborg spake,   |   the queen of the Huns:     “I have a greater   |   grief to tell;     My seven sons   |   in the southern land,     And my husband, fell   |   in fight all eight.     (Father and mother   |   and brothers four     Amid the waves   |   the wind once smote,     And the seas crashed through   |   the sides of the ship.)

7.  “The bodies all   |   with my own hands then     I decked for the grave,   |   and the dead I buried;     A half-year brought me   |   this to bear;     And no one came   |   to comfort me.

8.  “Then bound I was,   |   and taken in war,     A sorrow yet   |   in the same half-year;     They bade me deck   |   and bind the shoes     Of the wife of the monarch   |   every morn.

9.  “In jealous rage   |   her wrath she spake,     And beat me oft   |   with heavy blows;     Never a better   |   lord I knew,     And never a woman   |   worse I found.”

10. Grieving could not   |   Guthrun weep,     Such grief she had   |   for her husband dead,     And so grim her heart   |   by the hero’s body.

11. Then spake Gollrond,   |   Gjuki’s daughter:     “Thy wisdom finds not,   |   my foster-mother,     The way to comfort   |   the wife so young.”     She bade them uncover   |   the warrior’s corpse.

12. The shroud she lifted   |   from Sigurth, laying     His well-loved head   |   on the knees of his wife:     “Look on thy loved one,   |   and lay thy lips     To his as if yet   |   the hero lived.”

13. Once alone   |   did Guthrun look;     His hair all clotted   |   with blood beheld,     The blinded eyes   |   that once shone bright,     The hero’s breast   |   that the blade had pierced.

14. Then Guthrun bent,   |   on her pillow bowed,     Her hair was loosened,   |   her cheek was hot,     And the tears like raindrops   |   downward ran.

15. Then Guthrun, daughter   |   of Gjuki, wept,     And through her tresses   |   flowed the tears;     And from the court   |   came the cry of geese,     The birds so fair   |   of the hero’s bride.

16. Then Gollrond spake,   |   the daughter of Gjuki:     “Never a greater   |   love I knew     Than yours among   |   all men on earth;     Nowhere wast happy,   |   at home or abroad,     Sister mine,   |   with Sigurth away.”


Guthrun spake:


17. “So was my Sigurth   |   o’er Gjuki’s sons     As the spear-leek grown   |   above the grass,     Or the jewel bright   |   borne on the band,     The precious stone   |   that princes wear.

18. “To the leader of men   |   I loftier seemed     And higher than all   |   of Herjan’s maids;     As little now   |   as the leaf I am     On the willow hanging;   |   my hero is dead.

19. “In his seat, in his bed,   |   I see no more     My heart’s true friend;   |   the fault is theirs,     The sons of Gjuki,   |   for all my grief,     That so their sister   |   sorely weeps.

20. “So shall your land   |   its people lose     As ye have kept   |   your oaths of yore;     Gunnar, no joy   |   the gold shall give thee,     (The rings shall soon   |   thy slayers be,)     Who swarest oaths   |   with Sigurth once.

21. “In the court was greater   |   gladness then     The day my Sigurth   |   Grani saddled,     And went forth Brynhild’s   |   hand to win,     That woman ill,   |   in an evil hour.”

22. Then Brynhild spake,   |   the daughter of Buthli:     “May the witch now husband   |   and children want     Who, Guthrun, loosed   |   thy tears at last,     And with magic today   |   hath made thee speak.”

23. Then Gollrond, daughter   |   of Gjuki, spake:     “Speak not such words,   |   thou hated woman;     Bane of the noble   |   thou e’er hast been,     (Borne thou art   |   on an evil wave,     Sorrow hast brought   |   to seven kings,)     And many a woman   |   hast loveless made.”

24. Then Brynhild, daughter   |   of Buthli, spake:     “Atli is guilty   |   of all the sorrow,     (Son of Buthli   |   and brother of mine,)     When we saw in the hall   |   of the Hunnish race     The flame of the snake’s bed   |   flash round the hero;     (For the journey since   |   full sore have I paid,     And ever I seek   |   the sight to forget.)”

25. By the pillars she stood,   |   and gathered her strength,     From the eyes of Brynhild,   |   Buthli’s daughter,     Fire there burned,   |   and venom she breathed,     When the wounds she saw   |   on Sigurth then.


Guthrun went thence away to a forest in the waste, and journeyed all the way to Denmark, and was there seven half-years with Thora, daughter of Hokon. Brynhild would not live after Sigurth. She had eight of her thralls slain and five serving-women. Then she killed herself with a sword, as is told in the Short Lay of Sigurth.








NOTES


Prose. The prose follows the concluding prose of the Brot without indication of a break, the heading standing immediately before stanza 1. Fafnir’s heart: this bit of information is here quite without point, and it is nowhere else stated that Guthrun understood the speech of birds. In the Volsungasaga it is stated that Sigurth gave Guthrun some of Fafnir’s heart to eat, “and thereafter she was much grimmer than before, and wiser.”

1. This stanza seems to be based on Guthrunarkvitha II, 11–12.

4. Gjaflaug: nothing further is known of this aunt of Guthrun, or of the many relatives whom she has lost. Very likely she is an invention of the poet’s, for it seems improbable that otherwise all further trace of her should have been lost. Line 4 has been marked by many editors as spurious.

5. Some editors assume the loss of a line, after either line 1 or line 3. I prefer to believe that here and in stanza 10 the poet knew exactly what he was doing, and that both stanzas are correct.

6. Herborg: neither she nor her sorrows are elsewhere mentioned, nor is it clear what a “queen of the Huns” is doing in Gunnar’s home, but the word “Hun” has little definiteness of meaning in the poems, and is frequently applied to Sigurth himself (cf. note on stanza 24). Herborg appears from stanza 11 to have been the foster-mother of Gollrond, Guthrun’s sister. Lines 5–7 may be interpolations, or may form a separate stanza.

7. Lines 1 and 2 stand in reversed order in the manuscript; I have followed Gering’s conjectural transposition.

9. Herborg implies that the queen’s jealousy was not altogether misplaced.

10. Cf. stanza 5 and note. The manuscript abbreviates to first letters.

11. Gollrond: not elsewhere mentioned. Line 4 looks like an interpolation replacing a line previously lost.

12. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and some editors have attempted to follow this arrangement.

14. Many editors assume the loss of a line from this stanza.

15. The word here translated “tresses” is sheer guesswork. The detail of the geese is taken from Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 29, line 3 here being identical with line 4 of that stanza.

16. Line 1, abbreviated in the manuscript, very likely should be simply “Gollrond spake.”

17. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 2. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and some editions have a first line, “Then Guthrun spake,   | the daughter of Gjuki.”

18. Herjan: Othin; his maids are the Valkyries; cf. Voluspo, 31, where the same phrase is used.

20. Line 4 looks like an interpolation (cf. Fafnismol, 9, line 4), but some editors instead have queried line 5. How Guthrun’s curse is fulfilled is told in the subsequent poems. That desire for Sigurth’s treasure (the gold cursed by Andvari and Loki) was one of the motives for his murder is indicated in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma (stanza 16), and was clearly a part of the German tradition, as it appears in the Nibelungenlied.

21. Cf. Gripisspo, 35 and note.

22. Line 1 is abbreviated in the manuscript.

23. Editors are agreed that this stanza shows interpolations, but differ as to the lines to reject. Line 4 (literally “every wave of ill-doing drives thee”) is substantially a proverb, and line 5, with its apparently meaningless reference to “seven” kings, may easily have come from some other source.

24. The stanza is obviously in bad shape; perhaps it represents two separate stanzas, or perhaps three of the lines are later additions. Atli: Brynhild here blames her brother, following the frequent custom of transferring the responsibility for a murder (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 33), because he compelled her to marry Gunnar against her will, an idea which the poet seems to have gained from Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 32–39. These stanzas represent an entirely different version of the story, wherein Atli, attacked by Gunnar and Sigurth, buys them off by giving Gunnar his sister, Brynhild, as wife. He seems to have induced the latter to marry Gunnar by falsely telling her that Gunnar was Sigurth (a rationalistic explanation of the interchange of forms described in the Volsungasaga and Gripisspo, 37–39). In the present stanza Atli is made to do this out of desire for Sigurth’s treasure. Hunnish race: this may be merely an error (neither Gunnar nor Sigurth could properly have been connected in any way with Atli and his Huns), based on Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, wherein Sigurth appears more than once as the “Hunnish king.” The North was very much in the dark as to the differences between Germans, Burgundians, Franks, Goths, and Huns, and used the words without much discrimination. On the other hand, it may refer to Sigurth’s appearance when, adorned with gold, he came with Gunnar to besiege Atli, in the alternative version of the story just cited (cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 36). Flame of the snake’s bed: gold, so called because serpents and dragons were the traditional guardians of treasure, on which they lay.

Prose. The manuscript has “Gunnar” in place of “Guthrun,” but this is an obvious mistake; the entire prose passage is based on Guthrunarkvitha II, 14. The Volsungasaga likewise merely paraphrases Guthrunarkvitha II, and nothing further is known of Thora or her father, Hokon, though many inconclusive attempts have been made to identify the latter. Brynhild: the story of her death is told in great detail in the latter part of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma.








SIGURTHARKVITHA EN SKAMMA

THE SHORT LAY OF SIGURTH


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Guthrunarkvitha I is immediately followed in the Codex Regius by a long poem which in the manuscript bears the heading “Sigurtharkvitha,” but which is clearly referred to in the prose link between it and Guthrunarkvitha I as the “short” Lay of Sigurth. The discrepancy between this reference and the obvious length of the poem has led to many conjectures, but the explanation seems to be that the “long” Sigurth lay, of which the Brot is presumably a part, was materially longer even than this poem. The efforts to reduce the “short” Sigurth lay to dimensions which would justify the appellation in comparison with other poems in the collection, either by separating it into two poems or by the rejection of many stanzas as interpolations, have been utterly inconclusive.

Although there are probably several interpolated passages, and indications of omissions are not lacking, the poem as we now have it seems to be a distinct and coherent unit. From the narrative point of view it leaves a good deal to be desired, for the reason that the poet’s object was by no means to tell a story, with which his hearers were quite familiar, but to use the narrative simply as the background for vivid and powerful characterization. The lyric element, as Mogk points out, overshadows the epic throughout, and the fact that there are frequent confusions of narrative tradition does not trouble the poet at all.

The material on which the poem was based seems to have existed in both prose and verse form; the poet was almost certainly familiar with some of the other poems in the Eddic collection, with poems which have since been lost, and with the narrative prose traditions which never fully assumed verse form. The fact that he seems to have known and used the Oddrunargratr, which can hardly have been composed before 1050, and that in any case he introduces the figure of Oddrun, a relatively late addition to the story, dates the poem as late as the end of the eleventh century, or even the first half of the twelfth. There has been much discussion as to where it was composed, the debate centering chiefly on the reference to glaciers (stanza 8). There is something to be said in favor of Greenland as the original home of the poem (cf. introductory note to Atlakvitha), but the arguments for Iceland are even stronger; Norway in this case is practically out of the question.

The narrative features of the poem are based on the German rather than the Norse elements of the story (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo), but the poet has taken whatever material he wanted without much discrimination as to its source. By the year 1100 the story of Sigurth, with its allied legends, existed throughout the North in many and varied forms, and the poem shows traces of variants of the main story which do not appear elsewhere.





1.  Of old did Sigurth   |   Gjuki seek,     The Volsung young,   |   in battles victor;     Well he trusted   |   the brothers twain,     With mighty oaths   |   among them sworn.

2.  A maid they gave him,   |   and jewels many,     Guthrun the young,   |   the daughter of Gjuki;     They drank and spake   |   full many a day,     Sigurth the young   |   and Gjuki’s sons.

3.  Thereafter went they   |   Brynhild to woo,     And so with them   |   did Sigurth ride,     The Volsung young,   |   in battle valiant,—     Himself would have had her   |   if all he had seen.

4.  The southern hero   |   his naked sword,     Fair-flashing, let   |   between them lie;     (Nor would he come   |   the maid to kiss;)     The Hunnish king   |   in his arms ne’er held     The maiden he gave   |   to Gjuki’s sons.

5.  Ill she had known not   |   in all her life,     And nought of the sorrows   |   of men she knew;     Blame she had not,   |   nor dreamed she should bear it,     But cruel the fates   |   that among them came.

6.  By herself at the end   |   of day she sat,     And in open words   |   her heart she uttered:     “I shall Sigurth have,   |   the hero young,     E’en though within   |   my arms he die.

7.  “The word I have spoken;   |   soon shall I rue it,     His wife is Guthrun,   |   and Gunnar’s am I;     Ill Norns set for me   |   long desire.”

8.  Oft did she go   |   with grieving heart     On the glacier’s ice   |   at even-tide,     When Guthrun then   |   to her bed was gone,     And the bedclothes Sigurth   |   about her laid.

9.  “(Now Gjuki’s child   |   to her lover goes,)     And the Hunnish king   |   with his wife is happy;     Joyless I am   |   and mateless ever,     Till cries from my heavy   |   heart burst forth.”

10. In her wrath to battle   |   she roused herself:     “Gunnar, now   |   thou needs must lose     Lands of mine   |   and me myself,     No joy shall I have   |   with the hero ever.

11. “Back shall I fare   |   where first I dwelt,     Among the kin   |   that come of my race,     To wait there, sleeping   |   my life away,     If Sigurth’s death   |   thou shalt not dare,     (And best of heroes   |   thou shalt not be.)

12. “The son shall fare   |   with his father hence,     And let not long   |   the wolf-cub live;     Lighter to pay   |   is the vengeance-price     After the deed   |   if the son is dead.”

13. Sad was Gunnar,   |   and bowed with grief,     Deep in thought   |   the whole day through;     Yet from his heart   |   it was ever hid     What deed most fitting   |   he should find,     (Or what thing best   |   for him should be,     Or if he should seek   |   the Volsung to slay,     For with mighty longing   |   Sigurth he loved.)

14. Much he pondered   |   for many an hour;     Never before   |   was the wonder known     That a queen should thus   |   her kingdom leave;     In counsel then   |   did he Hogni call,     (For him in truest   |   trust he held.)

15. “More than all   |   to me is Brynhild,     Buthli’s child,   |   the best of women;     My very life   |   would I sooner lose     Than yield the love   |   of yonder maid.

16. “Wilt thou the hero   |   for wealth betray?     ’Twere good to have   |   the gold of the Rhine,     And all the hoard   |   in peace to hold,     And waiting fortune   |   thus to win.”

17. Few the words   |   of Hogni were:     “Us it beseems not   |   so to do,     To cleave with swords   |   the oaths we swore,     The oaths we swore   |   and all our vows.

18. “We know no mightier   |   men on earth     The while we four   |   o’er the folk hold sway,     And while the Hunnish   |   hero lives,     Nor higher kinship   |   the world doth hold.

19. “If sons we five   |   shall soon beget,     Great, methinks,   |   our race shall grow;     Well I see   |   whence lead the ways;     Too bitter far   |   is Brynhild’s hate.”


Gunnar spake:


20. “Gotthorm to wrath   |   we needs must rouse,     Our younger brother,   |   in rashness blind;     He entered not   |   in the oaths we swore,     The oaths we swore   |   and all our vows.”

21. It was easy to rouse   |   the reckless one.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     The sword in the heart   |   of Sigurth stood.

22. In vengeance the hero   |   rose in the hall,     And hurled his sword   |   at the slayer bold;     At Gotthorm flew   |   the glittering steel     Of Gram full hard   |   from the hand of the king.

23. The foeman cleft   |   asunder fell,     Forward hands   |   and head did sink,     And legs and feet   |   did backward fall.

24. Guthrun soft   |   in her bed had slept,     Safe from care   |   at Sigurth’s side;     She woke to find   |   her joy had fled,     In the blood of the friend   |   of Freyr she lay.

25. So hard she smote   |   her hands together     That the hero rose up,   |   iron-hearted:     “Weep not, Guthrun,   |   grievous tears,     Bride so young,   |   for thy brothers live.

26. “Too young, methinks,   |   is my son as yet,     He cannot flee   |   from the home of his foes;     Fearful and deadly   |   the plan they found,     The counsel new   |   that now they have heeded.

27. “No son will ride,   |   though seven thou hast,     To the Thing as the son   |   of their sister rides;     Well I see   |   who the ill has worked,     On Brynhild alone   |   lies the blame for all.

28. “Above all men   |   the maiden loved me,     Yet false to Gunnar   |   I ne’er was found;     I kept the oaths   |   and the kinship I swore;     Of his queen the lover   |   none may call me.”

29. In a swoon she sank   |   when Sigurth died;     So hard she smote   |   her hands together     That all the cups   |   in the cupboard rang,     And loud in the courtyard   |   cried the geese.

30. Then Brynhild, daughter   |   of Buthli, laughed,     Only once,   |   with all her heart,     When as she lay   |   full loud she heard     The grievous wail   |   of Gjuki’s daughter.

31. Then Gunnar, monarch   |   of men, spake forth:     “Thou dost not laugh,   |   thou lover of hate,     In gladness there,   |   or for aught of good;     Why has thy face   |   so white a hue,     Mother of ill?   |   Foredoomed thou art.

32. “A worthier woman   |   wouldst thou have been     If before thine eyes   |   we had Atli slain;     If thy brother’s bleeding   |   body hadst seen     And the bloody wounds   |   that thou shouldst bind.”


Brynhild spake:


33. “None mock thee, Gunnar!   |   thou hast mightily fought,     But thy hatred little   |   doth Atli heed;     Longer than thou,   |   methinks, shall he live,     And greater in might   |   shall he ever remain.

34. “To thee I say,   |   and thyself thou knowest,     That all these ills   |   thou didst early shape;     No bonds I knew,   |   nor sorrow bore,     And wealth I had   |   in my brother’s home.

35. “Never a husband   |   sought I to have,     Before the Gjukungs   |   fared to our land;     Three were the kings   |   on steeds that came,—     Need of their journey   |   never there was.

36. “To the hero great   |   my troth I gave     Who gold-decked sat   |   on Grani’s back;     Not like to thine   |   was the light of his eyes,     (Nor like in form   |   and face are ye,)     Though kingly both   |   ye seemed to be.

37. “And so to me   |   did Atli say     That share in our wealth   |   I should not have,     Of gold or lands,   |   if my hand I gave not;     (More evil yet,   |   the wealth I should yield,)     The gold that he   |   in my childhood gave me,     (The wealth from him   |   in my youth I had.)

38. “Oft in my mind   |   I pondered much     If still I should fight,   |   and warriors fell,     Brave in my byrnie,   |   my brother defying;     That would wide   |   in the world be known,     And sorrow for many   |   a man would make.

39. “But the bond at last   |   I let be made,     For more the hoard   |   I longed to have,     The rings that the son   |   of Sigmund won;     No other’s treasure   |   e’er I sought.

40. “One alone   |   of all I loved,     Nor changing heart   |   I ever had;     All in the end   |   shall Atli know,     When he hears I have gone   |   on the death-road hence.”

            *    *    *    *    *    *

41. “Never a wife   |   of fickle will     Yet to another   |   man should yield.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     So vengeance for all   |   my ills shall come.”

42. Up rose Gunnar,   |   the people’s ruler,     And flung his arms   |   round her neck so fair;     And all who came,   |   of every kind,     Sought to hold her   |   with all their hearts.

43. But back she cast   |   all those who came,     Nor from the long road   |   let them hold her;     In counsel then   |   did he Hogni call:     “Of wisdom now   |   full great is our need.

44. “Let the warriors here   |   in the hall come forth,     Thine and mine,   |   for the need is mighty,     If haply the queen   |   from death they may hold,     Till her fearful thoughts   |   with time shall fade.”

45. (Few the words   |   of Hogni were:)     “From the long road now   |   shall ye hold her not,     That born again   |   she may never be!     Foul she came   |   from her mother forth,     And born she was   |   for wicked deeds,     (Sorrow to many   |   a man to bring.)”

46. From the speaker gloomily   |   Gunnar turned,     For the jewel-bearer   |   her gems was dividing;     On all her wealth   |   her eyes were gazing,     On the bond-women slain   |   and the slaughtered slaves.

47. Her byrnie of gold   |   she donned, and grim     Was her heart ere the point   |   of her sword had pierced it;     On the pillow at last   |   her head she laid,     And, wounded, her plan   |   she pondered o’er.

48. “Hither I will   |   that my women come     Who gold are fain   |   from me to get;     Necklaces fashioned   |   fair to each     Shall I give, and cloth,   |   and garments bright.”

49. Silent were all   |   as so she spake,     And all together   |   answer made:     “Slain are enough;   |   we seek to live,     Not thus thy women   |   shall honor win.”

50. Long the woman,   |   linen-decked, pondered,—     —Young she was,—   |   and weighed her words:     “For my sake now   |   shall none unwilling     Or loath to die   |   her life lay down.

51. “But little of gems   |   to gleam on your limbs     Ye then shall find   |   when forth ye fare     To follow me,   |   or of Menja’s wealth.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

52. “Sit now, Gunnar!   |   for I shall speak     Of thy bride so fair   |   and so fain to die;     Thy ship in harbor   |   home thou hast not,     Although my life   |   I now have lost.

53. “Thou shalt Guthrun requite   |   more quick than thou     thinkest,     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Though sadly mourns   |   the maiden wise     Who dwells with the king,   |   o’er her husband dead.

54. “A maid shall then   |   the mother bear;     Brighter far   |   than the fairest day     Svanhild shall be,   |   or the beams of the sun.

55. “Guthrun a noble   |   husband thou givest,     Yet to many a warrior   |   woe will she bring,     Not happily wedded   |   she holds herself;     Her shall Atli   |   hither seek,     (Buthli’s son,   |   and brother of mine.)

56. “Well I remember   |   how me ye treated     When ye betrayed me   |   with treacherous wiles;     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Lost was my joy   |   as long as I lived.

57. “Oddrun as wife   |   thou fain wouldst win,     But Atli this   |   from thee withholds;     Yet in secret tryst   |   ye twain shall love;     She shall hold thee dear,   |   as I had done     If kindly fate   |   to us had fallen.

58. “Ill to thee   |   shall Atli bring,     When he casts thee down   |   in the den of snakes.

59. “But soon thereafter   |   Atli too     His life, methinks,   |   as thou shalt lose,     (His fortune lose   |   and the lives of his sons;)     Him shall Guthrun,   |   grim of heart,     With the biting blade   |   in his bed destroy.

60. “It would better beseem   |   thy sister fair     To follow her husband   |   first in death,     If counsel good   |   to her were given,     Or a heart akin   |   to mine she had.

61. “Slowly I speak,—   |   but for my sake     Her life, methinks,   |   she shall not lose;     She shall wander over   |   the tossing waves,     To where Jonak rules   |   his father’s realm.

62. “Sons to him   |   she soon shall bear,     Heirs therewith   |   of Jonak’s wealth;     But Svanhild far   |   away is sent,     The child she bore   |   to Sigurth brave.

63. “Bikki’s word   |   her death shall be,     For dreadful the wrath   |   of Jormunrek;     So slain is all   |   of Sigurth’s race,     And greater the woe   |   of Guthrun grows.

64. “Yet one boon   |   I beg of thee,     The last of boons   |   in my life it is:     Let the pyre be built   |   so broad in the field     That room for us all   |   will ample be,     (For us who slain   |   with Sigurth are.)

65. “With shields and carpets   |   cover the pyre,     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Shrouds full fair,   |   and fallen slaves,     And besides the Hunnish   |   hero burn me.

66. “Besides the Hunnish   |   hero there     Slaves shall burn,   |   full bravely decked,     Two at his head   |   and two at his feet,     A brace of hounds   |   and a pair of hawks,     For so shall all   |   be seemly done.

67. “Let between us   |   lie once more     The steel so keen,   |   as so it lay     When both within   |   one bed we were,     And wedded mates   |   by men were called.

68. “The door of the hall   |   shall strike not the heel     Of the hero fair   |   with flashing rings,     If hence my following   |   goes with him;     Not mean our faring   |   forth shall be.

69. “Bond-women five   |   shall follow him,     And eight of my thralls,   |   well-born are they,     Children with me,   |   and mine they were     As gifts that Buthli   |   his daughter gave.

70. “Much have I told thee,   |   and more would say     If fate more space   |   for speech had given;     My voice grows weak,   |   my wounds are swelling;     Truth I have said,   |   and so I die.”








NOTES


1. Gjuki: father of the brothers twain, Gunnar and Hogni, and of Guthrun. In this version of the story Sigurth goes straight to the home of the Gjukungs after his victory over the dragon Fafnir, without meeting Brynhild on the way (cf. Gripisspo, 13 and note). Volsung: Sigurth’s grandfather was Volsung; cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note. Oaths: regarding the blood-brotherhood sworn by Sigurth, Gunnar, and Hogni cf. Brot, 18 and note.

3. Brynhild: on the winning of Brynhild by Sigurth in Gunnar’s shape cf. Gripisspo, 37 and note. The poet here omits details, and in stanzas 32–39 appears a quite different tradition regarding the winning of Brynhild, which I suspect he had in mind throughout the poem.

4. Southern hero: Sigurth, whose Frankish origin is seldom wholly lost sight of in the Norse versions of the story. On the episode of the sword cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note. Line 3 may well be an interpolation; both lines 4 and 5 have also been questioned, and some editions combine line 5 with lines 1–3 of stanza 5. Hunnish king: Sigurth, who was, of course, not a king of the Huns, but was occasionally so called in the later poems owing to the lack of ethnological distinction made by the Norse poets (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note).

5. This stanza may refer, as Gering thinks, merely to the fact that Brynhild lived happy and unsuspecting as Gunnar’s wife until the fatal quarrel with Guthrun (cf. Gripisspo, 45 and note) revealed to her the deceit whereby she had been won, or it may refer to the version of the story which appears in stanzas 32–39, wherein Brynhild lived happily with Atli, her brother, until he was attacked by Gunnar and Sigurth, and was compelled to give his sister to Gunnar, winning her consent thereto by representing Gunnar as Sigurth, her chosen hero (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note). The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and many editors combine it with stanza 6.

6. Brynhild has now discovered the deceit that has been practised on her. That she had loved Sigurth from the outset (cf. stanza 40) fits well with the version of the story wherein Sigurth meets her before he comes to Gunnar’s home (the version not used in this poem), or the one outlined in the note on stanza 5, but does not accord with the story of Sigurth’s first meeting Brynhild in Gunnar’s form—an added reason for believing that the poet in stanzas 5–6 had in mind the story represented by stanzas 32–39. The hero: the manuscript originally had the phrase thus, then corrected it to “though I die,” and finally crossed out the correction. Many editions have “I.”

7. Perhaps a line is missing after line 3.

8. Glacier: a bit of Icelandic (or Greenland) local color.

9. Line 1 does not appear in the manuscript, and is based on a conjecture by Bugge. Some editions add line 2 to stanza 8. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and some editors assume a gap of two lines after line 4. Hunnish king: cf. stanza 4.

10. Lands: Brynhild’s wealth again points to the story represented by stanzas 32–39; elsewhere she is not spoken of as bringing wealth to Gunnar.

11. Line 5, or perhaps line 3, may be interpolated.

12. The son: the three-year-old son of Sigurth and Guthrun, Sigmund, who was killed at Brynhild’s behest.

13. This stanza has been the subject of many conjectural emendations. Some editions assume a gap after line 2, and make a separate stanza of lines 3–7; others mark lines 5–7 as spurious. The stanza seems to have been expanded by repetition. Grief (line 1): the manuscript has “wrath,” involving a metrical error.

14. Bugge and Gering transfer lines 4–5 to the beginning of stanza 16, on the basis of the Volsungasaga paraphrase, and assume a gap of one line after line 3. Line 5, which is in the nature of a stereotyped clause, may well be interpolated.

15. After “Buthli” in line 2 the manuscript has “my brother,” apparently a scribal error. In line 4 the manuscript has “wealth” instead of “love,” apparently with stanza 10 in mind, but the Volsungasaga paraphrase has “love,” and many editors have suspected an error.

16. Cf. note on stanza 14. After thus adding lines 4–5 of stanza 14 at the beginning of stanza 16, Gering marks line 4 as probably spurious; others reject both lines 3 and 4 as mere repetitions. Rhine: the Rhine, the sands of which traditionally contained gold, was apparently the original home of the treasure of the Nibelungs, converted in the North to Andvari’s treasure (cf. Reginsmol, 1–9). That greed for Sigurth’s wealth was one of the motives for his slaying is indicated likewise in Guthrunarkvitha I, 20, and in the German versions of the story.

18. We four: if line 1 of stanza 19 is spurious, or the reference therein to “five” is a blunder, as may well be the case, then the “four” are Sigurth and the three brothers, Gunnar, Hogni, and Gotthorm. But it may be that the poet had in mind a tradition which, as in the Thithrekssaga, gave Gjuki a fourth son, in which case the “four” refers only to the four Gjukungs. Hunnish hero: Sigurth; cf. stanza 4 and note. Some editions put line 4 between lines 1 and 2. Some add lines 1–2 of stanza 19 to stanza 18, marking them as spurious.

19. We five: see note on preceding stanza. Some editors mark lines 1–2 as spurious, and either assume a gap of two lines after line 4 or combine lines 3–4 with stanza 20. Whence lead the ways: a proverbial expression signifying “whence the trouble comes.”

20. The manuscript does not name the speaker. Gotthorm (the name is variously spelt): half-brother of Gunnar and Hogni (cf. Hyndluljoth, 27 and note, and Brot, 4 and note). The name is the northern form of Gundomar; a prince of this name is mentioned in the Lex Burgundionum, apparently as a brother of Gundahari (Gundicarius). In the Nibelungenlied the third brother is called Gernot.

21. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and many editors combine stanza 21 with stanza 22, but it seems likely that not only two lines, but one or more stanzas in addition, have been lost; cf. Brot, 4, and also the detailed account of the slaying of Sigurth in the Volsungasaga, wherein, as here, Sigurth is killed in his bed (cf. stanza 24) and not in the forest.

22. Some editions combine lines 3–4 with stanza 23. Gram: Sigurth’s sword (cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanza 14); the word here, however, may not be a proper name, but may mean “the hero.”

23. A line may well have been lost from this stanza.

24. Freyr: if the phrase “the friend of Freyr” means anything more than “king” (cf. Rigsthula, 46 etc.), which I doubt, it has reference to the late tradition that Freyr, and not Othin, was the ancestor of the Volsungs (cf. Helgakvitha Hundingsbana I, 57 and note).

25. Müllenhoff thinks this stanza, or at any rate lines 1–2, a later addition based on stanza 29.

26. My son: Sigmund; cf. stanza 12 and note, and also Brot, 9 and note.

27. Sigurth means that although Guthrun may have seven sons by a later marriage, none of them will equal Sigmund, “son of their (i.e., Gunnar’s and Hogni’s) sister.” Thing: council.

28. Sigurth’s protestation of guiltlessness fits perfectly with the story of his relations with Brynhild used in this poem, but not, of course, with the alternative version, used in the Gripisspo and elsewhere, wherein Sigurth meets Brynhild before he woos her for Gunnar, and they have a daughter, Aslaug.

29. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 15.

30. Cf. Brot, 10.

31. Line 1 may well be a mere expansion of “Gunnar spake.” The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions combine lines 4–5 with stanza 32.

32. This stanza, which all editors have accepted as an integral part of the poem, apparently refers to the same story represented by stanzas 37–39, which most editors have (I believe mistakenly) marked as interpolated. As is pointed out in the notes on stanzas 3, 5, 6 and 10, the poet throughout seems to have accepted the version of the story wherein Gunnar and Sigurth besiege Atli, and are bought off by the gift of Atli’s sister, Brynhild, to Gunnar as wife, her consent being won by Atli’s representation that Gunnar is Sigurth (cf. also Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note).

33. The manuscript does not name the speaker, and some editions add a first line: “Then Brynhild, daughter   |   of Buthli, spake.”

34. Cf. stanza 5.

35. Three kings: Gunnar, Hogni, and Sigurth.

36. Some editions place this stanza after stanza 39, on the theory that stanzas 37–39 are interpolated. Line 4, as virtually a repetition of line 3, has generally been marked as spurious. In this version of the winning of Brynhild it appears that Atli pointed out Sigurth as Gunnar, and Brynhild promptly fell in love with the hero whom, as he rode on Grani and was decked with some of the spoils taken from Fafnir, she recognized as the dragon’s slayer. Thus no change of form between Sigurth and Gunnar was necessary. The oath to marry Gunnar had to be carried out even after Brynhild had discovered the deception.

37. Most editors mark stanzas 37–39 as interpolated, but cf. note on stanza 32. Stanza 37 has been variously emended. Lines 4 and 6 look like interpolated repetitions, but many editors make two stanzas, following the manuscript in beginning a new stanza with line 4. After line 1 Grundtvig adds: “Son of Buthli,   |   and brother of mine.” After line 6 Bugge adds: “Not thou was it, Gunnar,   |   who Grani rode, / Though thou my brother   |   with rings didst buy.” Regarding Brynhild’s wealth cf. stanza 10 and note.

38. Brynhild here again appears as a Valkyrie. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza. Any one of the last three lines may be spurious.

39. Some editions combine this stanza with lines 4–5 of stanza 38, with lines 1–2 of stanza 40, or with the whole of stanza 40. The bond: Brynhild thought she was marrying Sigurth, owner of the treasure, whereas she was being tricked into marrying Gunnar.

41. At this point there seem to be several omissions. Brynhild’s statement in lines 1–2 seems to refer to the episode, not here mentioned but told in detail in the Volsungasaga, of Sigurth’s effort to repair the wrong that has been done her by himself giving up Guthrun in her favor, an offer which she refuses. The lacuna here suggested, which is not indicated in the manuscript, may be simply a single line (line 1) or a stanza or more. After line 2 there is almost certainly a gap of at least one stanza, and possibly more, in which Brynhild states her determination to die.

42. Hardly any two editions agree as to the arrangement of the lines in stanzas 42–44. I have followed the manuscript except in transposing line 4 of stanza 43 to this position from the place it holds in the manuscript after line 4 of stanza 44. All the other arrangements involve the rejection of two or more lines as spurious and the assumption of various gaps. Gering and Sijmons both arrange the lines thus: 42, 1–2; two-line gap; 43, 3 (marked probably spurious); 44, 1–4; 43–4 (marked probably spurious); 42, 3–4; 43, 1–2.

43. Cf. note on preceding stanza.

44. Cf. note on stanza 42.

45. Perhaps the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and after line 4 an added line has been suggested: “She was ever known   |   for evil thoughts.” On the other hand, line 1, identical with line 1 of stanza 17, may well be a mere expansion of “Hogni spake,” and line 6 may have been introduced, with a slight variation, from line 5 of stanza 38. Born again: this looks like a trace of Christian influence (the poem was composed well after the coming of Christianity to Iceland) in the assumption that if Brynhild killed herself she could not be “born again” (cf. concluding prose to Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II).

46. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza; some editions treat lines 1–2 as a separate stanza, and combine lines 3–4 with lines 1–2 of stanza 47. Jewel-bearer (literally “land of jewels”): woman, here Brynhild. Bond-women, etc.: in stanza 69 we learn that five female slaves and eight serfs were killed to be burned on the funeral pyre, and thus to follow Sigurth in death.

47. The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as beginning a stanza, and some editions treat lines 3–4 as a separate stanza, or combine them with stanza 48.

48. Brynhild means, as stanzas 49–51 show, that those of her women who wish to win rewards must be ready to follow her in death. The word translated “women” in line 1 is conjectural, but the general meaning is clear enough.

49. In place of “as so she spake” in line 1 the manuscript has “of their plans they thought,” which involves a metrical error.

51. No gap indicated in the manuscript; many editions place it between lines 3 and 4. Menja’s wealth: gold; the story of the mill Grotti, whereby the giantesses Menja and Fenja ground gold for King Frothi, is told in the Grottasongr.

52. With this stanza begins Brynhild’s prophesy of what is to befall Gunnar, Guthrun, Atli, and the many others involved in their fate. Line 3 is a proverbial expression meaning simply “your troubles are not at an end.”

53. No gap is indicated in the manuscript; one suggestion for line 2 runs: “Grimhild shall make her   |   to laugh once more.” Gering suggests a loss of three lines, and joins lines 3–4 with stanza 54.

54. Probably a line has been lost from this stanza. Grundtvig adds as a new first line: “Her shalt thou find   |   in the hall of Half.” Some editions query line 3 as possibly spurious. Svanhild: the figure of Svanhild is exceedingly old. The name means “Swan-Maiden-Warrior,” applying to just such mixtures of swan-maiden and Valkyrie as appear in the Völundarkvitha. Originally part of a separate tradition, Svanhild appears first to have been incorporated in the Jormunrek (Ermanarich) story as the unhappy wife of that monarch, and much later to have been identified as the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun, thus linking the two sets of legends.

55. Line 2 in the original is almost totally obscure. Line 4 should very possibly precede line 2, while line 5 looks like an unwarranted addition.

56. This stanza probably ought to follow stanza 52, as it refers solely to the winning of Brynhild by Gunnar and Sigurth. Müllenhoff regards stanzas 53–55 as interpolated. The manuscript indicates no gap after line 3.

57. Stanzas 57–58 seem to be the remains of two stanzas, but the Volsungasaga paraphrase follows closely the form here given. Line 3 may well be spurious; line 5 has likewise been questioned. Oddrun: this sister of Atli and Brynhild, known mainly through the Oddrunargratr, is a purely northern addition to the cycle, and apparently one of a relatively late date. She figures solely by reason of her love affair with Gunnar.

58. Possibly two lines have been lost; many editions combine the two remaining lines with lines 1–3 of stanza 59. Concerning the manner of Gunnar’s death cf. Drap Niflunga.

59. Line 3 may well be spurious, as it is largely repetition. The manuscript has “sofa” (“sleep”) in place of “sona” (“sons”), but the Volsungasaga paraphrase says clearly “sons.” The slaying of Atli by Guthrun in revenge for his killing of her brothers is told in the two Atli lays. The manuscript marks line 4 as the beginning of a new stanza, and some editions make a separate stanza out of lines 4–5, or else combine them with stanza 60.

60. To follow in death: this phrase is not in Regius, but is included in late paper manuscripts, and has been added in most editions.

61. Jonak: this king, known only through the Hamthesmol and the stories which, like this one, are based thereon, is another purely northern addition to the legend. The name is apparently of Slavic origin. He appears solely as Guthrun’s third husband and the father of Hamther, Sorli, and Erp (cf. introductory prose to Guthrunarhvot).

62. Svanhild: cf. stanza 54 and note.

63. Bikki: Svanhild is married to the aged Jormunrek (Ermanarich), but Bikki, one of his followers, suggests that she is unduly intimate with Jormunrek’s son, Randver. Thereupon Jormunrek has Randver hanged, and Svanhild torn to pieces by wild horses. Ermanarich’s cruelty and his barbarous slaying of his wife and son were familiar traditions long before they became in any way connected with the Sigurth cycle (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).

64. Line 5 is very probably spurious.

65. The manuscript indicates no gap; a suggested addition runs “Gold let there be,   |   and jewels bright.” Fallen slaves: cf. stanzas 66 and 69. Hunnish hero: cf. stanza 4 and note.

66. In place of lines 3–4 the manuscript has one line “Two at his head, |   and a pair of hawks”; the addition is made from the Volsungasaga paraphrase. The burning or burying of slaves or beasts to accompany their masters in death was a general custom in the North. The number of slaves indicated in this stanza does not tally with the one given in stanza 69, wherefore Vigfusson rejects most of this stanza.

67. Cf. Gripisspo, 41 and note. After line 1 the manuscript adds the phrase “bright, ring-decked,” referring to the sword, but it is metrically impossible, and many editions omit it.

68. The door: The gate of Hel’s domain, like that of Mengloth’s house (cf. Svipdagsmol, 26 and note), closes so fast as to catch any one attempting to pass through. Apparently the poet here assumes that the gate of Valhall does likewise, but that it will be kept open for Sigurth’s retinue.

69. Cf. stanza 66.








HELREITH BRYNHILDAR

BRYNHILD’S HELL-RIDE


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The little Helreith Brynhildar immediately follows the “short” Sigurth lay in the Codex Regius, being linked to it by the brief prose note; the heading, “Brynhild’s Ride on Hel-Way,” stands just before the first stanza. The entire poem, with the exception of stanza 6, is likewise quoted in the Nornageststhattr. Outside of one stanza (No. 11), which is a fairly obvious interpolation, the poem possesses an extraordinary degree of dramatic unity, and, certain pedantic commentators notwithstanding, it is one of the most vivid and powerful in the whole collection. None the less, it has been extensively argued that parts of it belonged originally to the so-called Sigrdrifumol. That it stands in close relation to this poem is evident enough, but it is difficult to believe that such a masterpiece of dramatic poetry was ever the result of mere compilation. It seems more reasonable to regard the Helreith, with the exception of stanza 11 and allowing for the loss of two lines from stanza 6, as a complete and carefully constructed unit, based undoubtedly on older poems, but none the less an artistic creation in itself.

The poem is generally dated as late as the eleventh century, and the concluding stanza betrays Christian influence almost unmistakably. It shows the confusion of traditions manifest in all the later poems; for example, Brynhild is here not only a Valkyrie but also a swan-maiden. Only three stanzas have any reference to the Guthrun-Gunnar part of the story; otherwise the poem is concerned solely with the episode of Sigurth’s finding the sleeping Valkyrie. Late as it is, therefore, it is essentially a Norse creation, involving very few of the details of the German cycle (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).





After the death of Brynhild there were made two bale-fires, the one for Sigurth, and that burned first, and on the other was Brynhild burned, and she was on a wagon which was covered with a rich cloth. Thus it is told, that Brynhild went in the wagon on Hel-way, and passed by a house where dwelt a certain giantess. The giantess spake:


1.  “Thou shalt not further   |   forward fare,     My dwelling ribbed   |   with rocks across;     More seemly it were   |   at thy weaving to stay,     Than another’s husband   |   here to follow.

2.  “What wouldst thou have   |   from Valland here,     Fickle of heart,   |   in this my house?     Gold-goddess, now,   |   if thou wouldst know,     Heroes’ blood   |   from thy hands hast washed.”


Brynhild spake:


3.  “Chide me not, woman   |   from rocky walls,     Though to battle once   |   I was wont to go;     Better than thou   |   I shall seem to be,     When men us two   |   shall truly know.”


The giantess spake:


4.  “Thou wast, Brynhild,   |   Buthli’s daughter,     For the worst of evils   |   born in the world;     To death thou hast given   |   Gjuki’s children,     And laid their lofty   |   house full low.”


Brynhild spake:


5.  “Truth from the wagon   |   here I tell thee,     Witless one,   |   if know thou wilt     How the heirs of Gjuki   |   gave me to be     Joyless ever,   |   a breaker of oaths.

6.  “Hild the helmed   |   in Hlymdalir     They named me of old,   |   all they who knew me.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

7.  “The monarch bold   |   the swan-robes bore     Of the sisters eight   |   beneath an oak;     Twelve winters I was,   |   if know thou wilt,     When oaths I yielded   |   the king so young.

8.  “Next I let   |   the leader of Goths,     Hjalmgunnar the old,   |   go down to hell,     And victory brought   |   to Autha’s brother;     For this was Othin’s   |   anger mighty.

9.  “He beset me with shields   |   in Skatalund,     Red and white,   |   their rims o’erlapped;     He bade that my sleep   |   should broken be     By him who fear   |   had nowhere found.

10. “He let round my hall,   |   that southward looked,     The branches’ foe   |   high-leaping burn;     Across it he bade   |   the hero come     Who brought me the gold   |   that Fafnir guarded.

11. “On Grani rode   |   the giver of gold,     Where my foster-father   |   ruled his folk;     Best of all   |   he seemed to be,     The prince of the Danes,   |   when the people met.

12. “Happy we slept,   |   one bed we had,     As he my brother   |   born had been;     Eight were the nights   |   when neither there     Loving hand   |   on the other laid.

13. “Yet Guthrun reproached me,   |   Gjuki’s daughter,     That I in Sigurth’s   |   arms had slept;     Then did I hear   |   what I would were hid,     That they had betrayed me   |   in taking a mate.

14. “Ever with grief   |   and all too long     Are men and women   |   born in the world;     But yet we shall live   |   our lives together,     Sigurth and I.   |   Sink down, Giantess!”








NOTES


Prose. The prose follows the last stanza of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma without break. Two bale-fires: this contradicts the statement made in the concluding stanzas of Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, that Sigurth and Brynhild were burned on the same pyre; there is no evidence that the annotator here had anything but his own mistaken imagination to go on.

2. Valland: this name (“Land of Slaughter”) is used elsewhere of mythical places; cf. Harbarthsljoth, 24, and prose introduction to Völundarkvitha; it may here not be a proper name at all. Gold-goddess: poetic circumlocution for “woman.”

6. In Regius these two lines stand after stanza 7, but most editions place them as here. They are not quoted in the Nornageststhattr. Presumably two lines, and perhaps more, have been lost. It has frequently been argued that all or part of the passage from stanza 6 through stanza 10 (6–10, 7–10 or 8–10) comes originally from the so-called Sigrdrifumol, where it would undoubtedly fit exceedingly well. Hild: a Valkyrie name meaning “Fighter” (cf. Voluspo, 31). In such compound names as Brynhild (“Fighter in Armor”) the first element was occasionally omitted. Hlymdalir (“Tumult-Dale”): a mythical name, merely signifying the place of battle as the home of Valkyries.

7. Regarding the identification of swan-maidens with Valkyries, and the manner in which men could get them in their power by stealing their swan-garments, cf. Völundarkvitha, introductory prose and note, where the same thing happens. The monarch: perhaps Agnar, brother of Autha, mentioned in Sigrdrifumol (prose and quoted verse following stanza 4) as the warrior for whose sake Brynhild defied Othin in slaying Hjalmgunnar. Eight: the Nornageststhattr manuscripts have “sisters of Atli” instead of “sisters eight.”

8. Hjalmgunnar: regarding this king of the Goths (the phrase means little) and his battle with Agnar, brother of Autha, cf. Sigrdrifumol, prose after stanza 4. One Nornageststhattr manuscript has “brother of the giantess” in place of “leader of Goths.”

9. Cf. Sigrdrifumol, prose introduction. Skatalund (“Warriors’ Grove”): a mythical name; elsewhere the place where Brynhild lay is called Hindarfjoll.

10. Branches’ foe: fire. Regarding the treasure cf. Fafnismol.

11. This stanza is presumably an interpolation, reflecting a different version of the story, wherein Sigurth meets Brynhild at the home of her brother-in-law and foster-father, Heimir (cf. Gripisspo, 19 and 27). Grani: Sigurth’s horse. Danes: nowhere else does Sigurth appear in this capacity. Perhaps this is a curious relic of the Helgi tradition.

12. Eight nights: elsewhere (cf. Gripisspo, 42) the time is stated as three nights, not eight. There is a confusion of traditions here, as in Gripisspo. In the version of the story wherein Sigurth met Brynhild before he encountered the Gjukungs, Sigurth was bound by no oaths, and the union was completed; it is only in the alternative version that the episode of the sword laid between the two occurs.

14. The idea apparently conveyed in the concluding lines, that Sigurth and Brynhild will be together in some future life, is utterly out of keeping with the Norse pagan traditions, and the whole stanza indicates the influence of Christianity.








DRAP NIFLUNGA

THE SLAYING OF THE NIFLUNGS


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It has been already pointed out (introductory note to Reginsmol) that the compiler of the Eddic collection had clearly undertaken to formulate a coherent narrative of the entire Sigurth cycle, piecing together the various poems by means of prose narrative links. To some extent these links were based on traditions existing outside of the lays themselves, but in the main the material was gathered from the contents of the poems. The short prose passage entitled Drap Niflunga, which in the Codex Regius immediately follows the Helreith Brynhildar, is just such a narrative link, and scarcely deserves a special heading, but as nearly all editions separate it from the preceding and following poems, I have followed their example.

With Sigurth and Brynhild both dead, the story turns to the slaying of the sons of Gjuki by Atli, Guthrun’s second husband, and to a few subsequent incidents, mostly late incorporations from other narrative cycles, including the tragic death of Svanhild, daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun and wife of Jormunrek (Ermanarich), and the exploits of Hamther, son of Guthrun and her third husband, Jonak. These stories are told, or outlined, in the two Atli lays, the second and third Guthrun lays, the Oddrunargratr, the Guthrunarhvot, and the Hamthesmol. Had the compiler seen fit to put the Atli lays immediately after the Helreith Brynhildar, he would have needed only a very brief transitional note to make the course of the story clear, but as the second Guthrun lay, the next poem in the collection, is a lament following the death of Guthrun’s brothers, some sort of a narrative bridge was manifestly needed.

Drap Niflunga is based entirely on the poems which follow it in the collection, with no use of extraneous material. The part of the story which it summarizes belongs to the semi-historical Burgundian tradition (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo), in many respects parallel to the familiar narrative of the Nibelungenlied, and, except in minor details, showing few essentially Northern additions. Sigurth is scarcely mentioned, and the outstanding episode is the slaying of Gunnar and Hogni, following their journey to Atli’s home.





Gunnar and Hogni then took all the gold that Fafnir had had. There was strife between the Gjukungs and Atli, for he held the Gjukungs guilty of Brynhild’s death. It was agreed that they should give him Guthrun as wife, and they gave her a draught of forgetfulness to drink before she would consent to be wedded to Atli. The sons of Atli were Erp and Eitil, and Svanhild was the daughter of Sigurth and Guthrun. King Atli invited Gunnar and Hogni to come to him, and sent as messenger Vingi or Knefröth. Guthrun was aware of treachery, and sent with him a message in runes that they should not come, and as a token she sent to Hogni the ring Andvaranaut and tied a wolf’s hair in it. Gunnar had sought Oddrun, Atli’s sister, for his wife, but had her not; then he married Glaumvor, and Hogni’s wife was Kostbera; their sons were Solar and Snævar and Gjuki. And when the Gjukungs came to Atli, then Guthrun besought her sons to plead for the lives of both the Gjukungs, but they would not do it. Hogni’s heart was cut out, and Gunnar was cast into the serpent’s den. He smote on the harp and put the serpents to sleep, but an adder stung him in the liver.








NOTE


Prose. Niflungs: regarding the mistaken application of this name to the sons of Gjuki, who were Burgundians, cf. Brot, 17 and note. Draught of forgetfulness: according to the Volsungasaga Grimhild, Guthrun’s mother, administered this, just as she did the similar draught which made Sigurth forget Brynhild. Erp and Eitil: Guthrun kills her two sons by Atli as part of her revenge; the annotator here explains her act further by saying that Guthrun asked her sons to intercede with their father in favor of Guthrun’s brothers, but that they refused, a detail which he appears to have invented, as it is found nowhere else. Svanhild: cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 54 and note. Vingi or Knefröth: Atlakvitha (stanza 1) calls the messenger Knefröth; Atlamol (stanza 4) speaks of two messengers, but names only one of them, Vingi. The annotator has here tried, unsuccessfully, to combine the two accounts. Andvaranaut: regarding the origin of Andvari’s ring cf. Reginsmol, prose after stanzas 4 and 5 and notes; Sigurth gave the ring to Guthrun. Here again the annotator is combining two stories; in Atlakvitha (stanza 8) Guthrun sends a ring (not Andvaranaut) with a wolf’s hair; in Atlamol (stanza 4) she sends a message written in runes. The messenger obscures these runes, and Kostbera, Hogni’s wife, who attempts to decipher them, is not clear as to their meaning, though she suspects danger. Oddrun: cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 57 and note. Glaumvor: almost nothing is told of Gunnar’s second wife, though she appears frequently in the Atlamol. Kostbera (or Bera), Hogni’s wife, is known only as skilled in runes. Her brother was Orkning. The sons of Hogni and Kostbera, according to the Atlamol (stanza 28), were Solar and Snævar; the third son, Gjuki, named after his grandfather, seems to be an invention of the annotator’s. Adder: according to Oddrunargratr (stanza 30) Atli’s mother assumed this form in order to complete her son’s vengeance.








GUTHRUNARKVITHA II, EN FORNA

THE SECOND, OR OLD, LAY OF GUTHRUN


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

It has already been pointed out (introductory note to Guthrunarkvitha I) that the tradition of Guthrun’s lament was known wherever the Sigurth story existed, and that this lament was probably one of the earliest parts of the legend to assume verse form. Whether it reached the North as verse cannot, of course, be determined, but it is at least possible that this was the case, and in any event it is clear that by the tenth and eleventh centuries there were a number of Norse poems with Guthrun’s lament as the central theme. Two of these are included in the Eddic collection, the second one being unquestionably much the older. It is evidently the poem referred to by the annotator in the prose note following the Brot as “the old Guthrun lay,” and its character and state of preservation have combined to lead most commentators to date it as early as the first half of the tenth century, whereas Guthrunarkvitha I belongs a hundred years later.

The poem has evidently been preserved in rather bad shape, with a number of serious omissions and some interpolations, but in just this form it lay before the compilers of the Volsungasaga, who paraphrased it faithfully, and quoted five of its stanzas. The interpolations are on the whole unimportant; the omissions, while they obscure the sense of certain passages, do not destroy the essential continuity of the poem, in which Guthrun reviews her sorrows from the death of Sigurth through the slaying of her brothers to Atli’s dreams foretelling the death of their sons. It is, indeed, the only Norse poem of the Sigurth cycle antedating the year 1000 which has come down to us in anything approaching complete form; the Reginsmol, Fafnismol, and Sigrdrifumol are all collections of fragments, only a short bit of the “long” Sigurth lay remains, and the others—Gripisspo, Guthrunarkvitha I and III, Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, Helreith Brynhildar, Oddrunargratr, Guthrunarhvot, Hamthesmol, and the two Atli lays—are all generally dated from the eleventh and even the twelfth centuries.

An added reason for believing that Guthrunarkvitha II traces its origin back to a lament which reached the North from Germany in verse form is the absence of most of the characteristic Norse additions to the narrative, except in minor details. Sigurth is slain in the forest, as “German men say” (cf. Brot, concluding prose); the urging of Guthrun by her mother and brothers to become Atli’s wife, the slaying of the Gjukungs (here only intimated, for at that point something seems to have been lost), and Guthrun’s prospective revenge on Atli, all belong directly to the German tradition (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo).

In the Codex Regius the poem is entitled simply Guthrunarkvitha; the numeral has been added in nearly all editions to distinguish this poem from the other two Guthrun lays, and the phrase “the old” is borrowed from the annotator’s comment in the prose note at the end of the Brot.





King Thjothrek was with Atli, and had lost most of his men. Thjothrek and Guthrun lamented their griefs together. She spoke to him, saying:


1.  A maid of maids   |   my mother bore me,     Bright in my bower,   |   my brothers I loved,     Till Gjuki dowered   |   me with gold,     Dowered with gold,   |   and to Sigurth gave me.

2.  So Sigurth rose   |   o’er Gjuki’s sons     As the leek grows green   |   above the grass,     Or the stag o’er all   |   the beasts doth stand,     Or as glow-red gold   |   above silver gray.

3.  Till my brothers let me   |   no longer have     The best of heroes   |   my husband to be;     Sleep they could not,   |   or quarrels settle,     Till Sigurth they   |   at last had slain.

4.  From the Thing ran Grani   |   with thundering feet,     But thence did Sigurth   |   himself come never;     Covered with sweat   |   was the saddle-bearer,     Wont the warrior’s   |   weight to bear.

5.  Weeping I sought   |   with Grani to speak,     With tear-wet cheeks   |   for the tale I asked;     The head of Grani   |   was bowed to the grass,     The steed knew well   |   his master was slain.

6.  Long I waited   |   and pondered well     Ere ever the king   |   for tidings I asked.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

7.  His head bowed Gunnar,   |   but Hogni told     The news full sore   |   of Sigurth slain:     “Hewed to death   |   at our hands he lies,     Gotthorm’s slayer,   |   given to wolves.

8.  “On the southern road   |   thou shalt Sigurth see,     Where hear thou canst   |   the ravens cry;     The eagles cry   |   as food they crave,     And about thy husband   |   wolves are howling.”

9.  “Why dost thou, Hogni,   |   such a horror     Let me hear,   |   all joyless left?     Ravens yet   |   thy heart shall rend     In a land that never   |   thou hast known.”

10. Few the words   |   of Hogni were,     Bitter his heart   |   from heavy sorrow:     “Greater, Guthrun,   |   thy grief shall be     If the ravens so   |   my heart shall rend.”

11. From him who spake   |   I turned me soon,     In the woods to find   |   what the wolves had left;     Tears I had not,   |   nor wrung my hands,     Nor wailing went,   |   as other women,     (When by Sigurth   |   slain I sat).

12. Never so black   |   had seemed the night     As when in sorrow   |   by Sigurth I sat;     The wolves .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

13. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Best of all   |   methought ’twould be     If I my life   |   could only lose,     Or like to birch-wood   |   burned might be.

14. From the mountain forth   |   five days I fared,     Till Hoalf’s hall   |   so high I saw;     Seven half-years   |   with Thora I stayed,     Hokon’s daughter,   |   in Denmark then.

15. With gold she broidered,   |   to bring me joy,     Southern halls   |   and Danish swans;     On the tapestry wove we   |   warrior’s deeds,     And the hero’s thanes   |   on our handiwork;     (Flashing shields   |   and fighters armed,     Sword-throng, helm-throng,   |   the host of the king).

16. Sigmund’s ship   |   by the land was sailing,     Golden the figure-head,   |   gay the beaks;     On board we wove   |   the warriors faring,     Sigar and Siggeir,   |   south to Fjon.

17. Then Grimhild asked,   |   the Gothic queen,     Whether willingly   |   would I .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

18. Her needlework cast she   |   aside, and called     Her sons to ask,   |   with stern resolve,     Who amends to their sister   |   would make for her son,     Or the wife requite   |   for her husband killed.

19. Ready was Gunnar   |   gold to give,     Amends for my hurt,   |   and Hogni too;     Then would she know   |   who now would go,     The horse to saddle,   |   the wagon to harness,     (The horse to ride,   |   the hawk to fly,     And shafts from bows   |   of yew to shoot).

20. (Valdar, king   |   of the Danes, was come,     With Jarizleif, Eymoth,   |   and Jarizskar).     In like princes   |   came they all,     The long-beard men,   |   with mantles red,     Short their mail-coats,   |   mighty their helms,     Swords at their belts,   |   and brown their hair.

21. Each to give me   |   gifts was fain,     Gifts to give,   |   and goodly speech,     Comfort so   |   for my sorrows great     To bring they tried,   |   but I trusted them not.

22. A draught did Grimhild   |   give me to drink,     Bitter and cold;   |   I forgot my cares;     For mingled therein   |   was magic earth,     Ice-cold sea,   |   and the blood of swine.

23. In the cup were runes   |   of every kind,     Written and reddened,   |   I could not read them;     A heather-fish   |   from the Haddings’ land,     An ear uncut,   |   and the entrails of beasts.

24. Much evil was brewed   |   within the beer,     Blossoms of trees,   |   and acorns burned,     Dew of the hearth,   |   and holy entrails,     The liver of swine,—   |   all grief to allay.

25. Then I forgot,   |   when the draught they gave me,     There in the hall,   |   my husband’s slaying;     On their knees the kings   |   all three did kneel,     Ere she herself   |   to speak began:

26. “Guthrun, gold   |   to thee I give,     The wealth that once   |   thy father’s was,     Rings to have,   |   and Hlothver’s halls,     And the hangings all   |   that the monarch had.

27. “Hunnish women,   |   skilled in weaving,     Who gold make fair   |   to give thee joy,     And the wealth of Buthli   |   thine shall be,     Gold-decked one,   |   as Atli’s wife.”


Guthrun spake:


28. “A husband now   |   I will not have,     Nor wife of Brynhild’s   |   brother be;     It beseems me not   |   with Buthli’s son     Happy to be,   |   and heirs to bear.”


Grimhild spake:


29. “Seek not on men   |   to avenge thy sorrows,     Though the blame at first   |   with us hath been;     Happy shalt be   |   as if both still lived,     Sigurth and Sigmund,   |   if sons thou bearest.”


Guthrun spake:


30. “Grimhild, I may not   |   gladness find,     Nor hold forth hopes   |   to heroes now,     Since once the raven   |   and ravening wolf     Sigurth’s heart’s-blood   |   hungrily lapped.”


Grimhild spake:


31. “Noblest of birth   |   is the ruler now     I have found for thee,   |   and foremost of all;     Him shalt thou have   |   while life thou hast,     Or husbandless be   |   if him thou wilt choose not.”


Guthrun spake:


32. “Seek not so eagerly   |   me to send     To be a bride   |   of yon baneful race;     On Gunnar first   |   his wrath shall fall,     And the heart will he tear   |   from Hogni’s breast.”

33. Weeping Grimhild   |   heard the words     That fate full sore   |   for her sons foretold,     (And mighty woe   |   for them should work;)     “Lands I give thee,   |   with all that live there,     (Vinbjorg is thine,   |   and Valbjorg too,)     Have them forever,   |   but hear me, daughter.”

34. So must I do   |   as the kings besought,     And against my will   |   for my kinsmen wed;     Ne’er with my husband   |   joy I had,     And my sons by my brothers’   |   fate were saved not.

35. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     I could not rest   |   till of life I had robbed     The warrior bold,   |   the maker of battles.

36. Soon on horseback   |   each hero was,     And the foreign women   |   in wagons faring;     A week through lands   |   so cold we went,     And a second week   |   the waves we smote,     (And a third through lands   |   that water lacked).

37. The warders now   |   on the lofty walls     Opened the gates,   |   and in we rode.

            *    *    *    *    *    *

38. Atli woke me,   |   for ever I seemed     Of bitterness full   |   for my brothers’ death.


Atli spake:


39. “Now from sleep   |   the Norns have waked me     With visions of terror,—   |   to thee will I tell them;     Methought thou, Guthrun,   |   Gjuki’s daughter,     With poisoned blade   |   didst pierce my body.”


Guthrun spake:


40. “Fire a dream   |   of steel shall follow     And willful pride   |   one of woman’s wrath;     A baneful sore   |   I shall burn from thee,     And tend and heal thee,   |   though hated thou art.”


Atli spake:


41. “Of plants I dreamed,   |   in the garden drooping,     That fain would I have   |   full high to grow;     Plucked by the roots,   |   and red with blood,     They brought them hither,   |   and bade me eat.

42. “I dreamed my hawks   |   from my hand had flown,     Eager for food,   |   to an evil house;     I dreamed their hearts   |   with honey I ate,     Soaked in blood,   |   and heavy my sorrow.

43. “Hounds I dreamed   |   from my hand I loosed,     Loud in hunger   |   and pain they howled;     Their flesh methought   |   was eagles’ food,     And their bodies now   |   I needs must eat.”


Guthrun spake:


44. “Men shall soon   |   of sacrifice speak,     And off the heads   |   of beasts shall hew;     Die they shall   |   ere day has dawned,     A few nights hence,   |   and the folk shall have them.”


Atli spake:


45. “On my bed I sank,   |   nor slumber sought,     Weary with woe,—   |   full well I remember.”     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .








NOTES


Prose. Thjothrek: the famous Theoderich, king of the Ostrogoths, who became renowned in German story as Dietrich von Bern. The German tradition early accepted the anachronism of bringing together Attila (Etzel, Atli), who died in 453, and Theoderich, who was born about 455, and adding thereto Ermanarich (Jormunrek), king of the Goths, who died about 376. Ermanarich, in German tradition, replaced Theoderich’s actual enemy, Odovakar, and it was in battle with Jormunrek (i.e., Odovakar) that Thjothrek is here said to have lost most of his men. The annotator found the material for this note in Guthrunarkvitha III, in which Guthrun is accused of having Thjothrek as her lover. At the time when Guthrunarkvitha II was composed (early tenth century) it is probable that the story of Theoderich had not reached the North at all, and the annotator is consequently wrong in giving the poem its setting.

2. Cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 17.

4. Regarding the varying accounts of the manner of Sigurth’s death cf. Brot, concluding prose and note. Grani: cf. Brot, 7.

6. No gap indicated in the manuscript. Some editions combine these two lines with either stanza 5 or stanza 7.

7. Gotthorm: from this it appears that in both versions of the death of Sigurth the mortally wounded hero killed his murderer, the younger brother of Gunnar and Hogni. The story of how Gotthorm was slain after killing Sigurth in his bed is told in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 22–23, and in the Volsungasaga.

11. On lines 3–4 cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 1. Line 5 is probably spurious.

12. Many editions make one stanza of stanzas 12 and 13, reconstructing line 3; the manuscript shows no gap. Bugge fills out the stanza thus: “The wolves were howling   |   on all the ways, / The eagles cried   | as their food they craved.”

13. Cf. note on preceding stanza. Grundtvig suggests as a first line: “Long did I bide,   |   my brothers awaiting.” Many editors reject line 4.

14. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3–4 with lines 1–2 of stanza 15. Hoalf (or Half): Gering thinks this Danish king may be identical with Alf, son of King Hjalprek, and second husband of Hjordis, Sigurth’s mother (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla and note), but the name was a common one. Thora and Hokon have not been identified (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, concluding prose, which is clearly based on this stanza). A Thora appears in Hyndluljoth, 18, as the wife of Dag, one of the sons of Halfdan the Old, the most famous of Denmark’s mythical kings, and one of her sons is Alf (Hoalf?).

15. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Some editors combine lines 5–6 with lines 1–2 of stanza 16, while others mark them as interpolated.

16. Some editions combine lines 3–4 with stanza 17. Sigmund: Sigurth’s father, who here appears as a sea-rover in Guthrun’s tapestry. Sigar: named in Fornaldar sögur II, 10, as the father of Siggeir, the latter being the husband of Sigmund’s twin sister, Signy (cf. Fra Dautha Sinfjotla). Fjon: this name, referring to the Danish island of Fünen, is taken from the Volsungasaga paraphrase as better fitting the Danish setting of the stanza than the name in Regius, which is “Fife” (Scotland).

17. No gap is indicated in the manuscript, and most editions combine these two lines either with lines 3–4 of stanza 16, with lines 1–2 of stanza 18, or with the whole of stanza 18. Line 2 has been filled out in various ways. The Volsungasaga paraphrase indicates that these two lines are the remains of a full stanza, the prose passage running: “Now Guthrun was somewhat comforted of her sorrows. Then Grimhild learned where Guthrun was now dwelling.” The first two lines may be the ones missing. Gothic: the term “Goth” was used in the North without much discrimination to apply to all south-Germanic peoples. In Gripisspo, 35, Gunnar, Grimhild’s son, appears as “lord of the Goths.”

18. The manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. Grimhild is eager to have amends made to Guthrun for the slaying of Sigurth and their son, Sigmund, because Atli has threatened war if he cannot have Guthrun for his wife.

19. Lines 5–6 are almost certainly interpolations, made by a scribe with a very vague understanding of the meaning of the stanza, which refers simply to the journey of the Gjukungs to bring their sister home from Denmark.

20. Lines 1–2 are probably interpolated, though the Volsungasaga includes the names. Some one apparently attempted to supply the names of Atli’s messengers, the “long-beard men” of line 4, who have come to ask for Guthrun’s hand. Some commentators assume, as the Volsungasaga does, that these messengers went with the Gjukungs to Denmark in search of Guthrun, but it seems more likely that a transitional stanza has dropped out after stanza 19, and that Guthrun received Atli’s emissaries in her brothers’ home. Long-beards: the word may actually mean Langobards or Lombards, but, if it does, it is presumably without any specific significance here. Certainly the names in the interpolated two lines do not fit either Lombards or Huns, for Valdar is identified as a Dane, and Jarizleif and Jarizskar are apparently Slavic. The manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza.

21. Each: the reference is presumably to Gunnar and Hogni, and perhaps also Grimhild. I suspect that this stanza belongs before stanza 20.

22. Stanzas 22–25 describe the draught of forgetfulness which Grimhild gives Guthrun, just as she gave one to Sigurth (in one version of the story) to make him forget Brynhild. The draught does not seem to work despite Guthrun’s statement in stanza 25 (cf. stanza 30), for which reason Vigfusson, not unwisely, places stanzas 22–25 after stanza 34. Blood of swine: cf. Hyndluljoth, 39 and note.

23. The Volsungasaga quotes stanzas 23–24. Heather-fish: a snake. Haddings’ land: the world of the dead, so called because, according to Saxo Grammaticus, the Danish king Hadingus once visited it. It is possible that the comma should follow “heather-fish,” making the “ear uncut” (of grain) come from the world of the dead.

24. Dew of the hearth: soot.

25. In the manuscript, and in some editions, the first line is in the third person plural: “Then they forgot,   |   when the draught they had drunk.” The second line in the original is manifestly in bad shape, and has been variously emended. I forgot: this emendation is doubtful, in view of stanza 30, but cf. note to stanza 22. The kings all three: probably Atli’s emissaries, though the interpolated lines of stanza 20 name four of them. I suspect that line 4 is wrong, and should read: “Ere he himself (Atli)   |   to speak began.” Certainly stanzas 26–27 fit Atli much better than they do Grimhild, and there is nothing unreasonable in Atli’s having come in person, along with his tributary kings, to seek Guthrun’s hand. However, the “three kings” may not be Atli’s followers at all, but Gunnar, Hogni, and the unnamed third brother possibly referred to in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 18.

26. Thy father’s: So the manuscript, in which case the reference is obviously to Gjuki. But some editions omit the “thy,” and if Atli, and not Grimhild, is speaking (cf. note on stanza 25), the reference may be, as in line 3 of stanza 27, to the wealth of Atli’s father, Buthli. Hlothver: the northern form of the Frankish name Chlodowech (Ludwig), but who this Hlothver was, beyond the fact that he was evidently a Frankish king, is uncertain. If Atli is speaking, he is presumably a Frankish ruler whose land Atli and his Huns have conquered.

27. Cf. note on stanza 25 as to the probable speaker.

28. In stanzas 28–32 the dialogue, in alternate stanzas, is clearly between Guthrun and her mother, Grimhild, though the manuscript does not indicate the speakers.

29. Sigmund: son of Sigurth and Guthrun, killed at Brynhild’s behest.

30. This stanza presents a strong argument for transposing the description of the draught of forgetfulness (stanzas 22–24 and lines 1–2 of stanza 25) to follow stanza 33. Raven, etc.: the original is somewhat obscure, and the line may refer simply to the “corpse-eating raven.”

32. In the manuscript this stanza is immediately followed by the two lines which here, following Bugge’s suggestion, appear as stanza 35. In lines 3–4 Guthrun foretells what will (and actually does) happen if she is forced to become Atli’s wife. If stanza 35 really belongs here, it continues the prophesy to the effect that Guthrun will have no rest till she has avenged her brothers’ death.

33. Very likely the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 4 as beginning a new stanza. On the other hand, lines 3 and 5 may be interpolations. Vinbjorg and Valbjorg: apparently imaginary place-names.

34. The kings: presumably Gunnar and Hogni. My sons: regarding Guthrun’s slaying of her two sons by Atli, Erp and Eitil, cf. Drap Niflunga, note.

35. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 32. The loss of two lines, to the effect that “Ill was that marriage for my brothers, and ill for Atli himself,” and the transposition of the remaining two lines to this point, are indicated in a number of editions. The warrior, etc.: Atli, whom Guthrun kills.

36. The stanza describes the journey to Atli’s home, and sundry unsuccessful efforts have been made to follow the travellers through Germany and down the Danube. Foreign women: slaves. Line 5, which the manuscript marks as beginning a stanza, is probably spurious.

37. After these two lines there appears to be a considerable gap, the lost stanzas giving Guthrun’s story of the slaying of her brothers. It is possible that stanzas 38–45 came originally from another poem, dealing with Atli’s dream, and were here substituted for the original conclusion of Guthrun’s lament. Many editions combine stanzas 37 and 38, or combine stanza 38 (the manuscript marks line 1 as beginning a stanza) with lines 1–2 of stanza 39.

39. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza. The manuscript and most editions do not indicate the speakers in this and the following stanzas.

40. Guthrun, somewhat obscurely, interprets Atli’s first dream (stanza 39) to mean that she will cure him of an abscess by cauterizing it. Her interpretation is, of course, intended merely to blind him to her purpose.

41. In stanzas 41–43 Atli’s dreams forecast the death of his two sons, whose flesh Guthrun gives him to eat (cf. Atlakvitha, 39, and Atlamol, 78).

44. This stanza is evidently Guthrun’s intentionally cryptic interpretation of Atli’s dreams, but the meaning of the original is more than doubtful. The word here rendered “sacrifice” may mean “sea-catch,” and the one rendered “beasts” may mean “whales.” None of the attempted emendations have rendered the stanza really intelligible, but it appears to mean that Atli will soon make a sacrifice of beasts at night, and give their bodies to the people. Guthrun of course has in mind the slaying of his two sons.

45. With these two lines the poem abruptly ends; some editors assign the speech to Atli (I think rightly), others to Guthrun. Ettmüller combines the lines with stanza 38. Whether stanzas 38–45 originally belonged to Guthrun’s lament, or were interpolated here in place of the lost conclusion of that poem from another one dealing with Atli’s dreams (cf. note on stanza 37), it is clear that the end has been lost.








GUTHRUNARKVITHA III

THE THIRD LAY OF GUTHRUN


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The short Guthrunarkvitha III, entitled in the manuscript simply Guthrunarkvitha, but so numbered in most editions to distinguish it from the first and second Guthrun lays, appears only in the Codex Regius. It is neither quoted nor paraphrased in the Volsungasaga, the compilers of which appear not to have known the story with which it deals. The poem as we have it is evidently complete and free from serious interpolations. It can safely be dated from the first half of the eleventh century, for the ordeal by boiling water, with which it is chiefly concerned, was first introduced into Norway by St. Olaf, who died in 1030, and the poem speaks of it in stanza 7 as still of foreign origin.

The material for the poem evidently came from North Germany, but there is little indication that the poet was working on the basis of a narrative legend already fully formed. The story of the wife accused of faithlessness who proves her innocence by the test of boiling water had long been current in Germany, as elsewhere, and had attached itself to various women of legendary fame, but not except in this poem, so far as we can judge, to Guthrun (Kriemhild). The introduction of Thjothrek (Theoderich, Dietrich, Thithrek) is another indication of relative lateness, for the legends of Theoderich do not appear to have reached the North materially before the year 1000. On the anachronism of bringing Thjothrek to Atli’s court cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, introductory prose, note, in which the development of the Theoderich tradition in its relation to that of Atli is briefly outlined.

Guthrunarkvitha III is, then, little more than a dramatic German story made into a narrative lay by a Norse poet, with the names of Guthrun, Atli, Thjothrek, and Herkja incorporated for the sake of greater effectiveness. Its story probably nowhere formed a part of the living tradition of Sigurth and Atli, but the poem has so little distinctively Norse coloring that it may possibly have been based on a story or even a poem which its composer heard in Germany or from the lips of a German narrator.





Herkja was the name of a serving-woman of Atli’s; she had been his concubine. She told Atli that she had seen Thjothrek and Guthrun both together. Atli was greatly angered thereby. Then Guthrun said:


1.  “What thy sorrow, Atli,   |   Buthli’s son?     Is thy heart heavy-laden?   |   Why laughest thou never?     It would better befit   |   the warrior far     To speak with men,   |   and me to look on.”


Atli spake:


2.  “It troubles me, Guthrun,   |   Gjuki’s daughter,     What Herkja here   |   in the hall hath told me,     That thou in the bed   |   with Thjothrek liest,     Beneath the linen   |   in lovers’ guise.”


Guthrun spake:


3.  “This shall I   |   with oaths now swear,     Swear by the sacred   |   stone so white,     That nought was there   |   with Thjothmar’s son     That man or woman   |   may not know.

4.  “Nor ever once   |   did my arms embrace     The hero brave,   |   the leader of hosts;     In another manner   |   our meeting was,     When our sorrows we   |   in secret told.

5.  “With thirty warriors   |   Thjothrek came,     Nor of all his men   |   doth one remain;     Thou hast murdered my brothers   |   and mail-clad men,     Thou hast murdered all   |   the men of my race.

6.  “Gunnar comes not,   |   Hogni I greet not,     No longer I see   |   my brothers loved;     My sorrow would Hogni   |   avenge with the sword,     Now myself for my woes   |   I shall payment win.

7.  “Summon Saxi,   |   the southrons’ king,     For he the boiling   |   kettle can hallow.”     Seven hundred   |   there were in the hall,     Ere the queen her hand   |   in the kettle thrust.

8.  To the bottom she reached   |   with hand so bright,     And forth she brought   |   the flashing stones:     “Behold, ye warriors,   |   well am I cleared     Of sin by the kettle’s   |   sacred boiling.”

9.  Then Atli’s heart   |   in happiness laughed,     When Guthrun’s hand   |   unhurt he saw;     “Now Herkja shall come   |   the kettle to try,     She who grief   |   for Guthrun planned.”

10. Ne’er saw man sight   |   more sad than this,     How burned were the hands   |   of Herkja then;     In a bog so foul   |   the maid they flung,     And so was Guthrun’s   |   grief requited.








NOTES


Prose. The annotator derived all the material for this note from the poem itself, except for the reference to Herkja as Atli’s former concubine. Herkja: the historical Kreka and the Helche of the Nibelungenlied, who there appears as Etzel’s (Attila’s) first wife. Thjothrek: cf. Introductory Note.

2. The manuscript omits the names of the speakers throughout.

3. Holy stone: just what this refers to is uncertain; it may be identical with the “ice-cold stone of Uth” mentioned in an oath in Helgakvitha Hundingsbana II, 29. Thjothmar’s son: the manuscript has simply “Thjothmar.” Some editions change it as here, some assume that Thjothmar is another name or an error for Thjothrek, and Finnur Jonsson not only retains Thjothmar here but changes Thjothrek to Thjothmar in stanza 5 to conform to it.

5. Regarding the death of Thjothrek’s men cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, introductory prose, note. It was on these stanzas of Guthrunarkvitha III that the annotator based his introduction to Guthrunarkvitha II. The manuscript repeats the “thirty” in line 2, in defiance of metrical requirements.

6. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 7; many editions have made the transposition.

7. Who Saxi may be is not clear, but the stanza clearly points to the time when the ordeal by boiling water was still regarded as a foreign institution, and when a southern king (i.e., a Christian from some earlier-converted region) was necessary to consecrate the kettle used in the test. The ordeal by boiling water followed closely the introduction of Christianity, which took place around the year 1000. Some editions make two stanzas out of stanza 7, and Müllenhoff contends that lines 1–2 do not constitute part of Guthrun’s speech.

10. The word “requited” in line 4 is omitted in the manuscript, but it is clear that some such word was intended. The punishment of casting a culprit into a bog to be drowned was particularly reserved for women, and is not infrequently mentioned in the sagas.








ODDRUNARGRATR

THE LAMENT OF ODDRUN


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The Oddrunargratr follows Guthrunarkvitha III in the Codex Regius; it is not quoted or mentioned elsewhere, except that the composer of the “short” Sigurth lay seems to have been familiar with it. The Volsungasaga says nothing of the story on which it is based, and mentions Oddrun only once, in the course of its paraphrase of Brynhild’s prophecy from the “short” Sigurth lay. That the poem comes from the eleventh century is generally agreed; prior to the year 1000 there is no trace of the figure of Oddrun, Atli’s sister, and yet the Oddrunargratr is almost certainly older than the “short” Sigurth lay, so that the last half of the eleventh century seems to be a fairly safe guess.

Where or how the figure of Oddrun entered the Sigurth-Atli cycle is uncertain. She does not appear in any of the extant German versions, and it is generally assumed that she was a creation of the North, though the poet refers to “old tales” concerning her. She does not directly affect the course of the story at all, though the poet has used effectively the episode of Gunnar’s death, with the implication that Atli’s vengeance on Gunnar and Hogni was due, at least in part, to his discovery of Gunnar’s love affair with Oddrun. The material which forms the background of Oddrun’s story belongs wholly to the German part of the legend (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo), and is paralleled with considerable closeness in the Nibelungenlied; only Oddrun herself and the subsidiary figures of Borgny and Vilmund are Northern additions. The geography, on the other hand, is so utterly chaotic as to indicate that the original localization of the Atli story had lost all trace of significance by the time this poem was composed.

In the manuscript the poem, or rather the brief introductory prose note, bears the heading “Of Borgny and Oddrun,” but nearly all editions, following late paper manuscripts, have given the poem the title it bears here. Outside of a few apparently defective stanzas, and some confusing transpositions, the poem has clearly been preserved in good condition, and the beginning and end are definitely marked.





Heithrek was the name of a king, whose daughter was called Borgny. Vilmund was the name of the man who was her lover. She could not give birth to a child until Oddrun, Atli’s sister, had come to her; Oddrun had been beloved of Gunnar, son of Gjuki. About this story is the following poem.


1.  I have heard it told   |   in olden tales     How a maiden came   |   to Morningland;     No one of all   |   on earth above     To Heithrek’s daughter   |   help could give.

2.  This Oddrun learned,   |   the sister of Atli,     That sore the maiden’s   |   sickness was;     The bit-bearer forth   |   from his stall she brought,     And the saddle laid   |   on the steed so black.

3.  She let the horse go   |   o’er the level ground,     Till she reached the hall   |   that loftily rose,     (And in she went   |   from the end of the hall;)     From the weary steed   |   the saddle she took;     Hear now the speech   |   that first she spake:

4.  “What news on earth,   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     Or what has happened   |   in Hunland now?”


A serving-maid spake:


    “Here Borgny lies   |   in bitter pain,     Thy friend, and, Oddrun,   |   thy help would find.”


Oddrun spake:


5.  “Who worked this woe   |   for the woman thus,     Or why so sudden   |   is Borgny sick?”


The serving-maid spake:


    “Vilmund is he,   |   the heroes’ friend,     Who wrapped the woman   |   in bedclothes warm,     (For winters five,   |   yet her father knew not).”

6.  Then no more   |   they spake, methinks;     She went at the knees   |   of the woman to sit;     With magic Oddrun   |   and mightily Oddrun     Chanted for Borgny   |   potent charms.

7.  At last were born   |   a boy and girl,     Son and daughter   |   of Hogni’s slayer;     Then speech the woman   |   so weak began,     Nor said she aught   |   ere this she spake:

8.  “So may the holy   |   ones thee help,     Frigg and Freyja   |   and favoring gods,     As thou hast saved me   |   from sorrow now.”


Oddrun spake:


9.  “I came not hither   |   to help thee thus     Because thou ever   |   my aid didst earn;     I fulfilled the oath   |   that of old I swore,     That aid to all   |   I should ever bring,     (When they shared the wealth   |   the warriors had).”


Borgny spake:


10. “Wild art thou, Oddrun,   |   and witless now,     That so in hatred   |   to me thou speakest;     I followed thee   |   where thou didst fare,     As we had been born   |   of brothers twain.”


Oddrun spake:


11. “I remember the evil   |   one eve thou spakest,     When a draught I gave   |   to Gunnar then;     Thou didst say that never   |   such a deed     By maid was done   |   save by me alone.”

12. Then the sorrowing woman   |   sat her down     To tell the grief   |   of her troubles great.

13. “Happy I grew   |   in the hero’s hall     As the warriors wished,   |   and they loved me well;     Glad I was   |   of my father’s gifts,     For winters five,   |   while my father lived.

14. “These were the words   |   the weary king,     Ere he died,   |   spake last of all:     He bade me with red gold   |   dowered to be,     And to Grimhild’s son   |   in the South be wedded.

15. “But Brynhild the helm   |   he bade to wear,     A wish-maid bright   |   he said she should be;     For a nobler maid   |   would never be born     On earth, he said,   |   if death should spare her.

16. “At her weaving Brynhild   |   sat in her bower,     Lands and folk   |   alike she had;     The earth and heaven   |   high resounded     When Fafnir’s slayer   |   the city saw.

17. “Then battle was fought   |   with the foreign swords,     And the city was broken   |   that Brynhild had;     Not long thereafter,   |   but all too soon,     Their evil wiles   |   full well she knew.

18. “Woeful for this   |   her vengeance was,     As so we learned   |   to our sorrow all;     In every land   |   shall all men hear     How herself at Sigurth’s   |   side she slew.

19. “Love to Gunnar   |   then I gave,     To the breaker of rings,   |   as Brynhild might;     To Atli rings   |   so red they offered,     And mighty gifts   |   to my brother would give.

20. “Fifteen dwellings   |   fain would he give     For me, and the burden   |   that Grani bore;     But Atli said   |   he would never receive     Marriage gold   |   from Gjuki’s son.

21. “Yet could we not   |   our love o’ercome,     And my head I laid   |   on the hero’s shoulder;     Many there were   |   of kinsmen mine     Who said that together   |   us they had seen.

22. “Atli said   |   that never I     Would evil plan,   |   or ill deed do;     But none may this   |   of another think,     Or surely speak,   |   when love is shared.

23. “Soon his men   |   did Atli send,     In the murky wood   |   on me to spy;     Thither they came   |   where they should not come,     Where beneath one cover   |   close we lay.

24. “To the warriors ruddy   |   rings we offered,     That nought to Atli   |   e’er they should say;     But swiftly home   |   they hastened thence,     And eager all   |   to Atli told.

25. “But close from Guthrun   |   kept they hid     What first of all   |   she ought to have known.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

26. “Great was the clatter   |   of gilded hoofs     When Gjuki’s sons   |   through the gateway rode;     The heart they hewed   |   from Hogni then,     And the other they cast   |   in the serpents’ cave.

27. “The hero wise   |   on his harp then smote,     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     For help from me   |   in his heart yet hoped     The high-born king,   |   might come to him.

28. “Alone was I gone   |   to Geirmund then,     The draught to mix   |   and ready to make;     Sudden I heard   |   from Hlesey clear     How in sorrow the strings   |   of the harp resounded.

29. “I bade the serving-maids   |   ready to be,     For I longed the hero’s   |   life to save;     Across the sound   |   the boats we sailed,     Till we saw the whole   |   of Atli’s home.

30. “Then crawling the evil   |   woman came,     Atli’s mother—   |   may she ever rot!     And hard she bit   |   to Gunnar’s heart,     So I could not help   |   the hero brave.

31. “Oft have I wondered   |   how after this,     Serpents’-bed goddess!   |   I still might live,     For well I loved   |   the warrior brave,     The giver of swords,   |   as my very self.

32. “Thou didst see and listen,   |   the while I said     The mighty grief   |   that was mine and theirs;     Each man lives   |   as his longing wills,—     Oddrun’s lament   |   is ended now.”








NOTES


Prose. Nothing further is known of Heithrek, Borgny or Vilmund. The annotator has added the name of Borgny’s father, but otherwise his material comes from the poem itself. Oddrun, sister of Atli and Brynhild, here appears as proficient in birth-runes (cf. Sigrdrifumol, 8). Regarding her love for Gunnar, Guthrun’s brother, and husband of her sister, Brynhild, cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 57 and note.

1. Olden tales: this may be merely a stock phrase, or it may really mean that the poet found his story in oral prose tradition. Morningland: the poem’s geography is utterly obscure. “Morningland” is apparently identical with “Hunland” (stanza 4), and yet Oddrun is herself sister of the king of the Huns. Vigfusson tries to make “Mornaland” into “Morva land” and explain it as Moravia. Probably it means little more than a country lying vaguely in the East. With stanza 28 the confusion grows worse.

3. Line 3 (cf. Völundarkvitha, 17) or line 5 (cf. Thrymskvitha, 2), both quoted from older poems, is probably spurious; the manuscript marks line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza.

4. Line 1 in the original appears to have lost its second half. In line 2 the word rendered “has happened” is doubtful. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker of lines 3–4, and a few editors assign them to Borgny herself.

5. The manuscript does not indicate the speakers. For the woman: conjectural; the manuscript has instead: “What warrior now   |   hath worked this woe?” The manuscript indicates line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Line 5, apparently modeled on line 4 of stanza 13, is probably spurious.

6. Charms: cf. Sigrdrifumol, 8.

7. Hogni’s slayer: obviously Vilmund, but unless he was the one of Atli’s followers who actually cut out Hogni’s heart (cf. Drap Niflunga), there is nothing else to connect him with Hogni’s death. Sijmons emends the line to read “Born of the sister   |   of Hogni’s slayer.”

8. Regarding Frigg as a goddess of healing cf. Svipdagsmol, 52, note. Regarding Freyja as the friend of lovers cf. Grimnismol, 14, note. A line is very possibly missing from this stanza.

9. The manuscript does not name the speaker. In line 2 the word rendered “earn” is omitted in the manuscript, but nearly all editions have supplied it. Line 5 is clearly either interpolated or out of place. It may be all that is left of a stanza which stood between stanzas 15 and 16, or it may belong in stanza 12.

10–20. In the manuscript the order is as follows: 12; 13; 14; 15, 3–4; 10; 11; 16; 17; 18; 19, 1–2; 15, 1–2; 19, 3–4; 20. The changes made here, following several of the editions, are: (a) the transposition of stanzas 10–11, which are clearly dialogue, out of the body of the lament to a position just before it; (b) the transposition of lines 1–2 of stanza 15 to their present position from the middle of stanza 19.

10. The manuscript does not name the speaker; cf. note on stanzas 10–20.

11. The manuscript does not name the speaker; cf. note on stanzas 10–20. The word rendered “evil” in line 1 is a conjectural addition. Apparently Borgny was present at Atli’s court while the love affair between Oddrun and Gunnar was in progress, and criticised Oddrun for her part in it. A draught, etc.: apparently in reference to a secret meeting of the lovers.

12. In the manuscript this stanza follows stanza 9; cf. note on stanzas 10–20. No gap is indicated, but something has presumably been lost. Grundtvig supplies as a first line: “The maid her evil   |   days remembered,” and inserts as a second line line 5 of stanza 9.

13. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a new stanza; many editions combine lines 1–2 with stanza 12 and lines 3–4 with lines 1–2 of stanza 14. The hero: Buthli, father of Oddrun, Atli, and Brynhild.

14. The manuscript indicates line 3, but not line 1, as the beginning of a new stanza; some editions combine lines 3–4 with lines 3–4 of stanza 15. Making Buthli plan the marriage of Oddrun and Gunnar may be a sheer invention of the poet, or may point to an otherwise lost version of the legend.

15. Lines 1–2 have here been transposed from the middle of stanza 19; cf. note on stanzas 10–20. Wish-maid: a Valkyrie, so called because the Valkyries fullfilled Othin’s wish in choosing the slain heroes for Valhall. The reference to Brynhild as a Valkyrie by no means fits with the version of the story used in stanzas 16–17, and the poet seems to have attempted to combine the two contradictory traditions; cf. Fafnismol, note on stanza 44. In the manuscript stanzas 10–11 follow line 4 of stanza 15.

16. In stanzas 16–17 the underlying story seems to be the one used in Sigurtharkvitha en skamma (particularly stanzas 32–39), and referred to in Guthrunarkvitha I, 24, wherein Gunnar and Sigurth lay siege to Atli’s city (it here appears as Brynhild’s) and are bought off only by Atli’s giving Brynhild to Gunnar as wife, winning her consent thereto by falsely representing to her that Gunnar is Sigurth. This version is, of course, utterly at variance with the one in which Sigurth wins Brynhild for Gunnar by riding through the ring of flames, and is probably more closely akin to the early German traditions. In the Nibelungenlied Brynhild appears as a queen ruling over lands and peoples. Fafnir’s slayer: Sigurth.

17. Cf. note on preceding stanza.

18. Cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, stanzas 64–70.

19. In the manuscript lines 1–2 of stanza 15 follow line 2, resulting in various conjectural combinations. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Rings, etc.: possibly, as Gering maintains, payment offered by Gunnar and Hogni for Brynhild’s death, but more probably, as in stanza 20, Gunnar’s proffered “marriage gold” for the hand of Oddrun.

20. Grani’s burden: the treasure won by Sigurth from Fafnir; cf. Fafnismol, concluding prose. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza, as also in stanzas 21 and 22.

23. Murky wood: the forest which divided Atli’s realm from that of the Gjukungs is in Atlakvitha, 3, called Myrkwood. This hardly accords with the extraordinary geography of stanzas 28–29, or with the journey described in Guthrunarkvitha II, 36.

24. In the manuscript lines 3 and 4 stand in reversed order.

25. No gap is indicated in the manuscript; some editors assume the loss not only of two lines, but of an additional stanza. Evidently Guthrun has already become Atli’s wife.

26. If a stanza has been lost after stanza 25, it may well have told of Atli’s treacherous invitation to the Gjukungs to visit him; cf. Drap Niflunga, which likewise tells of the slaying of Hogni and Gunnar (the other).

27. In the manuscript these three lines follow line 2 of stanza 28. No gap is indicated in the manuscript. In the Volsungasaga Guthrun gives her brother the harp, with which he puts the serpents to sleep. The episode is undoubtedly related to the famous thirtieth Aventiure of the Nibelungenlied, in which Volker plays the followers of Gunther to sleep before the final battle.

28. In the manuscript the three lines of stanza 27 follow line 2, and line 3 is marked as beginning a new stanza. Geirmund: nothing further is known of him, but he seems to be an ally or retainer of Atli, or possibly his brother. Hlesey: the poet’s geography is here in very bad shape. Hlesey is (or may be) the Danish island of Läsö, in the Kattegat (cf. Harbarthsljoth, 37 and note), and thither he has suddenly transported not only Gunnar’s death-place but Atli’s whole dwelling (cf. stanza 29), despite his previous references to the ride to Hunland (stanzas 3–4) and the “murky wood” (stanza 23). Geirmund’s home, where Oddrun has gone, is separated from Hlesey and Atli’s dwelling by a sound (stanza 29). However, geographical accuracy is seldom to be looked for in heroic epic poetry.

29. Many editions combine this stanza with lines 3–4 of stanza 28. The sound: cf. note on stanza 28.

30. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Atli’s mother: the Volsungasaga does not follow this version; Gunnar puts all the serpents but one to sleep with his harp playing, “but a mighty and evil adder crawled to him and drove his fangs into him till they reached his heart, and so he died.” It is possible that “Atli” is a scribal error for a word meaning “of serpents.”

31. Serpents’-bed goddess: woman (i.e., Borgny); “goddess of gold” was a frequent term for a woman, and gold was often called the “serpents’ bed” (cf. Guthrunarkvitha I, 24 and note).

32. Some editions make line 4 a statement of the poet’s, and not part of Oddrun’s speech.








ATLAKVITHA EN GRÖNLENZKA

THE GREENLAND LAY OF ATLI


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

There are two Atli poems in the Codex Regius, the Atlakvitha (Lay of Atli) and the Atlamol (Ballad of Atli). The poems are not preserved or quoted in any other old manuscript, but they were extensively used by the compilers of the Volsungasaga. In the manuscript superscription to each of these poems appears the word “Greenland,” which has given rise to a large amount of argument. The scribe was by no means infallible, and in this case his statement proves no more than that in the period round 1300 there was a tradition that these two poems originated in the Greenland settlement.

The two Atli poems deal with substantially the same material: the visit of the sons of Gjuki to Atli’s court, their deaths, and the subsequent revenge of their sister, Guthrun, Atli’s wife, on her husband. The shorter of the two, the Atlakvitha, tells the story with little elaboration; the Atlamol, with about the same narrative basis, adds many details, some of them apparently of the poet’s invention, and with a romantic, not to say sentimental, quality quite lacking in the Atlakvitha. Both poems are sharply distinguished from the rest of the collection by their metrical form, which is the Malahattr (used irregularly also in the Harbarthsljoth), employed consistently and smoothly in the Atlamol, and with a considerable mixture of what appear to be Fornyrthislag lines (cf. Introduction) in the Atlakvitha.

It is altogether probable that both poems belong to the eleventh century, the shorter Atlakvitha being generally dated from the first quarter thereof, and the longer Atlamol some fifty years or more later. In each case the poet was apparently a Christian; in the Atlamol (stanza 82) Guthrun expresses her readiness to die and “go into another light,” and in the Atlakvitha there is frequent use of mythological names (e.g., Valhall, Hlithskjolf) with an evident lack of understanding of their relation to the older gods. These facts fit the theory of a Greenland origin exceedingly well, for the Greenland settlement grew rapidly after the first explorations of Eirik the Red, which were in 982–985, and its most flourishing period was in the eleventh century. The internal evidence, particularly in the case of the Atlamol, points likewise to an origin remote from Iceland, Norway, and the “Western Isles”; and the two poems are sufficiently alike so that, despite the efforts of Finnur Jonsson and others to separate them, assigning one to Greenland and the other to Norway or elsewhere, it seems probable that the manuscript statement is correct in both instances, and that the two Atli poems did actually originate in Greenland. An interesting account of this Greenland settlement is given in William Hovgaard’s Voyages of the Norsemen to America, published by the American-Scandinavian Foundation in 1914, and an extraordinarily vivid picture of the sufferings of the early settlers appears in Maurice Hewlett’s Thorgils, taken from the Floamannasaga.

From the standpoint of narrative material there is little that is distinctively Norse in either the Atlakvitha or the Atlamol. The story is the one outlined in the prose Drap Niflunga (largely based on these two poems), representing almost exclusively the southern blending of the Attila and Burgundian legends (cf. introductory note to Gripisspo). In the Atlakvitha, indeed, the word “Burgundians” is actually used. Brynhild is not mentioned in either poem; Sigurth’s name appears but once, in the Atlamol. Thus the material goes directly back to its South-Germanic origins, with little of the Northern making-over which resulted in such extensive changes in most parts of the Sigurth story. The general atmosphere, on the other hand, particularly in the Atlamol, is essentially Norse.

As has been said, the Atlakvitha is metrically in a chaotic state, the normal Malahattr lines being frequently interspersed with lines and even stanzas which apparently are of the older Fornyrthislag type. How much of this confusion is due to faulty transmission is uncertain, but it has been suggested that the composer of the Atlakvitha made over in Malahattr an older Atli poem in Fornyrthislag, and this suggestion has much to recommend it. That he worked on the basis of an older poem is, indeed, almost certain, for in oral prose tradition a far larger number of distinctively Norse traits would unquestionably have crept in than are found in the material of the Atlakvitha. As for the Atlamol, here again the poet seems to have used an older poem as his basis, possibly the Atlakvitha itself, although in that case he must have had other material as well, for there are frequent divergences in such matters as proper names.

The translation of the Atlakvitha is rendered peculiarly difficult by the irregularity of the metre, by the evident faultiness of the transmission, and above all by the exceptionally large number of words found nowhere else in Old Norse, involving much guesswork as to their meanings. The notes do not attempt to indicate all the varying suggestions made by editors and commentators as to the reconstruction of defective stanzas and the probable meanings of obscure passages; in cases which are purely or largely guesswork the notes merely point out the uncertainty without cataloguing the proposed solutions.





Guthrun, Gjuki’s daughter, avenged her brothers, as has become well known. She slew first Atli’s sons, and thereafter she slew Atli, and burned the hall with his whole company. Concerning this was the following poem made:


1.  Atli sent   |   of old to Gunnar     A keen-witted rider,   |   Knefröth did men call him;     To Gjuki’s home came he   |   and to Gunnar’s dwelling,     With benches round the hearth,   |   and to the beer so sweet.

2.  Then the followers, hiding   |   their falseness, all drank     Their wine in the war-hall,   |   of the Huns’ wrath wary;     And Knefröth spake loudly,   |   his words were crafty,     The hero from the south,   |   on the high bench sitting:

3.  “Now Atli has sent me   |   his errand to ride,     On my bit-champing steed   |   through Myrkwood the secret,     To bid you, Gunnar,   |   to his benches to come,     With helms round the hearth,   |   and Atli’s home seek.

4.  “Shields shall ye choose there,   |   and shafts made of     ash-wood,     Gold-adorned helmets,   |   and slaves out of Hunland,     Silver-gilt saddle-cloths,   |   shirts of bright scarlet,     With lances and spears too,   |   and bit-champing steeds.

5.  “The field shall be given you   |   of wide Gnitaheith,     With loud-ringing lances,   |   and stems gold-o’erlaid,     Treasures full huge,   |   and the home of Danp,     And the mighty forest   |   that Myrkwood is called.”

6.  His head turned Gunnar,   |   and to Hogni he said:     “What thy counsel, young hero,   |   when such things we hear?     No gold do I know   |   on Gnitaheith lying     So fair that other   |   its equal we have not.

7.  “We have seven halls,   |   each of swords is full,     (And all of gold   |   is the hilt of each;)     My steed is the swiftest,   |   my sword is sharpest,     My bows adorn benches,   |   my byrnies are golden,     My helm is the brightest   |   that came from Kjar’s hall,     (Mine own is better   |   than all the Huns’ treasure.)”


Hogni spake:


8.  “What seeks she to say,   |   that she sends us a ring,     Woven with a wolf’s hair?   |   methinks it gives warning;     In the red ring a hair   |   of the heath-dweller found I,     Wolf-like shall our road be   |   if we ride on this journey.”

9.  Not eager were his comrades,   |   nor the men of his kin,     The wise nor the wary,   |   nor the warriors bold.     But Gunnar spake forth   |   as befitted a king,     Noble in the beer-hall,   |   and bitter his scorn:

10. “Stand forth now, Fjornir!   |   and hither on the floor     The beakers all golden   |   shalt thou bring to the warriors.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

11. “The wolves then shall rule   |   the wealth of the Niflungs,     Wolves aged and grey-hued,   |   if Gunnar is lost,     And black-coated bears   |   with rending teeth bite,     And make glad the dogs,   |   if Gunnar returns not.”

12. A following gallant   |   fared forth with the ruler,     Yet they wept as their home   |   with the hero they left;     And the little heir   |   of Hogni called loudly:     “Go safe now, ye wise ones,   |   wherever ye will!”

13. Then let the bold heroes   |   their bit-champing horses     On the mountains gallop,   |   and through Myrkwood the secret;     All Hunland was shaken   |   where the hard-souled ones rode,     On the whip-fearers fared they   |   through fields that were     green.

14. Then they saw Atli’s halls,   |   and his watch-towers high,     On the walls so lofty   |   stood the warriors of Buthli;     The hall of the southrons   |   with seats was surrounded,     With targets bound   |   and shields full bright.

15. Mid weapons and lances   |   did Atli his wine     In the war-hall drink,   |   without were his watchmen,     For Gunnar they waited,   |   if forth he should go,     With their ringing spears   |   they would fight with the ruler.

16. This their sister saw,   |   as soon as her brothers     Had entered the hall,—   |   little ale had she drunk:     “Betrayed art thou, Gunnar!   |   what guard hast thou, hero,     ’Gainst the plots of the Huns?   |   from the hall flee swiftly!

17. “Brother, ’twere far better   |   to have come in byrnie,     With thy household helmed,   |   to see Atli’s home,     And to sit in the saddle   |   all day ’neath the sun,     (That the sword-norns might weep   |   for the death-pale warriors,     And the Hunnish shield-maids   |   might shun not the sword,)     And send Atli himself   |   to the den of the snakes;     (Now the den of the snakes   |   for thee is destined.)”


Gunnar spake:


18. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     “Too late is it, sister,   |   to summon the Niflungs,     Long is it to come   |   to the throng of our comrades,     The heroes gallant,   |   from the hills of the Rhine.”

            *    *    *    *    *    *

19. Then Gunnar they seized,   |   and they set him in chains,     The Burgundians’ king,   |   and fast they bound him.

20. Hogni slew seven   |   with sword so keen,     And an eighth he flung   |   in the fire hot;     A hero should fight   |   with his foemen thus,     As Hogni strove   |   in Gunnar’s behalf.

21. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     The leader they asked   |   if his life he fain     With gold would buy,   |   the king of the Goths.


Gunnar spake:


22. “First the heart of Hogni   |   shall ye lay in my hands,     All bloody from the breast   |   of the bold one cut     With keen-biting sword,   |   from the son of the king.”

23. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     They cut out the heart   |   from the breast of Hjalli,     On a platter they bore it,   |   and brought it to Gunnar.

24. Then Gunnar spake forth,   |   the lord of the folk:     “Here have I the heart   |   of Hjalli the craven,     Unlike to the heart   |   of Hogni the valiant,     For it trembles still   |   as it stands on the platter;     Twice more did it tremble   |   in the breast of the man.”

25. Then Hogni laughed   |   when they cut out the heart     Of the living helm-hammerer;   |   tears he had not.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     On a platter they bore it,   |   and brought it to Gunnar.

26. Then Gunnar spake forth,   |   the spear of the Niflungs:     “Here have I the heart   |   of Hogni the valiant,     Unlike to the heart   |   of Hjalli the craven,     Little it trembles   |   as it lies on the platter,     Still less did it tremble   |   when it lay in his breast.

27. “So distant, Atli,   |   from all men’s eyes,     Shalt thou be as thou   |   .  .  .  .  . from the gold.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

28. “To no one save me   |   is the secret known     Of the Niflungs’ hoard,   |   now Hogni is dead;     Of old there were two,   |   while we twain were alive,     Now is none but I,   |   for I only am living.

29. “The swift Rhine shall hold   |   the strife-gold of heroes,     That once was the gods’,   |   the wealth of the Niflungs,     In the depths of the waters   |   the death-rings shall glitter,     And not shine on the hands   |   of the Hunnish men.”


Atli spake:


30. “Ye shall bring the wagon,   |   for now is he bound.”

            *    *    *    *    *    *

31. On the long-maned Glaum   |   rode Atli the great,     About him were warriors   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     But Guthrun, akin   |   to the gods of slaughter,     Yielded not to her tears   |   in the hall of tumult.


Guthrun spake:


32. “It shall go with thee, Atli,   |   as with Gunnar thou heldest     The oaths ofttimes sworn,   |   and of old made firm,     By the sun in the south,   |   by Sigtyr’s mountain,     By the horse of the rest-bed,   |   and the ring of Ull.”

33. Then the champer of bits   |   drew the chieftain great,     The gold-guarder, down   |   to the place of death.     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

34. By the warriors’ host   |   was the living hero     Cast in the den   |   where crawling about     Within were serpents,   |   but soon did Gunnar     With his hand in wrath on   |   the harp-strings smite;     The strings resounded,—   |   so shall a hero,     A ring-breaker, gold   |   from his enemies guard.

35. Then Atli rode   |   on his earth-treading steed,     Seeking his home,   |   from the slaughter-place;     There was clatter of hoofs   |   of the steeds in the court,     And the clashing of arms   |   as they came from the field.

36. Out then came Guthrun   |   to meeting with Atli,     With a golden beaker   |   as gift to the monarch:     “Thou mayst eat now, chieftain,   |   within thy dwelling,     Blithely with Guthrun   |   young beasts fresh slaughtered.”

37. The wine-heavy ale-cups   |   of Atli resounded,     When there in the hall   |   the Hunnish youths clamored,     And the warriors bearded,   |   the brave ones, entered.

38. Then in came the shining one,   |   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   |   and drink she bore them;     Unwilling and bitter   |   brought she food to the warrior,     Till in scorn to the white-faced   |   Atli did she speak:

39. “Thou giver of swords,   |   of thy sons the hearts     All heavy with blood   |   in honey thou hast eaten;     Thou shalt stomach, thou hero,   |   the flesh of the slain,     To eat at thy feast,   |   and to send to thy followers.

40. “Thou shalt never call   |   to thy knees again     Erp or Eitil,   |   when merry with ale;     Thou shalt never see   |   in their seats again     The sharers of gold   |   their lances shaping,     (Clipping the manes   |   or minding their steeds.)”

41. There was clamor on the benches,   |   and the cry of men,     The clashing of weapons,   |   and weeping of the Huns,     Save for Guthrun only,   |   she wept not ever     For her bear-fierce brothers,   |   or the boys so dear,     So young and so unhappy,   |   whom with Atli she had.

42. Gold did she scatter,   |   the swan-white one,     And rings of red gold   |   to the followers gave she;     The fate she let grow,   |   and the shining wealth go,     Nor spared she the treasure   |   of the temple itself.

43. Unwise then was Atli,   |   he had drunk to wildness,     No weapon did he have,   |   and of Guthrun bewared not;     Oft their play was better   |   when both in gladness     Each other embraced   |   among princes all.

44. With her sword she gave blood   |   for the bed to drink,     With her death-dealing hand,   |   and the hounds she loosed,     The thralls she awakened,   |   and a firebrand threw     In the door of the hall;   |   so vengeance she had.

45. To the flames she gave all   |   who yet were within,     And from Myrkheim had come   |   from the murder of Gunnar;     The timbers old fell,   |   the temple was in flames,     The dwelling of the Buthlungs,   |   and the shield-maids burned,     They were slain in the house,   |   in the hot flames they sank.

46. Now the tale is all told,   |   nor in later time     Will a woman in byrnie   |   avenge so her brothers;     The fair one to three   |   of the kings of the folk     Brought the doom of death   |   ere herself she died.


Still more is told in the Greenland ballad of Atli.








NOTES


Prose. On the marriage of Guthrun to Atli at the instigation of her brothers, Gunnar and Hogni, and on the slaying of Atli and his two sons, Erp and Eitil, cf. Drap Niflunga and note.

1. Line 1 apparently is in Fornyrthislag. Knefröth (the name is spelt in various ways, and its meaning is uncertain): in the Atlamol (stanza 4) there are two messengers, one named Vingi and the other unnamed; the annotator combines the two versions in the Drap Niflunga. Benches, etc.: the adjective rendered “round the hearth,” which etymologically it ought to mean, is made obscure by its application to “helmets” in stanzas 3 and 17.

2. Falseness: i.e., Gunnar’s followers concealed their fear and hatred of the Huns at the feast; but the word may mean “fear of treachery.” War-hall: the word used is “Valhall,” the name of Othin’s hall of slain warriors.

3. Myrkwood the secret (the adjective is literally “unknown”): the forest which divided Atli’s realm from that of the Gjukungs; cf. Oddrunargratr, 23 and note. Around the hearth: the adjective is the same one which is applied to “benches” in stanza 1 (cf. note); it may be an error here, or it may possibly have the force of “of your followers,” i.e., Gunnar is to arm the men of his household (those who are round his hearth) for the journey.

4. Slaves, etc.: some editions have “swords in plenty.” Scarlet: the word apparently means “slaughter-red,” “blood-red,” but it may mean something entirely different.

5. Gnitaheith: here the dragon Fafnir had his lair (cf. Gripisspo, 11). Sigurth doubtless owned it after Fafnir’s death, and the Gjukungs after they had killed Sigurth. Possibly they had given it to Atli in recompense for the death of his sister, Brynhild, and he now offered to restore it to them, or—as seems more likely—the poet was not very clear about its ownership himself. Stems: i.e., the gilded stems of ships, carved like dragons,—an evident northern touch, if the word is correct, which is by no means certain. Danp: this name was early applied to a mythical Danish king (cf. Rigsthula, 49 and note), but it may have been fabricated by error out of the word “Danparstaþir” (the phrase here used is “staþi Danpar”), used in the Hervararsaga of a field of battle between the Goths and the Huns, and quite possibly referring to the region of the Dnieper. The name seems to have clung to the Atli tradition long after it had lost all definite significance. Myrkwood: cf. note on stanza 3.

7. The stanza is clearly in bad shape; the manuscript indicates line 5 as beginning a new stanza. In line 5 the manuscript has “and shield” after “helm.” Kjar: Gering ingeniously identifies this Kjar with Kjar the father of Olrun, mentioned in the Völundarkvitha, introductory prose and stanza 2, on the basis of a genealogy in the Flateyjarbok, in which Authi, the grandfather of Kjar (by no means certainly the same man) and Buthli, father of Atli, are mentioned as making a raiding voyage together. This identification, however, rests on slight evidence.

8. The manuscript does not name the speaker. One editor gives the first sentence to Gunnar. She, etc.: Guthrun, seeking to warn her brothers of Atli’s treachery, sends them a ring with a wolf’s hair as a sign of danger; in the Atlamol (stanza 4) she sends a message written in runes; cf. Drap Niflunga. Heath-dweller: wolf.

9. In line 1 the manuscript has “His comrades did not urge Gunnar,” but the name, involving a metrical error, seems to have been inserted through a scribal blunder.

10. The manuscript indicates no lacuna, but probably two lines have dropped out, for the Volsungasaga paraphrase runs: “Give us to drink in great cups, for it may well be that this shall be our last feast.” Fjornir: Gunnar’s cup-bearer.

11. Bugge thinks this stanza is spoken by Gunnar’s terrified followers; Grundtvig assigns it to Hogni. Apparently, however, Gunnar means that if he and his men are not valiant enough to make the journey and return safely, it matters little what may happen to them. Niflungs: regarding the application of this name to Gunnar’s Burgundians cf. Brot, 17 and note. Bears: these “black” bears have been used as arguments against the Greenland origin of the poem. And make glad the dogs: i.e., by giving them corpses to eat, but the phrase in the original is more than doubtful.

12. Some editions in line 2 read “home of the Niflungs” instead of “their home,” and others “home of the Huns,” the manuscript reading being “home of the men.” Heir: the Atlamol (stanza 28) names two sons of Hogni, Snævar and Solar, both of whom make the journey with their father and are killed. The Volsungasaga, combining the two versions, says that Snævar and Solar went with their father, and implies that it was a third and still younger son who said: “Farewell, and have a good time” (thus literally).

13. Myrkwood: cf. stanza 3 and note; the journey is here made by land, whereas in the Atlamol it is made partly by boat; cf. Atlamol, 34 and note. Whip-fearers: horses, but there is some uncertainty as to the word.

14. In line 1 the manuscript has “land” instead of “halls,” which involves a metrical error. Watch-towers: the word used is identical with the name of Othin’s watch-tower, Hlithskjolf (cf. Grimnismol, introductory prose). Buthli: the manuscript has “Bikki,” which has led some editors to transfer this stanza to the Hamthesmol, placing it between stanzas 16 and 17; it seems more likely, however, that “Bikki” was a scribal error for “Buthli.” Regarding Bikki cf. Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 63 and note. Line 4 is apparently in Fornyrthislag.

15. Line 1 in the manuscript is apparently incorrectly copied, and some editions omit “Mid weapons and lances” and assume a gap in either line 1 or line 3.

17. This may be the remains of two stanzas; the manuscript marks line 5 as beginning a new stanza. Editorial conjectures are numerous and varied. Household: the phrase is the same “helms round the hearth” commented on in stanza 3. Some editions insert a conjectural line after line 3. Sword-norns, etc.: the line is exceedingly obscure, and the phrase rendered “sword-norns” may mean “corpse-norns.” Apparently it refers to the warrior-women of the Huns, the “shield-maids” of line 5 and of stanza 45. Roman writers refer to the warrior-women among the early Germanic tribes, and the tradition, closely allied to that of the Valkyries, attached itself readily to the ferocious Huns. Den of snakes: concerning the manner of Gunnar’s death cf. Drap Niflunga.

18. The manuscript indicates no lacuna and does not name the speaker; perhaps a line similar to line 1 of stanza 24 (or 26) should be inserted here. Rhine: Gunnar’s Burgundian home is here clearly localized. After this stanza it is probable that a passage describing the battle has been lost.

19. These two lines, apparently the remains of a full stanza, may belong after stanza 20. Burgundians’ king: the phrase may mean “Burgundians’ men,” i.e., they bound all the Burgundians who were left alive after the battle. This is the only place in the poems in which the name “Burgundian” appears; that the poet had no very clear conception of its meaning is indicated by the fact that in stanza 21 he calls Gunnar “king of the Goths.”

20. Apparently a Fornyrthislag stanza, though most editions have attempted to expand the lines into Malahattr. The exploits of Hogni (Hagene), with the names of many of his victims, are told in the Nibelungenlied. The fire: in the Nibelungenlied Kriemhild has the hall set on fire, and the Burgundians fight amid the flames. Line 4 is clearly defective, and some editors regard the name “Gunnar” as all that is left of the first two lines of stanza 21.

21. Again apparently the remains of a Fornyrthislag stanza. Editors have attempted various combinations of the lines. Gold: presumably Sigurth’s treasure.

22. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker; perhaps a first line similar to line 1 of stanza 24 should appear here. Some editors, however, assume that a line is missing after line 3. Gunnar demands proof that Hogni is dead because, as stanza 28 shows, he is unwilling to die himself until he is assured that the secret of the treasure will perish with him. He did not, of course, intend that the heart should be cut from the living Hogni.

23. Most editions assume a gap (lines 1–2, 2–3 or 3–4). Hjalli: Atli’s cook, killed to deceive Gunnar, as Atli hoped to wring the secret of the hoard from Hogni if Gunnar remained silent. In the Atlamol (stanzas 59–60) Atli’s men prepare to kill Hjalli, but he is spared at Hogni’s intercession.

25. Helm-hammerer (literally “helmet-smith”): warrior, i.e., Hogni. No gap indicated in the manuscript.

26. Line 1 may belong elsewhere (stanzas 18 or 22).

27. Apparently the remains of two Fornyrthislag lines; the manuscript combines them with lines 1–2 of stanza 28. Gunnar foretells Atli’s speedy death.

28. Apparently in Fornyrthislag. The manuscript indicates line 3 as the beginning of a stanza, and many editions combine lines 3–4 with stanza 29. This stanza explains Gunnar’s demand for Hogni’s heart in stanza 22.

29. The manuscript marks line 3, and not line 1, as the beginning of a stanza. Rhine, etc.: the stanza shows the blending of three different traditions with regard to the treasure: the German tradition of the gold of the Rhine (cf. Völundarkvitha, 16, and Sigurtharkvitha en skamma, 16), the tradition, likewise German, of the hoard of the Nibelungen (Niflungs), early blended with the first one, and finally the northern tradition of the theft of Andvari’s treasure by Othin, Hönir, and Loki (cf. Reginsmol, 1–9).

30. Apparently all that is left of a full stanza. The manuscript does not name Atli as the speaker, and Grundtvig inserts: “Then Atli called, |   the king of the Huns,” as a first line. Some editors combine this line with the two lines of stanza 33. Wagon: in Brot, 16, Gunnar is led to his death in the serpents’ den on horseback, not in a wagon.

31. The stanza in the original is hopelessly confused. Glaum: this horse of Atli’s is mentioned by name elsewhere. Long-maned: uncertain. The manuscript indicates no gap, but something has evidently been lost. Gods of slaughter: perhaps the phrase, usually applied to Othin and the other gods, is here used simply to mean “heroes,” i.e., Atli, Gunnar, and Hogni. Line 4 suggests Guthrun’s tearlessness after Sigurth’s death (cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 11).

32. The manuscript does not indicate the speaker. Sigtyr (“Victory-God”): Othin; what particular mountain (if any) is meant is unknown. Horse of the rest-bed: probably this means “bedpost,” i.e., the support of the marriage-bed. Ull: the archer-god, cf. Grimnismol, 5 and note. Nothing is known of his ring.

33. Apparently the remains of a Fornyrthislag stanza. Some editors combine the two lines with the line here indicated as stanza 30. Champer of bits: horse. The manuscript indicates no gap.

34. Six Fornyrthislag lines which editors have tried to reconstruct in all sorts of ways. The manuscript marks line 5 as the beginning of a new stanza. Regarding the serpents’ den, Gunnar’s harp-playing, and the manner of his death, cf. Drap Niflunga and Oddrunargratr, 27–30, and notes. In Atlamol, 62, Gunnar plays the harp with his feet, his hands being bound, and some editors change hand in line 4 to “foot.” Lines 5–6 may be interpolated, or, as Bugge maintains, lines 1–4 may have been expanded out of two lines.

35. The manuscript marks line 3 as beginning a new stanza. Two (possibly three) of the lines appear to be in Fornyrthislag. Field: so the manuscript, involving a metrical error; many editions have “wood.”

36. Young beasts: Guthrun means Atli’s sons, Erp and Eitil, but of course he thinks she refers to newly slaughtered beasts; cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 41–45.

37. Youths: a conjectural addition. The brave ones is also conjectural, the manuscript having “each.” No gap indicated in the manuscript; some editions insert as line 3 or line 4 a slightly altered version of line 2 of stanza 45.

38. No gap indicated in the manuscript, but the two fragments cannot be fitted together as one line. The shining one: Guthrun.

39. Giver of swords: generous prince, i.e., Atli. Honey: cf. Guthrunarkvitha II, 42. To send to thy followers: literally, “to send from thy high seat.”

40. Apparently a Fornyrthislag stanza. Merry with ale: presumably this refers to Atli, but the manuscript reading makes it apply to the two boys. Sharers of gold: princes. Line 5 is either interpolated or all that is left of a separate stanza.

41. The text of the whole stanza has required a considerable amount of emendation. Lines 3–5 may have been expanded out of two lines, or line 5 may be an interpolation, possibly from stanza 12 of the Guthrunarhvot. Weapons: the word literally means “good-weaving,” and may refer to silken garments, but this hardly fits the noun here rendered “clashing.” Wept not: cf. stanza 31 and note.

42. Line 1 appears to be in Fornyrthislag. Guthrun distributes Atli’s treasures among his followers apparently to prevent their wrath at the slaying of Erp and Eitil from turning against her; Atli, as stanza 43 shows, is too drunk to realize or prevent what she is doing.

43. The second half of line 4 is apparently an error, but none of the editorial suggestions have improved it.

44. Guthrun allows the dogs and the house-thralls, who had no part in Gunnar’s death, to escape before she burns the dwelling with all who are left therein. In Atlamol, stanzas 83–84, Atli is slain by a son of Hogni (Hniflung?) with Guthrun’s help.

45. Some editions transfer line 2 to stanza 37; others reject line 3 as interpolated. Myrkheim (“Dark-Home”): probably identical with Myrkwood; cf. stanza 3. Temple: probably both here and in stanza 42 the word means little more than the place where Atli’s treasures were kept; the poet was by no means literal in his use of terms connected with the heathen religion. Buthlungs: sons of Buthli, i.e., Atli and his family. Shield-maids: cf. stanza 17 and note.

46. The entire stanza is very likely a later addition. Three kings: Atli and his two sons, Erp and Eitil.








ATLAMOL EN GRÖNLENZKU

THE GREENLAND BALLAD OF ATLI


INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Many of the chief facts regarding the Atlamol, which follows the Atlakvitha in the Codex Regius, are outlined in the introductory note to the earlier Atli lay. That the superscription in the manuscript is correct, and that the poem was actually composed in Greenland, is generally accepted; the specific reference to polar bears (stanza 17), and the general color of the entire poem make this origin exceedingly likely. Most critics, again, agree in dating the poem nearer 1100 than 1050. As to its state of preservation there is some dispute, but, barring one or two possible gaps of some importance, and the usual number of passages in which the interpolation or omission of one or two lines may be suspected, the Atlamol has clearly come down to us in fairly good shape.

Throughout the poem the epic quality of the story itself is overshadowed by the romantically sentimental tendencies of the poet, and by his desire to adapt the narrative to the understanding of his fellow-Greenlanders. The substance of the poem is the same as that of the Atlakvitha; it tells of Atli’s message to the sons of Gjuki, their journey to Atli’s home, the slaying of Hogni and Gunnar, Guthrun’s bitterness over the death of her brothers, and her bloody revenge on Atli. Thus in its bare outline the Atlamol represents simply the Frankish blending of the legends of the slaughter of the Burgundians and the death of Attila (cf. Gripisspo, introductory note). But here the resemblance ends. The poet has added characters, apparently of his own creation, for the sake of episodes which would appeal to both the men and the women of the Greenland settlement. Sea voyages take the place of journeys by land; Atli is reproached, not for cowardice in battle, but for weakness at the Thing or great council. The additions made by the poet are responsible for the Atlamol’s being the longest of all the heroic poems in the Eddic collection, and they give it a kind of emotional vividness, but it has little of the compressed intensity of the older poems. Its greatest interest lies in its demonstration of the manner in which a story brought to the North from the South Germanic lands could be adapted to the understanding and tastes of its eleventh century hearers without any material change of the basic narrative.

In what form or forms the story of the Gjukungs and Atli reached the Greenland poet cannot be determined, but it seems likely that he was familiar with older poems on the subject, and possibly with the Atlakvitha itself. That the details which are peculiar to the Atlamol, such as the figures of Kostbera and Glaumvor, existed in earlier tradition seems doubtful, but the son of Hogni, who aids Guthrun in the slaying of Atli, appears, though under another name, in other late versions of the story, and it is impossible to say just how much the poet relied on his own imagination and how far he found suggestions and hints in the prose or verse stories of Atli with which he was familiar.

The poem is in Malahattr (cf. Introduction) throughout, the verse being far more regular than in the Atlakvitha. The compilers of the Volsungasaga evidently knew it in very much the form in which we now have